Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Wilson, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
enacted and ordained as follows:
§ 1-1. Code adopted.
The codification of a complete body of ordinances of the Borough of Wilson,
County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., is hereby approved adopted, ordained and enacted as
the "Code of the Borough of Wilson," hereinafter known and referred to
as the "Code," pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code, 53 P.S.
§ 46008(b).1
§ 1-2. Effective date.
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Wilson and in force on the date of the adoption
of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of
the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 11, 1994.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
1. Editor's Note: Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code was repealed by 2012, May 17, P.L.
262, No. 43. See now 53 P.S. § 48301.5(a) through (d).
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
J. Any ordinance designating the boundaries of water districts.
K. The levy or imposition of taxes, special assessments or charges.
L. The dedication of property.
M. Any currently effective ordinance or resolution establishing the salaries
or rates of compensation of officers and employees of the Borough.
N. Ordinance No. 477, adopted February 8, 1971, to establish a Code
Hearing Board.
O. Ordinance No. 576, adopted February 14, 1983, pertaining to a
Northampton County Solid Waste Management Plan.
P. Ordinance No. 556, adopted June 9, 1980, to establish an Educational
Service Agency.
Q. Ordinance No. 566, adopted March 8, 1982, pertaining to participation
in an investment trust.
R. Ordinance No. 584, adopted February 27, 1984, pertaining to a sewer
user charge system.
S. Ordinance No. 587, adopted May 14, 1984, regulating building
construction in areas subject to flooding.
T. Any currently effective ordinance regulating traffic or parking in the
Borough.
§ 1-4 WILSON CODE § 1-5
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-4A and/or the date of adoption of this ordinance are
hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be
included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume has been filed in the office of
the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary,
as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that references to the Code shall be understood and
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough of Wilson for
adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes
and other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances.
It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Certain changes of a substantive nature have been made to various
ordinances found within the Code, and certain new materials have been
added to the Code. These changes and additions have been made to
bring the provisions of the Code into conformity with the desired
policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough
Council that all such changes and additions be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed or added had been previously
formally amended or adopted to read as such. Such changes and
additions are cited within the historical statements by the terms
"amended at time of adoption of Code" or "adopted at time of adoption
of Code" and are as follows.2
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654." A complete description
of all changes is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by the Borough Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification, which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the Borough
Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, which may also arrange by resolution for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the
manner required, a notice of the adoption of this ordinance adopting the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Secretary
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance adopting the Code, coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-8 WILSON CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Borough to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense
by a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default
in payment of the fine and costs, by imprisonment in the County jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 1-15. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall be included in the Code as Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Offices abolished.
The offices of elected Borough Auditors are hereby abolished.
§ 5-2. Appointed independent auditor; qualifications.
Hereafter, the audit of Borough accounts shall be conducted by an
appointed independent auditor, who shall be a certified public accountant
registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants.
§ 5-3. Annual appointment.
Such independent auditor shall be appointed by Council annually, by
resolution, before the close of a fiscal year, to make an independent
examination of the accounting records of the Borough for such fiscal year.
§ 5-4. Additional statutory duties.
Such independent auditor shall also perform the other duties and exercise
the powers as conferred upon him by the Act of 1966, February 1, P.L. 581,
§ 1196; 53 P.S. § 46196, as amended.3
§ 5-5. Duties of elected auditors during current term;
compensation.
The elected Borough Auditors now in office shall continue to hold their
office during the term for which elected, and the Borough Auditors shall not
audit, settle or adjust the accounts audited by such independent auditor but
shall perform the other duties of their office, if necessary, as determined by
Council. For performance of other duties requested by Council as aforesaid,
each Auditor shall receive no less than $15 nor more than $30, as Council
may determine, per day for each day necessarily employed in the discharge
of his duties. A day shall consist of not less than five hours in the aggregate.
Chapter 10
COMMITTEES OF COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council procedures — See Ch. 13.
3. Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 46196 was repealed by 2012, May 17, P.L. 262, No. 43. See
now 53 P.S. § 46059.11.
§ 1-15 WILSON CODE § 5-5
1:8
§ 10-1. Provision for standing committees.
There shall be four regular or standing committees of the Borough Council,
each committee to be composed of four members of the Borough Council
to be appointed by the President of the Council who shall also appoint a
chairman for each committee.
§ 10-2. Designation of standing committees.
The regular or standing committees shall be designated as follows:
§ 10-3. Additional committees authorized.
The President of the Borough Council shall have authority, at his or her
discretion, to appoint such other additional committees as from time to time
may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of the business of
the Borough Council.
Chapter 13
COUNCIL PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees of Council — See Ch. 10.
§ 13-1. President to conduct meetings.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Council of the Borough of
Wilson, following the order of business hereinafter provided and adhering in
the conduct of the business of Council in meeting assembled to recognized
parliamentary procedure.
A. General Government, in charge of administration, tax collection,
Borough buildings, code administration, insurance, debt service,
investments, library, law, health and other related matters.
B. Protection to Persons and Property, in charge of Police Bureau and Fire
Bureau and other related matters.
C. Public works, in charge of sanitary sewers, streets, bridges,
streetlighting, and markings, building maintenance and other related
matters.
D. Recreation, in charge of parks and playgrounds, shade trees,
swimming, pools, recreation, and other related matters.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2
1:9
§ 13-2. President Pro Tempore.
In the absence of the President, his place shall be filled by a President Pro
Tempore.
§ 13-3. Reading of minutes.
Immediately after calling the Council to order, the President shall direct the
Secretary or Clerk to read the minutes of the last preceding meeting, and
it appearing that there are no corrections to be made, the minutes shall be
declared by the President approved as read.
§ 13-4. Conduct of members.
Every member of the Council, when speaking, shall respectfully address the
President, and when called to order by him or any member of the Council,
shall take his seat until such point of order shall be decided.
§ 13-5. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the President or by a
majority of the Council upon five hours' notice in writing. When called by
the President, he may direct the High Constable to deliver written notices
of such meetings, which shall set forth the object and purpose thereof.
§ 13-6. Recording of votes.
The ayes and nays may be demanded by any member or ordered by the
President upon any vote, in which case the names of the members shall
be called alphabetically and entered upon the minutes accordingly. Any
member may be excused from voting upon any question in which it appears
that he is personally interested, but unless so excused, all members shall be
required to vote. When a motion shall have been duly made and seconded,
it shall be reduced to writing by the Secretary and read by him before its
adoption if desired by any member of Council.
§ 13-7. Leaving seat during proceedings.
No member shall leave his seat in the Council chamber without the consent
of the President.
§ 13-8. Entries in minutes.
Every vote of the Council shall be entered upon the minutes; a brief synopsis
of each petition, memorial or communication to the Council shall be
inserted in the minutes; and the names of members making and seconding
resolutions shall also be inserted in the minutes.
§ 13-2 WILSON CODE § 13-9
1:10
§ 13-9. Election of officers. [Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 788,
approved 6-25-2018]
In all cases of election of officers, a majority of the members of the Council
present shall be necessary to a choice, and all such elections shall be by oral
vote.
§ 13-10. Quorum.
The majority of the members of Council shall constitute a quorum, but a
lesser number shall have the power to adjourn the meeting from day to day
until a majority shall attend.
§ 13-11. Order of business. [Amended 1-24-1944 by Ord. No. 281,
approved 2-3-1944; 12-9-1974 by Ord. No. 514]
The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
§ 13-12. Suspension of rules.
No rule herein provided for shall be suspended unless it be with the consent
of 2/3 of the members present.
§ 13-13. (Reserved)4
A. Roll call of members of Council.
B. Reading of minutes of last regular and special meetings of Council.
C. Presentation of matters by persons present.
D. Presentation of petitions, communications, memorials and
remonstrances.
E. Communications from Mayor.
F. Reports of committees.
G. Deferred business.
H. New business.
I. Ordinances.
J. Resolutions.
K. Bills, accounts, etc.
L. Adjournment.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 13-13, Adoption of ordinances, as amended 4-10-1922 by Ord. No.
48, was repealed 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996.
§ 13-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-14
1:11
§ 13-14. Synopsis of Council action. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
Every vote of the Council shall be entered upon the minutes thereof; a
brief synopsis of the contents of each petition, memorial and communication
presented to the Council shall be inserted in the minutes and also the names
of any members making or seconding any resolutions.
§ 13-15. Reconsideration of questions.5 [Amended 1-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
When a question has been voted and decided upon, it shall be in order for
any member or majority, or, when the Council has been equally divided, for
any two members of the Council, to move for the reconsideration of the
question. Such motion shall not be in order unless moved at the same or the
next regular meeting.
§ 13-16. Membership on committees.
Every member shall serve on the committee to which he is appointed unless
excused by Council, but no member shall be discharged or supplanted on
any committee except by the direction or consent of Council.
§ 13-17. Written reports of committees.
The reports of all committees shall be in writing.
§ 13-18. Meeting days. [Added 12-3-1929 by Ord. No. 164, approved
12-3-1929; amended 12-9-1974 by Ord. No. 514; 4-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 636, approved 4-13-1992; 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 725, approved
2-14-2005]
The regular meetings of the Council of the Borough of Wilson shall be held
on the second and fourth Mondays of each and every month at 7:00 p.m. at
the Guy B. Tomaino Municipal Building, 2040 Hay Terrace, Wilson Borough,
Pennsylvania.
Chapter 18
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
[Ordinance No. 556 adopted and approved June 9, 1980, to establish
an Educational Service Agency, is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary. The function of the Educational Service Agency is to
employ school crossing guards, and it was established in order to
comply with federal requirements for funding.]
5. Editor's Note: Original Section 15 of Ord. No. 1, as amended 4-10-1922 by Ord. No. 48 and
1-22-1944 by Ord. No. 281, providing for standing committees of Council, has been
deleted, as superseded by Ord. No. 502 adopted and approved 12-27-1973. Ordinance No.
502 is included as Ch. 10, Committees of Council.
§ 13-14 WILSON CODE § 13-18
1:12
Chapter 22
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 25. Firefighters pension plan — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
§ 22-1. Department established.
A Fire Department for the Borough of Wilson, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby established.
§ 22-2. Composition.
Said Fire Department shall consist of one person who shall be known as the
"Chief" and such other paid firemen as Council shall from time to time deem
necessary to properly man the fire apparatus and to protect the property
and life of the inhabitants of the said Borough of Wilson, together with such
volunteer fire companies as may accept the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-3. Authority of Chief.
Subject to the Borough Council and the Fire Committee, the Chief shall
have absolute control over all fire apparatus and is hereby given full power
and authority to give all directions in the performance of his duty when
called upon to perform the same.
§ 22-4. Control over firemen.
All persons designated by Council as paid firemen, together with all
volunteer firemen belonging to any volunteer fire company within the
Borough which has accepted the provisions of this chapter, shall be under
and subject to the control of said Fire Chief when actively engaged in
fighting fires.
§ 22-5. (Reserved)6
§ 22-6. Salaries.7
The salary of the Chief and paid firemen appointed by Council shall be as
fixed by Council from time to time.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 22-5, Suspension of member; appeal, was repealed 1-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996.
7. Editor's Note: Original Section 6, which provided for the appointment of the Chief of the
Fire Department in the month of May for a three-year term and for the removal of the
Chief or any paid fireman at any time at the will of Council, was deleted from this chapter
upon instruction of Council.
§ 13-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-7
1:13
§ 22-7. Increase in number of firemen.
The number of paid firemen shall be increased from time to time as the
Borough Council shall deem necessary.
§ 22-8. Access to fire apparatus.
No persons shall have any access or control over any of the fire apparatus
of the Borough of Wilson unless duly authorized by the Borough Council.
§ 22-9. Purchase of equipment and supplies.
When equipment and supplies of any kind are necessary to the efficiency of
the Fire Department of the Borough of Wilson, the same shall be reported
by the Chief to the Borough Council, which may direct the purchase of the
same.
§ 22-10. Authority of Fire Committee.
The Fire Committee is hereby authorized to continue the establishment of
the fire alarm system in the Borough of Wilson; to promulgate all rules and
regulations necessary for the Fire Department, which shall only be effective
upon approval by Council; and to number all plugs within the Borough of
Wilson, said numbered plugs to be used in connection with the said fire
alarm system.
§ 22-11. Oath of members.
All members of the Fire Department, before entering upon their duties,
shall subscribe to an oath or affirmation that they and each of them will
faithfully obey the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Borough of Wilson and all laws,
rules and regulations now in force or that may hereafter be adopted, and
that they will faithfully perform all the duties as officers and firemen to the
best of their ability.
Chapter 25
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22. Firefighters pension plan — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
§ 25-1. Authorization to receive certain relief funds.
The Wilson-Avona Active Firemen's Relief Association of the Borough of
Wilson, County of Northampton and State of Pennsylvania, is hereby
constituted and recognized by the Borough Council of the said Borough of
§ 22-7 WILSON CODE § 25-1
1:14
Wilson as the relief fund association for the receipt of the payments from
time to time from the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania of the two-percentum
tax paid on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies under
the provisions of the Act of July 5, 1947, P.L. 1240.8
Chapter 31
INVESTMENT TRUST
[Ordinance No. 566 adopted and approved March 8, 1982, providing
for the Borough to become a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local
Government Trust, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.]
Chapter 35
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 56.
§ 35-1. Office created.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Wilson.
§ 35-2. Appointment; removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
members of the Council. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council, and he/she may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all
its members. At least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the
Council shall furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its
intention to remove him/her and the reasons therefor.
§ 35-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his/her executive and
administrative abilities, degree and training, with special reference to the
years of experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to
the duties of his/her office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a
resident of the Borough of Wilson but must reside within a five-mile radius
of the Borough boundaries within a prescribed period of time established by
the Council, not to exceed one year.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq., particularly § 895.706.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-4
1:15
§ 35-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his/her duties, the Borough Manager shall give a bond
to the Borough, with a bonding company as surety, in the sum of $10,000,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties, the premium
for said bond to be paid for by the Borough of Wilson. The bond of the
Borough Manager may be included in and the Manager may be bonded
under and covered by the blanket bond in force and effect for other Borough
employees.
§ 35-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Borough Manager shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council in the same manner as compensation for all other Borough
employees.
§ 35-6. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he/she shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. His/her powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business not
imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers expressly by statute.
Subject to recall by ordinance of the Council, the powers and duties of the
Borough Manager shall include the following:
A. He/she shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments, except such departments where said
supervision is not delegated by the Council or by the Mayor, as the case
may be.
B. With concurrence of the Council, he/she shall hire and, when necessary
for the good of the service, shall suspend or discharge all employees
under his/her supervision, provided that persons covered by the civil
service provisions of the Borough Code shall be hired, suspended or
discharged in accordance with such provisions, provided further that
the Manager shall immediately report in writing to all members of the
Council and furthermore present in person at the next meeting
thereafter of the Council any action taken by authority of this
subsection.
C. He/she shall make recommendations to the Council with respect to the
compensation of all employees under his/her supervision, but such
compensation shall be fixed by the Council.
D. He/she shall prepare and submit to the Council, before the close of the
fiscal year or on such alternate date as the Council shall determine, a
budget for the next fiscal year as an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he/she requires. The
§ 35-4 WILSON CODE § 35-6
1:16
Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before
submitting the budget to the Council.
E. He/she shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Council.
F. He/she shall attend all meetings of the Council and, when requested, its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion.
G. He/she shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs, submit quarterly reports of the condition of Borough finances
and such other reports as the Council requests and make such
recommendations to the Council as he/she deems necessary.
H. He/she shall submit to the Council, as soon as possible, after the close
of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
I. He/she shall employ, by and with approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Borough.
J. He/she shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges, such as zoning, housing, building, plumbing and
electrical, granted by the Borough are observed.
K. He/she shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he/
she shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
Borough official by statute or by direction of the Council.
L. He/she shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
of the Borough's claims.
M. He/she shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough, and he/she shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Borough. He/she shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by Council,
make a full written report thereof. Subject to the approval and within
the monetary bounds set forth by the Council, he/she shall, upon his/her
signature, approve the requisition and purchase of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
N. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. He/she or an officer designated by
him/her shall investigate and dispose of all such complaints, and the
Manager shall report thereon to the Council.
§ 35-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-7
1:17
§ 35-7. Certain duties delegated by Mayor.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 35-8. Absence; disability.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he/she
shall yield his/her duties to the Borough Secretary during his/her absence
or disability.
Chapter 38
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 25.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Social Security — See Ch. 65.
§ 35-7 WILSON CODE § 35-8
1:18
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-8-1958 by Ord. No. 369, approved 12-10-1958;
amended in its entirety 12-29-2003 by Ord. No. 709, approved
12-29-2003]
§ 38-1. Codification of prior ordinances.
This article hereby codifies all prior and existing ordinances and resolutions
relating to the Police Pension Fund, hereinafter referred to as the "fund," of
the Borough of Wilson, so that henceforth all rights and pensions for fulltime
members of the police force shall be governed by this article.
§ 38-2. Establishment and administration.
A Police Pension Fund is hereby established for the Borough of Wilson,
County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to be
administered by the Borough Council or such agency as may be created
by the Council. The funds and property of the existing Police Pension Plan
(hereinafter called the "plan") shall be administered under the terms of this
article.
§ 38-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — The average monthly salary of
the employee at any time of reference computed over the last 36 months (or
such shorter period as represents the member's total period of employment
by the Borough) of his employment by the Borough prior to such date
of reference. For purposes of computing average monthly compensation,
average monthly salary shall include all earnings (shown as earnings in
Pennsylvania) as reported to the Internal Revenue Service on Form W-2.
Average monthly compensation shall include pickup contributions (if any),
paid for the member by the Borough pursuant to § 414(h) of the Internal
Revenue Code, any disability insurance benefit payments and any elective
salary deferrals made by the member pursuant to § 457 or 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
KILLED IN THE LINE OF SERVICE — A police officer's death contracted in
the actual performance of the officer's duties and without fault, neglect or
misconduct on the officer's behalf.
§ 38-4. Membership; authorization for payroll deduction;
designation of beneficiary.
This plan shall apply to existing and future full-time or regular members
of the police force of the Borough who work for a stated salary or
compensation; it does not apply to part-time or special policemen. Upon
becoming a member of the fund, each officer and member of the police
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-4
1:19
force shall, in writing, authorize the Borough to deduct from his pay the
appropriate per centum as provided herein as his contribution into the fund
and shall designate a beneficiary or beneficiaries to whom payments shall
be made in the event of such member's death while a member of the police
force and of the fund, and he shall further stipulate and agree that he shall
be bound by the provisions of the law pertaining to the fund and of this
article and of any future ordinances or statutes pertaining thereto.
§ 38-5. Time of retirement.
A full-time policeman who shall receive honorable discharge by reason of
age and service shall be entitled to a pension commencing on the first day
of the month following his 50th birthday, provided such member shall have
completed 25 years of credited service in the Borough, and ending on the
first day of the month in which he dies. The benefits are hereinafter set
forth.
§ 38-6. Normal retirement benefit; sources of revenue.
The normal monthly pension or retirement benefit shall be equal to 1/2
the member's average monthly compensation during the last 36 months of
employment, continuing for life, in equal monthly payments. The fund shall
be derived from:
A. Retirement benefits shall be paid in equal monthly installments during
the member's lifetime.
B. (Reserved)9
C. Credited service is service rendered in the Borough only.
A. Contributions from the salaries of each officer and member of the police
force, which contribution shall not be in excess of 8% of his
compensation, and in the event payments by members are reduced
below 5%, or eliminated, contributions by the Borough will not be
required to keep the fund actuarially sound;
B. Any sum or sums paid to the Borough and inuring to the fund from any
official or department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under any
present or future law providing therefor;
C. Any money or property, real, personal or mixed, or any other
appropriations which the Borough may by gift, grant, devise or bequest
receive for the benefit of the fund;
D. Any and all contributions that may be lawfully made by the Borough to
the fund; and
E. Receipts from investments of said fund.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding retirement age, was repealed 8-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 718, approved 8-23-2004.
§ 38-4 WILSON CODE § 38-7
1:20
§ 38-7. Vested benefit.
Should a police officer, before completing superannuation retirement age
and service requirements but after having completed 12 years of total
service, for any reason cease to be employed as a full-time police officer
by the Borough, and who is a member of the pension fund, he shall be
entitled to vest his retirement benefits by filing with Council within 90
days of the date he ceases to be a full-time police officer a written notice
of his intention to vest. Upon reaching the date which would have been
his superannuation retirement date if he had continued to be employed
as a full time officer, he shall be paid a partial superannuation retirement
allowance determined by applying the percentage his years of service bears
to the years of service which he would have rendered had he continued to
work until his superannuation retirement date to the gross pension; using,
however, the average monthly compensation during the appropriate period
prior to his termination of employment.
§ 38-8. Postponed retirement.
A member may continue employment after attaining normal retirement
date, if requested to do so by Borough Council, and the member voluntarily
agrees to do so. Such members as are retired shall be subject to service,
from time to time, as a police reserve, in cases of riot, tumult or
preservation of the public peace until unfit for such service, when they may
be finally discharged by reason of age or disability. The retirement benefit
shall be based on the average monthly compensation during the last 36
months of employment by the Borough.
§ 38-9. Refund; disability benefits; death benefits.
A. Should an officer or member of the police force be discharged or
voluntarily withdraw from the police force, or for any reason
whatsoever be ineligible to receive a pension after having contributed
to the fund, he shall be entitled to a refund of all money paid by him into
the fund together with 4% of all interest earned by such monies while in
the fund, as determined by Borough Council, less any amounts which
have been paid to him from the fund by pension or otherwise, and he
shall be excluded from further participation in the fund and shall have
no further rights therein. If such ineligibility is due to nonservice
disability or nonservice death prior to retirement, such monies shall be
paid to the police officer or, in case of death, to a designated beneficiary
or to his estate.
B. In the event of permanent injury or disease contracted in the actual
performance of his duties, and without fault, neglect or misconduct on
his part, which prevents the police officer from performing his duty as a
police officer, benefits shall become payable to the police officer at a
rate equal to 50% of the officer's average monthly compensation,
provided that any police officer who receives benefits for the same
injury under the Social Security Act (49 Statutes 620, 42 U.S.C.A. § 301
§ 38-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-9
1:21
et seq.) shall have the disability benefits offset or reduced by the
amount of such benefits.
(1) "Total and permanent disability" means a physical or mental
condition of a member resulting from bodily injury or disease or
mental disorder which renders him incapable of engaging in any
gainful employment.
(2) A police officer who has indicated his desire to retire on disability
pay and is found eligible for disability payments as set forth above
shall receive a monthly pension for the remainder of his life, or
until sooner reinstated as an active member of the police force,
provided, however, that if the police officer retiring on disability
shall be eligible for and receive workmen's compensation benefits
or other insurance benefits from Borough-owned policies for such
disease or injury, and if such workmen's compensation and other
insurance benefits shall exceed the amounts set forth herein for
disability payments, then no disability shall be made to the retiring
member until such workmen's compensation or other insurance
benefits shall have been exhausted. In the event such workmen's
compensation benefits or other insurance benefits from Boroughowned
policies for such disease and injury are payable but do not
exceed the monthly service related disability pension payment,
then each disability pension payment hereunder shall be reduced
by the amount of such workmen's compensation or other insurance
benefits.
(3) The determination as to the existence and the continuance of the
disability shall be made by one or more qualified physicians
appointed by the Borough Council. A disabled member may be
required to submit to a physical examination to prove the existence
of disabilities and every six months may be required to submit to a
physical examination to prove its continuance.
C. Survivor benefits shall accrue to widows and certain minor children of
members who are entitled to benefits by reason of age and service or
disability as follows:
(1) The surviving spouse of a member of the police force or a member
who retires on pension who dies or, if no spouse survives or if he or
she survives and subsequently dies, then the child or children
under the age of 18 years, or if attending college, under or
attaining the age of 23 years, of a member of the police force or a
member who retires on pension who dies, shall, during her lifetime
in the case of a surviving spouse or until reaching the age of 18
years or, if attending college, under or attaining the age of 23 years
in the case of a child or children, be entitled to receive a pension
calculated at no less than 50% of the pension the member was
receiving or would have been receiving had he been retired at the
time of his death.
§ 38-9 WILSON CODE § 38-9
1:22
§ 38-10. Contributions.
(2) The surviving spouse of a member of the police force who dies
before his pension has vested or, if no spouse survives or if he or
she survives and subsequently dies, the child or children under the
age of 18 years or, if attending college, under or attaining the age
of 23 years, of the member of the police force shall be entitled to
receive repayment of all money which the member invested in the
pension fund plus interest or other increases in value of the
member's investment in the pension fund unless the member has
designated another beneficiary for this purpose.
(3) For the purposes of this article, the phrase "attending college" shall
mean the eligible children are registered at an accredited
institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum course
load of seven credit hours per semester.10
D. When beneficiaries entitled to receive benefit. [Added 7-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 749, approved 7-13-2009]
(1) The beneficiaries (as defined in this Subsection D) of a police
officer shall be entitled to receive a benefit if a police officer dies:
(a) After he/she has begun receiving benefits under a normal
retirement benefit; or
(b) After he/she has begun disability retirement benefits, provided
that such benefits did not terminate to his/her death benefits
because he/she ceases to be disabled; or
(c) While still employed by the Police Department and having met
the age and service requirements for normal benefits; or
(d) Prior to commencement of any retirement benefit under this
section and was vested in his/her accrued benefit.11
A. The Borough Council agrees to contribute the payments made by the
State Treasurer to the municipality from the monies received from
taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies for
purposes of pension, retirement, death or disability benefits for
policemen which shall be used as follows to reduce the unfunded
liability or, after such liability has been funded, to apply against the
annual obligation of the municipality for future service costs or, to the
extent that the payment may be in excess of such obligation, to reduce
the member's contributions. It shall be the duty of the Borough Council
to apply such payments as set forth above.
10.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), Killed-in-service death benefit, added 7-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 749, approved 7-13-2009, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 758, approved 11-28-2011.
11.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding the killed-in-service death benefit,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 758,
approved 11-28-2011.
§ 38-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-10
1:23
§ 38-11. Cost of living benefits.
In addition to the benefits received under this plan, Council at its December
meeting of each year shall act on whether or not a cost-of-living increase
shall be granted for members of the police force receiving retirement
benefits; provided, however, that if such cost of living is granted, it shall not
exceed the percentage increase in the consumer price index from the month
in which the police member last worked; provided, further, that in no case
shall the police pension benefits exceed 75% of the average monthly salary
for computing return of benefits; and provided, further, that the total cost
of living increase shall not exceed 30%. No cost of living increase shall be
granted which would impair the actuarial soundness of the police pension
fund.
§ 38-12. Management of funds.
All the funds of this plan shall be held by a trustee or trustees appointed
by the Borough Council, in trust, under a trust agreement which shall be a
part of this plan for use in providing the benefits of this plan. No part of the
corpus or income of the Trust shall be used for or diverted to purposes other
than the exclusive benefit of the members and contingent annuitants of this
plan prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan with respect to
such persons. No person shall have any interest in or right to any part of
the earnings of the trust or any part of the assets thereof; except as and to
the extent expressly provided in this plan and in the trust agreement.
§ 38-13. Administration of plan.
A Pension Board consisting of three members of the Borough Council,
namely, the Chairman of the Police Committee, the Chairman of the General
Government Committee, and one at-large member selected by Borough
Council, one member of the police force elected by the members of the
Police Association, and one person who is an elector of the Borough but
not a member of the Council or the police force, such fifth member to
be appointed by the Mayor of the Borough, shall administer this plan in
accordance with its terms and with such powers as herein described. Any
member of the Board may resign at any time by giving written notice to the
other Board members.
§ 38-14. Powers and duties, organization of the Board.
B. Each year, an actuarial study shall be made to determine the
contributions to be made to the fund so as to maintain the plan on an
actuarially sound basis, From the results of the actuarial study, the
Council shall by ordinance or resolution, determine the amount to be
contributed by the members and the Borough, if any.
A. The Board shall administer the plan in accordance with its terms and
shall have all powers necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan.
The Board shall interpret the plan and shall determine all questions
§ 38-10 WILSON CODE § 38-14
1:24
§ 38-15. Records and reports.
The Board shall keep a record of all its proceedings and acts, and shall keep
all such books of account, records and other data as may be necessary for
the proper administration of the plan. The Board shall notify the Trustee
and the Borough Council of any action taken by the Board and, when
required, shall notify any other interested person or persons.
§ 38-16. Payment of expenses.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for services as
such, but all expenses of the Board shall be paid by the Borough in such
manner as the Borough shall determine. Such expenses shall include any
expenses incident to the functioning of the Board, including but not limited
to fees of accountants, actuaries, counsel, consultants and other specialists
arising in the administration, interpretation, and application of the
plan. Any such determination by the Board shall be conclusive and
binding on all persons. The Board shall appoint a chief administrative
officer to handle the day-to-day administration of the plan.
B. The Board shall act by a majority of its members at the time in office
and such action may be taken either by a vote at a meeting or in writing
without a meeting. The Board, with Borough Council approval, may
authorize any one or more of its members to execute any document or
documents on behalf of the Board, in which event the Board shall notify
the Trustees in writing of such action and the name or names of its
member or members so designated. The Trustees thereafter shall
accept and rely upon any document executed by such member or
members as representing action by the Board until the Board shall file
with the Trustees a written revocation of such designation. The Board
may adopt such bylaws and regulations as it deems desirable for the
conduct of its affairs, and may appoint such accountants, actuaries,
counsel, specialists, consultants and other persons as it may deem
necessary or desirable in connection with the administration of this
Plan. The Board shall be entitled to rely exclusively upon, and shall be
fully protected in any action taken by it in good faith in relying upon,
any opinions or reports which shall be furnished to it by any such
accountant, actuary, counsel or other consultants.
C. The Board shall adopt from time to time tables for use in all actuarial
calculations required in connection with the Plan and shall establish
from time to time the rate or rates of interest which shall be used in all
actuarial calculations required in connection with the plan. As an aid to
the Board in adopting tables, the consultant appointed by the Borough
shall evaluate the assets of the plan annually, shall make such actuarial
valuations of the contingent assets and liabilities of the plan as the
Board may require, and shall certify to the Board the tables and rates of
contributions which such consultants recommend for use by the
Borough.
§ 38-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-16
1:25
and any other costs of administering the plan. Investment expenses shall be
paid from the plan assets.
§ 38-17. Immunity from liability.
No member of the Board shall incur any liability for any action or failure
to act excepting only liability for his own gross negligence or willful
misconduct. The Borough Council shall and does hereby indemnify each
member of the Board against any and all claims, losses, damages, expense
and liability arising from any action or failure to act, except when the
same is judicially determined to be due to the gross negligence or willful
misconduct of such member. In addition, the Board and any member or
agent thereof shall be fully protected in relying upon the advice of any
accountant, actuary, counsel or consultant appointed by the Board or the
Borough Council.
§ 38-18. Military service.
A. Any member of the police force who has been a regularly appointed
employee for a period of at least six months and who thereafter shall
enter into the military service of the United States shall have credited
to his employment record for pension or retirement benefits all of the
time spent by him in such military service, if such person returns or has
heretofore returned to his employment within six months after his
separation from the service.
B. The police pension fund shall provide full service credit for each year of
military service or fraction thereof, not to exceed five years, to any
member of the police force who was not employed by the political
subdivision or regional police department prior to such military service,
The amount due for the purchase of credit for military service other
than intervening military service shall be computed by applying the
average normal cost rate for the Borough pension plan as certified by
the Public Employee Retirement Commission, but not to exceed 10%, to
the member's average annual rate of compensation over the first three
years of municipal service and multiplying the result by the number of
years and fractional part of a year of creditable nonintervening military
service being purchased together with interest at the rate of 4 3/4%
compounded annually from the date of initial entry into municipal
service to the date of payment.
C. Any member of the police force shall be eligible to receive service credit
for intervening or nonintervening military service as provided in
Subsections A and B provided that he is not entitled to receive, eligible
to receive now or in the future, or is receiving retirement benefits for
such service under a retirement system administered and wholly or
partially paid for by any other governmental agency with the exception
of a member eligible to receive or receiving military retirement pay
earned by a combination of active duty and nonactive duty with a
reserve or national guard component of the armed forces which
§ 38-16 WILSON CODE § 38-18
1:26
§ 38-19. Nonalienation of benefits.
No benefit under the plan shall be subject in any manner to anticipation,
alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance or charge, and
any attempt so to do shall be void, except as specifically provided in the
plan, nor shall any such benefits be in any manner liable for or subject
to garnishment, attachment, execution, levy or other legal process of the
collection of debts or liable for or subject to the debts, contracts, liabilities,
engagements or torts of the person entitled to such benefit. In the event
Council or its agency shall find that any member or beneficiary under the
plan has become incompetent, bankrupt or insolvent or that any attempt
has been made to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge,
encumber or charge any of his benefits under the plan, except as specifically
provided in the plan, then such benefit shall cease and terminate and, in the
event, Council or its agency shall hold or apply the same to or for the benefit
of such member or beneficiary, his spouse, children, or other dependents, or
any of them, in such manner as the Borough Council may find proper from
time to time.
§ 38-20. Hearings.
Any officer or member of the police force aggrieved by any ruling or action
of the Police Pension Board or the Council regarding the fund and his
relation thereto shall have the right to a hearing before Council to be held
within 10 days, at his written request therefor, at which he may attend
in person and be represented by counsel and may further require the
attendance of any witnesses on his behalf, by subpoena to be issued by the
Borough Council on his written request. Minutes and records shall be kept
of the testimony and of the facts produced, and Council may thereon make
such order and ruling in the matter as may seem just and lawful.
§ 38-21. Amendments.
retirement pay is payable only upon the attainment of a specified age
and period of service under 10 U.S.C. Chapter 67 (relating to retired
pay for nonregular service).
A. Subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, the employer may at any
time and from time to time modify, or amend, in whole or in part, any or
all of the provisions of this article and/or trust agreement, including the
method of financing the plan, provided that:
(1) No modification or amendment may be made which would have the
effect of depriving any retired member or contingent annuitant
receiving a retirement benefit or any benefits under the plan to
which he would otherwise be entitled by reason of the accumulated
funds held under this article at that time, unless such member or
contingent annuitant consents thereto; and
(2) No such modification or amendment shall make it possible for any
part of the funds of the plan to be used for or diverted to purposes
§ 38-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-21
1:27
§ 38-22. Controlling law.
This article represents codification of all ordinances and resolutions of
the Borough relating to the Police Employee Pension Plan. Therefore, all
ordinances, resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions conflicting
with this article are hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this article.
All of the amendments which are mandated by Act 30 of 2002 shall be
considered granted as of January 1, 2003.
other than for the exclusive benefit of members and contingent
annuitants under the plan prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities
with respect to them.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any modification or amendments of this
article may be made, retroactively if necessary, which the employer may
deem necessary or appropriate to make the plan conform to the
requirements of any law or governmental regulation now or hereafter
enacted or promulgated or to qualify such ordinance and trust forming
a part thereof as exempt under existing or future federal, state or local
income tax or estate tax laws and regulations.
§ 38-21 WILSON CODE § 38-22
1:28
ARTICLE II
Firefighters Pension Plan
[Adopted 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 771,12 approved 4-14-2014]
§ 38-23. Election of benefits.
Wilson Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Firefighter Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act; 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 38-24. Administration of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Firefighter Pension
Plan Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective January 1, 2014 (the Contract).
§ 38-25. Acceptance of Contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the Contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the Contract.
§ 38-26. Payment for obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the Contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the Contract.
§ 38-27. Repeal of prior provisions; effective date.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 729 either immediately or on January 1, 2014, which is the effective
date of the Contract, whichever is later.
§ 38-28. Copies on file.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed Contract shall be filed
with the System.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 38, Art. II, Firefighters Pension
Plan, adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 729, approved 3-13-2006.
§ 38-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-29
1:29
§ 38-29. (Reserved)
§ 38-29 WILSON CODE § 38-29
1:30
ARTICLE III
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 770,13 approved 4-14-2014]
§ 38-30. Election of benefits.
Wilson Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 38-31. Administration of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective January 1, 2014 (the Contract).
§ 38-32. Acceptance of Contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the Contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the Contract.
§ 38-33. Payment for obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the Contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the Contract.
§ 38-34. Repeal of prior provisions; effective date.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 737 either immediately or on January 1, 2014, which is the effective
date of the Contract, whichever is later.
§ 38-35. Copies on file.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed Contract shall be filed
with the System.
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 38, Art. III, Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan, adopted 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 737, approved 2-26-2007.
§ 38-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-36
1:31
§ 38-36. (Reserved)
§ 38-36 WILSON CODE § 38-36
1:32
ARTICLE IV
Police Officers Deferred Retirement Option Plan
[Adopted 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 767, approved 9-23-2013]
§ 38-37. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
DROP — A deferred retirement option plan that provides for the
commencement and accumulation of retirement benefit payments for active
employees with disbursement of the accumulated payments and interest
earnings as a lump sum upon termination of employment.
DROP PARTICIPANT — A retired member of a local government defined
benefit pension plan who is eligible to participate in a drop under § 38-39,
who has elected to participate in a drop under § 38-40 and who is not an
elected official.
DROP PARTICIPANT ACCOUNT — A pension trust fund ledger account
established under § 38-44.
NORMAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT — The retirement benefit payable to a
member of a defined benefit pension plan on or after the date on which the
member first satisfies the age and service requirements for full, unreduced
retirement benefits, including supplemental amounts provided to the
member after retirement as cost-of-living increases.
SUBSIDIARY DROP PARTICIPANT ACCOUNT — The separate, interestbearing,
subsidiary DROP participant account established for a DROP
participant under § 38-44.
§ 38-38. Employment status.
Participation in a DROP does not guarantee the DROP participant's
employment by the Borough during the specified period of the DROP.
§ 38-39. Eligibility.
An active member of the Borough of Wilson Police Pension Plan who is
eligible for a normal retirement benefit under the pension plan or will be
eligible for a normal retirement benefit under the pension plan prior to
participation in the DROP and who is not an elected official is eligible to
participate in the DROP by filing a written application with the Borough
Secretary at least 30 days before the member's effective date of retirement.
§ 38-40. Participation in DROP.
A. Election. An eligible active member may elect to participate in a DROP
for a period of no longer than one year.
§ 38-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-40
1:33
§ 38-41. Benefits payable.
B. DROP participation election. Upon deciding to participate in a DROP, a
member shall submit on forms provided and required by the retirement
system:
(1) A binding and irrevocable letter of resignation from regular
employment with the Borough of Wilson that discloses the
member's intent to retire and specifies the member's retirement
date.
(2) An irrevocable written election to participate in the DROP that:
(a) Details a DROP participant's rights and obligations under the
DROP.
(b) Includes an agreement to forgo:
[1] Active membership in the retirement system.
[2] Any growth in the salary base used for calculating the
regular retirement benefit.
[3] Any additional benefit accrual for retirement purposes,
including length-of-service increments.
(c) Specifies the effective date of DROP participation that shall be
the day after the specified retirement date.
(d) Specifies the DROP termination date that satisfies the
limitation in Subsection A.
C. DROP termination.
(1) A DROP participant may change the DROP termination date to an
earlier date within the limitations of Subsection A. No penalty shall
be imposed for early termination of DROP participation.
(2) Upon either early or regular termination of DROP participation:
(a) The DROP participant shall be separated from employment by
the Borough of Wilson.
(b) The retirement system shall pay the balance in the DROP
participant's subsidiary DROP participant account to the
terminating DROP participant as provided in § 38-41D.
(c) The DROP participant shall be ineligible to re-enroll in the
DROP thereafter even if the former DROP participant is
reemployed by the Borough of Wilson with renewed active
membership in the retirement system.
A. Fixing retirement benefit, retirement date, retirement benefits and
DROP dates. Effective with the date of retirement, which shall be the
§ 38-40 WILSON CODE § 38-41
1:34
day before the effective date of DROP participation, the member's
effective date of retirement and the member's effective dates of
beginning and terminating employment as a DROP participant shall be
fixed.
B. Effective dates.
(1) A retired member's effective date of participation in a DROP shall
begin the day following the effective date of the member's regular
retirement.
(2) A retired member's participation in a DROP shall end on the last
day of the participation period specified in the ordinance
establishing the DROP that is in effect on the effective date of the
retired member's participation in the DROP.
C. Benefit payments and accruals. All of the retired members' monthly,
normal retirement benefit and interest thereon at the assigned rate
shall be credited to the DROP participant's subsidiary DROP participant
account in the pension trust fund and a separate accounting of the
DROP participant's accrued benefits accumulation under the DROP
shall be calculated annually and provided to the DROP participant.
D. Payment. On the effective date of a DROP participant's termination of
employment with the Borough of Wilson as DROP participant,
participation in the DROP shall cease and the retirement system shall
calculate and pay to the participant the participant's total accumulated
DROP benefits in the DROP participant's subsidiary DROP participant
account subject to the following provisions:
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2), the terminating DROP
participant or, if deceased, the participant's survivor as provided by
the Police Pension Plan or, in lieu thereof, the participant's named
beneficiary, shall elect on a form provided by the retirement system
to receive payment of the DROP benefits in accordance with one of
the following options:
(a) The balance in the DROP participant's subsidiary DROP
participant account less withholding taxes, if any, remitted to
the Internal Revenue Service shall be paid within 45 days by
the retirement system from the account to the DROP
participant or surviving beneficiary.
(b) The balance in the DROP participant's subsidiary DROP
participant account shall be paid within 45 days by the
Retirement system from the account directly to the custodian
of an eligible retirement plan as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(B)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 [Public Law 99-514, 26
U.S.C. § 402(c)(8)(B)], or, in the case of eligible rollover
distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased DROP
participant, an eligible retirement plan that is an individual
retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as
§ 38-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-41
1:35
described in Section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986.
(2) If the DROP participant or beneficiary fails to elect a method of
payment within 60 days after the participant's termination date,
the retirement system shall pay the balance as a lump sum as
provided in Subsection D(1).
(3) The form of payment selected by the DROP participant or surviving
beneficiary shall comply with the minimum distribution
requirements of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
E. Taxation, attachment and assignment.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection E(2), (3) and (4), the right of a
DROP participant to any benefit or right accrued or accruing under
the provisions of this article and the moneys in the DROP
participant's subsidiary DROP participant account are exempt from
any state or municipal tax, levy and sale, garnishment, attachment,
spouse's election or any other process whatsoever.
(2) Rights under this chapter shall be subject to forfeiture as provided
by the act of July 8, 1978 (P.L. 752, No. 140), known as the Public
Employee Pensions Forfeiture Act.14 Forfeitures under this
subsection or under any other provision of law may not be applied
to increase the benefits that any DROP participant otherwise would
receive under this article.
(3) Rights under this article shall be subject to attachment in favor of
an alternate payee as set forth in a qualified domestic relations
order.
(4) Direct rollover.
(a) Under Subsection D(1)(b), a distributee may elect to have an
eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible
retirement plan by way of a direct rollover.
(b) For purposes of this subsection, a "distributee" includes a
DROP participant, a DROP participant's survivor as provided
by the Police Pension Plan or, in lieu thereof, the participant's
designated beneficiary and a DROP participant's former
spouse who is an alternate payee under a qualified domestic
relations order.
(c) For purposes of this subsection, "eligible rollover distribution"
has the meaning given the term by Section 402(f)(2)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, except that a qualified trust
shall be considered an eligible retirement plan only if it accepts
the distributee's eligible rollover distribution and, in the case
14.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 1311 et seq.
§ 38-41 WILSON CODE § 38-41
1:36
§ 38-42. Death benefits under DROP.
of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an
eligible retirement plan is an "individual retirement account"
or an "individual retirement annuity" as those terms are
defined in Section 408(a) and (b) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986.
F. Disability. If a DROP participant becomes eligible for a disability
pension benefit and terminates employment, the monthly normal
retirement benefit of the DROP participant shall terminate.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article I, Police Pension
Plan, if a DROP participant becomes eligible for a disability pension
benefit, the amount of the monthly disability pension payment shall not
exceed the amount of the monthly normal retirement benefit under the
pension plan the DROP participant would receive under § 38-41A.
G. Eligibility. Except for those benefits specified under § 38-40B(2)(b) as
forgone by the member, a DROP participant shall be eligible for any
employee benefits provided to active employees before retirement as
set forth in this article.
H. Eligibility for other benefits. A DROP participant shall be eligible for all
preretirement benefits for employees otherwise provided by law,
including, but not limited to, benefits under:
(1) The act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736, No. 338) known as the "Worker's
Compensation Act";
(2) The act of June 28, 1935 (P.L. 477, No. 193), referred to as the
"Enforcement Officer Disability Benefits Law";
(3) The act of December 5, 1936 (2nd Sp.Sess., 1937 P.L. 2897, No. 1)
known as the "Unemployment Compensation Law";
(4) The act of June 24, 1976 (P.L. 424, No. 101) referred to as the
"Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death Benefits Act";
and
(5) The Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976 (Public Law 94-430,
42 U.S.C. § 90, Stat. 1347).
A. Named beneficiary. If a DROP participant dies, the DROP participant's
named beneficiary shall be entitled to apply for and receive benefits
accrued in the DROP participant's subsidiary DROP participant account
as provided in § 38-41D.
B. Final benefit. The monthly retirement system benefit accrued in the
DROP participant's subsidiary DROP participant account during the
month of a DROP participant's death shall be the final monthly
retirement system benefit credited for DROP participation.
§ 38-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-42
1:37
§ 38-43. Subsequent employment.
After both the termination of a DROP participant's employment as a DROP
participant by the Borough of Wilson and the expiration of the DROP
participation period, a former DROP participant shall be subject to such
reemployment limitations as other retired members and shall be eligible
for renewed membership as an active member in the Borough of Wilson
employees' retirement system.
§ 38-44. DROP participant account.
C. Termination of eligibility. A DROP participant's eligibility to participate
in the DROP terminates upon the death of the DROP participant. If a
DROP participant dies on or after the effective date of participation in
the DROP but before the monthly retirement system benefit of the
participant's accruable for the month has accrued in the DROP
participant's subsidiary DROP participant account, the Borough of
Wilson shall pay the monthly retirement system benefits as though the
participant had not elected DROP participation and had died after the
member's effective date of retirement but before receipt of the retired
member's first regular retirement benefit.
D. Survivors ineligible for death benefit. Except for those benefits
specifically payable as a result of death incurred in the course of
performing a hazardous public duty, the survivors of a DROP
participant who dies shall not be eligible to receive retirement system
death benefits payable in the event of the death of an active member.
E. Survivors eligible for retired member's death benefit. The DROP
participant's survivor shall be eligible to receive retirement system
death benefits normally payable in the event of the death of a retired
employee.
A. General rule. The Borough of Wilson shall establish a DROP participant
account as an interest-bearing ledger account in its pension trust fund.
The account balance shall be accounted for separately but need not be
physically segregated from other pension trust fund assets.
B. Subsidiary DROP participant accounts. A separate interest-bearing
subsidiary DROP participant account shall be established for each
DROP participant. While a retired member is employed as DROP
participant, the member's monthly, normal retirement benefit and
interest thereon shall be credited to the DROP participant's subsidiary
DROP participant account under § 38-41C. The interest shall be
compounded and credited monthly at the actual rate earned by the
DROP participant account that shall not be less than 0% nor more than
4 1/2%.
C. Termination of employment. When a DROP participant terminates
employment with the Borough of Wilson as a DROP participant, the
DROP participant's total accumulated benefits shall be calculated,
§ 38-42 WILSON CODE § 38-44
1:38
§ 38-45. Cost of management of DROP program.
Any and all costs or fees associated with the management or administration
of the DROP program and the individual DROP participant accounts shall
be paid directly from the Police Pension Fund and not by the Borough of
Wilson.
charged to the DROP participant account and paid out of the pension
trust fund under § 38-41D(2).
D. Account held in trust. A DROP participant account shall be held in trust
for the exclusive benefit of DROP retired members who are or were
DROP participants and for the beneficiaries of the members.
§ 38-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-45
1:39
Chapter 41
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 41-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Act. No. 247 of 1968, known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code," 53 P.S. § 10101, as amended, supplemented and in effect,
there shall be a Planning Commission in and for the Borough of Wilson.
§ 41-2. Membership; appointment; compensation.
The Planning Commission shall consist of not less than three nor more than
nine members, as the Borough Council may from time to time determine
by resolution. The members shall be appointed by the Borough Council and
shall serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for
expenses incurred in carrying out their Commission duties.
§ 41-3. Terms of office.
The term of each member of the Planning Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however,
that the members of the Planning Commission as it exists at the time of
the adoption of this chapter shall continue as the members of the Planning
Commission established by this chapter. Subsequent terms of office shall be
so arranged that if the Commission consists of eight members or less, no
more than two members shall be reappointed or replaced during any future
calendar year, and if the Commission consists of nine members, no more
than three members shall be so reappointed or replaced.
§ 41-4. Organization.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and
shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may
make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures,
consistent with the ordinances of the municipality and the laws of the
commonwealth. The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities
to the Borough Council. Interim reports may be made as often as may be
necessary or as requested by the Borough Council.
§ 38-45 WILSON CODE § 41-5
1:40
§ 41-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the right to exercise all of the powers and rights
conferred by the Act of Assembly under which it is established and shall
perform all of the mandatory duties imposed by said Act of Assembly.
Chapter 44
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
§ 44-1. Establishment; membership.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Wilson,
consisting of a Chief of Police, Sergeants and such subordinate officers or
any other classification as desired by the Borough Council.
§ 44-2. Authority of Chief.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He
shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and
have supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties
and authority.
Chapter 48
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 48, Recreation Board, adopted 2-14-1949 by Ord. No.
320, approved 2-17-1949, as amended, was repealed 8-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 792, approved 8-12-2019.]
Chapter 51
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 51, Retirement System, adopted 2-24-1975 by Ord. No.
519, approved 2-24-1975, was repealed 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 679,
approved 3-8-1999. For the complete current pension plan
provisions, see now Ch. 38, Pensions.]
Chapter 56
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 41-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:41
§ 56-1. Salary of Mayor.
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Wilson is hereby fixed at the
sum of $3,500 per annum, payable from the Borough treasury in biweekly
installments on warrants authorized by Council.
§ 56-2. Compensation of President of Council.
The compensation for the President of Council is hereby fixed at the sum
of $2,700 per annum, payable in biweekly installments during the term of
office as President in the same manner as the compensation is paid to other
members of Council as hereinafter provided.
§ 56-3. Compensation of members of Council.
Each member of Borough Council of the Borough of Wilson shall receive
as compensation the sum of $2,500 per annum payable in biweekly
installments during the term of his respective office.
§ 56-4. Time and manner of payment.
The compensation hereinabove provided for shall be paid to each
Councilperson during the month succeeding the month for which the
compensation is provided, and shall be payable from the Borough Treasury
on warrants authorized by Council.
§ 56-5. When salaries and compensation effective.
The aforesaid salary of the Mayor and the compensation of the President
and each member of Borough Council shall be effective as of the first day of
January 2004.
Chapter 59
SECRETARY AND TREASURER
§ 59-1. One person authorized to hold both offices.
The offices of Secretary and Treasurer of the Borough may be held by the
same person, who shall be appointed by Council to serve for an indefinite
term at the pleasure of the Council and shall receive compensation for such
services as the Council shall prescribe.
§ 59-2. Performance of duties.
The person holding the offices of Secretary and Treasurer shall perform the
duties of each office as set forth in the Act of February 1, 1966 [P.L. (1965)
1656, No. 581], as amended, known as the "Borough Code."15
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 56-1 WILSON CODE § 59-2
1:42
Chapter 62
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
Chapter 65
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension funds — See Ch. 38.
§ 65-1. Legislative declaration.
It is the considered opinion of the Borough Council that the extension of
the social security system to employees and officers of the Borough of
Wilson will be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the Borough by
providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions
of the old-age and survivors insurance system, but also to the Borough
of Wilson by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of
personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 65-2. Execution of plan and agreement.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"16 which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said oldage
and survivors insurance system. The Borough of Wilson is hereby
authorized by and through the President of the Council and the Secretary of
the Council to execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans and
agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling act17 and the Social
Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Borough
of Wilson, and to do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of
employees and officers under the old-age and survivors insurance system.
§ 65-3. System of payroll deductions.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough of Wilson to be
made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
16.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
§ 59-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:43
Borough of Wilson. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the
provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state agency and
the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent
shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as
payments are made.
§ 65-4. Appropriations.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Wilson in the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution Fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling act 18 and in accordance with the plan
or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President of the Borough
Council and the Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Wilson
to enter into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall
be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with paragraph 218 of the Social
Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation
of this Borough of Wilson shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
Chapter 67
WILSON PARK TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 157. Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 67-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, in addition to the terms defined in the preamble
hereto,19 the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
COOPERATION AGREEMENT — The cooperation agreement for the Wilson
Park Tax Increment District by and among the County, the school district,
the Borough and the Authority.
DISTRICT — The tax increment district created pursuant to this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of the TIF Act.
FINANCE OFFICER — The legally authorized agent for each of the taxing
districts responsible by law for receipt and disbursement of the revenues
for the taxing districts.
PROJECT COSTS — Such costs include any and all eligible costs undertaken
within or for the benefit of the District in accordance with the express
language defining project costs as contained in the TIF Act.
18.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
19.Editor's Note: The preamble is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 65-3 WILSON CODE § 67-1
1:44
TAXING DISTRICTS — Shall mean, collectively, the County, the Township,
and the school district.
TAX INCREMENT FUND — The fund maintained by the Authority into
which are paid all tax increments and into which are deposited all other
revenues related to the District and the plan and from which money is
disbursed to pay project costs related to the District.
TAX INCREMENT OR TAX INCREMENT REVENUES — The meaning
ascribed to the term "tax increment" in the TIF Act.
§ 67-2. Boundaries.
The District created pursuant to this chapter shall contain those units of
property assessed for real property tax purposes as described in Exhibit A
attached hereto.20
§ 67-3. Creation and term.
The District is hereby created as of January 2, 2007. The District shall
continue in existence until January 1, 2027; provided that, as provided in
the TIF Act, the District may not be dissolved as long as any tax increment
bonds or notes for the District remain outstanding. The Borough hereby
determines that the requisite time provided for under Section 5(a)(6) of
the TIF Act subsequent to the public hearing has passed as of the date of
enactment of this chapter.
§ 67-4. Name.
The District shall be identified as the Wilson Park Tax Increment District for
all plan and identification purposes.
§ 67-5. Legislative findings.
The Borough hereby determines, in accordance with the powers conferred
by the TIF Act, based upon extensive studies and examination of the
conditions currently existing within the District, that:
A. The District is a contiguous geographic area within an area undergoing
redevelopment.
B. The improvements contemplated by the plan are likely to enhance
significantly the value of all real property in the District.
C. The aggregate value of equalized taxable property of the District, plus
all existing tax increment districts, does not exceed 10% of the total
value of equalized taxable property within the Borough.
D. The area comprising the District as a whole has not been subject to
adequate growth and development through investment by private
20.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:45
§ 67-6. Approval of plan and project financing.
§ 67-7. Designation of Authority as project authority.
The Council of this Borough hereby designates the Authority as the
Authority charged with preparing, implementing, monitoring, and directing
the plan and as the issuer for any bonds or notes which may be necessary
to finance project costs for the District.
§ 67-8. Creation of Tax Increment Fund.
The Authority will establish a Tax Increment Fund account which shall hold
all tax increment revenues for the District. The Council of this Borough
hereby requests that the finance officers of the taxing districts transfer
all tax increment revenues as specified in the TIF plan received from the
taxing districts to the Authority for deposit into a Tax Increment Fund to be
created for such purposes by the Authority. The Treasurer of the Borough
is also authorized to accept or transfer to the Authority for deposit into the
Tax Increment Fund any other gifts, appropriations, grants, loans, or other
revenues to be applied to the District for the purposes of the plan.
§ 67-9. Tax increment revenues to be held in trust for project.
The required tax increments specified in the plan and cooperation
agreement collected by the finance officers of the taxing districts, from and
after the date of settlement of such taxes, shall be paid to the Tax Increment
enterprise and would not reasonably be anticipated to be adequately
developed without the adoption of the plan.
E. No individuals, families or small businesses will be displaced in the
District.
F. The plan conforms to the County master plan.
G. The plan will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with sound needs
of the taxing districts as a whole, for the rehabilitation or
redevelopment of the District by private enterprise.
H. The District is a blighted area containing characteristics of blight as
described in the Urban Redevelopment Law, and the project to be
undertaken is necessary to eliminate such conditions of blight.
A. The Council of this Borough hereby approves the plan for the District
prepared by the Authority and authorizes the Authority to borrow an
amount not to exceed $5,910,000 to finance project costs and to
undertake any and all methods of financing of project costs available
pursuant to the TIF Act.
B. The Council of this Borough hereby agrees to participate in the District
and to allocate to the financing of the Project thereof 53.75% of the
Borough's share of the Tax Increment.
§ 67-5 WILSON CODE § 67-9
1:46
Fund as stated in § 67-8 above and shall be held in trust in favor of the
District for purposes of the plan.
§ 67-10. Application of tax increment revenue.
The Authority is hereby authorized to apply tax increment revenues to
project costs incurred in connection with the plan for the District in
accordance with the TIF Act and to pay the principal of and interest on
the TIF debt. The Authority may undertake such expenditures, make such
appropriations, reimburse parties for prior expenditures related to project
costs, enter into such contracts and agreements with respect to the plan
and the District which, in the sole judgment of the Authority, shall further
the purposes of the plan consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Any
tax increment revenues remaining in the Tax Increment Fund after payment
of all project costs has been made or provided for and after the principal of
and interest on the TIF debt has been paid in full shall be returned to the
taxing districts on a pro rata basis in the proportions that the property tax
millage of each taxing body bears to the entire millage levied by all taxing
districts at the time the District was created.
§ 67-11. Procedures for collection of tax increment revenues.
The Authority is hereby directed to establish such dates for receipt of tax
increment revenues, provide for any necessary reserve for tax revenues,
and establish provisions for collection and enforcement of payment of tax
increment revenues to the extent permissible under the TIF Act.
§ 67-12. Agreements for financial security for project costs.
The Council of this Borough hereby authorizes the execution and delivery of
the cooperation agreement with the Authority and the other taxing districts
and the execution and delivery of any other documents, agreements and
instruments necessary or appropriate for the implementation of the plan
and to provide any form of assurances toward payment of project costs
as may be deemed necessary by the Authority in consultation with the
Borough.
§ 67-13. Amendments to plan and district.
The Authority may propose and the Borough may adopt, by ordinance such
amendments to the plan as are deemed necessary and which are authorized
by the TIF Act.
§ 67-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-13
1:47
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 73
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 67-13 WILSON CODE § 67-13
1:48
ARTICLE I
Dense Smoke From Smokestacks or Chimneys
[Adopted 9-24-1928 by Ord. No. 147, approved 10-11-1928]
§ 73-1. Emission of dense smoke prohibited.
The emission of dense smoke from the smokestack of any stationary engine
or from the smokestack, chimney or fireplace of any building or plant
anywhere within the Borough of Wilson shall be deemed and is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 73-2. Liability for allowing emission of dense smoke.
The owner, lessee or occupant of any building or plant and the fireman,
engineer or any other person having charge or control of any furnace,
fireplace or stationary engine who shall cause, permit or allow dense smoke
to issue or be emitted from the smokestack, fireplace or chimney of any
such building or plant or from the smokestack, fireplace or chimney
connected with any such plant, furnace or stationary engine within the
Borough of Wilson, except as hereinafter provided, shall be deemed and
held guilty of creating a public nuisance and of violating the provisions of
this article.
§ 73-3. Liability for allowing emission of soot, cinders, steam or
offensive odors.
The owner, lessee or occupant of any building or plant within the Borough
of Wilson or any other person having charge or control thereof who shall
cause, permit or allow, or cause to be permitted or allowed, the discharge or
escape into the open air of large quantities of soot, cinders, dust, gas, steam
or offensive odor in such manner or in such quantities as to cause or have a
natural tendency to cause injury or detriment to the public in the vicinity of
such building or plant or to endanger the health, safety or comforts of the
public, or in such manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause
injury or damage to property or business, shall be deemed and held guilty
of creating a public nuisance and of violating the provisions of this article.
§ 73-4. Cleaning firebox or building new fire.
The emission of dense smoke within the Borough of Wilson from the
smokestack of any steamroller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle
or other similar machine or contrivance or from the smokestack or chimney
of any building or premises, except for a period or periods aggregating
not to exceed six minutes in any one hour, during which period or periods
the firebox is being cleaned or a new fire is being built therein, is hereby
declared a nuisance.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-5
1:49
§ 73-5. Abatement of nuisance by Borough.
Any nuisance such as specified in this article may be summarily abated by
the Borough of Wilson, and such abatement may be in addition to the fine
hereinafter provided.
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person or persons or corporation owning, operating or in charge or
control of any steamroller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or
other similar machine or contrivance or of any building or premises who
shall cause or allow the emission of dense smoke, soot, cinders, dust, gas,
steam or offensive odor within the Borough of Wilson, in contravention of
the provisions of this article from the smokestack or chimney of any building
or premises so owned, controlled or in charge of him, her or them, shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, and
each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
§ 73-7. Terminology.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, as published and used by the Federal Bureau of Mines, shall be the
standard of comparison. Smoke shall be considered "dense smoke" when it
is of a density equal to or greater than No. 3 on the chart. For the purpose
of this article, "stack" means any chimney, smokestack or other structure,
whether of brick, metal or other material, intended for the emission of
smoke.
§ 73-5 WILSON CODE § 73-7
1:50
ARTICLE II
Control of Air Pollution
[Adopted 8-12-1968 by Ord. No. 443, approved 8-12-1968]
§ 73-8. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Wilson Air
Pollution Control Ordinance of 1968."
§ 73-9. Policy.
Whereas the Council of the Borough of Wilson has determined that air
pollution from an open fire may be detrimental to the health, comfort, living
conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Borough of Wilson, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Borough of Wilson to safeguard the
citizens of the Borough of Wilson from such air pollution.
§ 73-10. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
COUNCIL/BOARD — Borough Council/Township Board of Supervisors.
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for the burning of
any material for the production of heat.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning of refuse, sewage sludge or any other combustible material.
OPEN FIRE — A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but
not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid materials or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons, paint,
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-10
1:51
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials; provided, however, that "trade
waste" shall not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or
preparation of coal.
§ 73-11. Enforcement.
The Borough of Wilson Fire Chief shall have the power and duty to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 73-12. Regulations.
§ 73-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
A. After September 1, 1968, no person shall:
(1) Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place
outside of any building.
(2) Cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a salvage operation on
any property under his control outside of any building.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for:
(a) The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means.
(b) The protection of public health.
(2) Open fires may be set with the approval of the authorized
enforcement agent of this article, provided that:
(a) Rubbish only is burned.
(b) There is no practical available alternate method for the
disposal of the material to be burned.
(c) No hazardous or other objectionable condition will be created
by such burning.
§ 73-10 WILSON CODE § 73-13
1:52
Chapter 74
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 104.
§ 73-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-13
1:53

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 2-10-1992 by Ord. No. 634, approved 2-10-1992]
§ 74-1. Number of false alarms limited.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, firm or corporation to own, lease, operate or maintain any
single automatic protection device or alarm within the Borough of Wilson,
so as to permit such device to register more than three false alarms in any
one-year period.
§ 74-2. Response fee.
The owner or lessee of any building, structure or facility from which more
than three false alarms are received within a period of one year from any
single automatic protection device or alarm shall be charged a fee for
service from the Borough of Wilson in responding to such alarm in the
amount of $300 for the fourth and each subsequent false alarm in the oneyear
period.
§ 74-3. Billing procedures; collection.
Bills for the above service charge shall be sent to the above described liable
party, and, if payment is not made in full within 30 days from the date of
mailing of said bill, the matter shall be turned over to the Borough Solicitor
for collection.
§ 74-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm coming into the fire station which requires men
and/or equipment to respond to the location, without there then existing a
condition or situation for which the alarm was intended.
ONE-YEAR PERIOD — The period commencing on the date the first false
alarm is received from any single automatic protection or alarm and ending
365 days later.
§ 74-5. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, firm or
corporation violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $10 or more than $300, together with costs of prosecution and,
in default thereof undergo imprisonment in Northampton County Prison for
not more than 30 days.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:55
Chapter 77
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 162.
§ 77-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A device having two tandem wheels of a diameter not less than
16 inches and propelled by human power.
§ 77-2. Registration and fee; plate and card.
No person who resides within this municipality shall ride a bicycle or
operate it upon any street or public place within this municipality unless
said bicycle has been properly registered and tagged in accordance with the
following regulations:
A. Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the Borough of Wilson
shall make application for the registration of said bicycle to the Chief of
Police on a form provided for that purpose.
B. Registrations of bicycles shall be serially numbered and kept on file by
the Chief of Police on a form in his office as a public record.
C. The Chief of Police shall then issue an identification tag or plate serially
numbered to correspond to the bicycle registration. This identification
tag or plate must then be affixed to the rear mudguard or frame of the
bicycle in such a position as to be plainly visible from the rear. A
registration card shall be issued to the owner of each properly
registered bicycle.
D. A charge of $0.50 per registration shall be made for the registering and
tagging of any bicycle and paid into the Borough treasury. A charge of
$0.25 shall be made for issuing a duplicate registration card.
E. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of:
(1) The number of each registration.
(2) The date of registration and the date of inspection.
(3) The name, age and address of the person to whom issued.
(4) The make, color and serial number of each bicycle frame.
(5) The bicycle fees collected.
§ 74-5 WILSON CODE § 77-2
1:56
§ 77-3. Sales and rentals.
§ 77-4. Examination of applicant for license.
Before the issuance of a bicycle registration, the applicant shall be required
to demonstrate personally, in such a manner as the Chief of Police shall
direct, that he or she is a proper person and is capable of riding a bicycle.
Further, such applicant shall satisfactorily pass such examination to
determine his knowledge of safe riding rules and practices as the Chief of
Police may reasonably prescribe.
§ 77-5. Bicycle operation.
F. Bicycles registered under the provisions hereof shall be registered on
or before January 1,1971, and annually on April 1 thereafter. A general
registration may be applied for on the morning of the first Saturday of
each month, at 9:00 a.m., at police headquarters, Public Safety
Building. A temporary registration for a new bicycle may be obtained
from the Chief of Police and shall be valid until the first Saturday of the
succeeding month, when the vehicle shall be inspected and the
registrant required to pass an examination.
G. Within 10 days after the sale or dismantling of any registered bicycle,
such information shall be reported to the Chief of Police by the person
in whose name the bicycle was registered. Such person in whose name
the bicycle was registered may have the identification tag or plate of his
former bicycle transferred to another bicycle owned by him upon
payment of a fee of $0.25 upon the registration of such bicycle with the
Chief of Police.
A. Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report within five days to the Chief of
Police of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving:
(1) The name and address of the person from whom purchased or to
whom sold.
(2) A description of such bicycle by name or make.
(3) The frame number thereof.
(4) The number of the identification plate, if any, found thereon.
B. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is properly registered and tagged and unless such bicycle is
provided with the equipment required under the terms of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the identification tag or plate or frame number
of the bicycle or the registration card issued to the owner thereof.
§ 77-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-5
1:57
§ 77-6. Bicycle inspections.
The Chief of Police or his duly authorized representatives shall inspect each
bicycle presented for registration and shall report to the Chief of Police any
bicycle found to be in unsafe mechanical condition or lacking the equipment
specified as necessary under the terms of this chapter. The Chief of Police
shall refuse to register such bicycle until and unless it is brought into
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 77-7. Required equipment. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654,
approved 1-22-1996]
A. A bicycle shall be operated only on the roadway as near to the righthand
side as possible. Bicycles whose wheel diameter is 16 inches or
over shall not be operated on the sidewalks. The operator of a bicycle
shall obey all official traffic signals and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry any other person upon the
handlebar, frame or any part of the bicycle. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of bicycles built to be operated by two or
more persons.
C. The operator of a bicycle emerging from a driveway or building shall
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on the sidewalk and to all
vehicles on the roadway.
D. Operators of bicycles shall not ride in any manner other than single file
except on paths or parts of the roadway set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
E. The operator of a bicycle shall not indulge in any abnormal or trick
riding and shall keep at least one hand on the handlebar at all times
while in use.
F. Operators of bicycles shall not hitch onto vehicles or buses upon a
roadway.
G. The operator of a bicycle shall park the same upon the roadway at the
curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a
building, except windows or glass doors thereof, in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
A. Every bicycle operated upon a street or public place at any time during
the period one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise and at any
other time when there is not sufficient light under normal atmospheric
conditions to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
street or public places at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall be equipped
on the front with a lamp which emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear of a type approved by the Department of Transportation which
shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear
§ 77-5 WILSON CODE § 77-7
1:58
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a summary
offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10.
§ 77-9. Bicycles owned and operated by nonresidents.
Any bicycle owned and operated by any resident of any other municipality
shall not be required to be registered hereunder but shall be subject to all
other provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 79
ATTORNEY FEES
§ 79-1. Collection of fees.
Attorney fees incurred on behalf of Wilson Borough in the collection or
enforcement of any delinquent account or other charge or obligation due to
the Borough shall be charged to the owner, occupant or user of the property
or service giving rise to such account, charge or obligation and shall be
assessed as part of the municipal claim or lien for the same at the rate of
$70 per hour.
Chapter 80
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
and with an amber reflector on each side. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to
the red reflector. A lamp worn by the operator of a bicycle shall comply
with the requirements of this subsection if the lamp can be seen at the
distance specified. All lamps and reflectors shall be of a type approved
by the Department of Transportation.
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a device capable of giving a signal
audible from a distance of at least 100 feet, provided that no bicycle
shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any
siren.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a braking system which will stop
the bicycle in 15 feet from an initial speed of 15 miles per hour on a dry,
level and clean pavement.
§ 77-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-1
1:59

ARTICLE I
Disposal of Snow, Weeds, Leaves or Trash
[Adopted 4-13-1964 by Ord. No. 403, approved 4-13-1964; amended
in its entirety 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 769, approved 2-24-2014]
§ 80-1. Prohibited disposal.
From and after the passage of this article, the throwing, placing, or
depositing of snow, ice, grass cuttings, weeds, leaves (unless leaves are
raked to the street adjacent to the curb, for Fall cleanup authorized by the
Public Works Director), or trash of any kind whatsoever in and upon the
drains, gutters, crossings, streets and roadways of the Borough of Wilson,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, shall be and is hereby prohibited.
§ 80-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the appropriate Magisterial District Judge, be
guilty of a summary offense and be subject to pay a fine of $100 for each
violation in addition to the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of the fine and costs so imposed, the person or persons so convicted may
be imprisoned in Northampton County Prison for a period not exceeding 10
days.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:61

ARTICLE II
Cutting and Removal of Brush, Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 7-8-1968 by Ord. No. 441, approved 7-8-1968]
§ 80-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSHES — The scrubby growth of wild and uncultivated shrubs, but not
including private hedges or other hedges that are kept properly trimmed
so as not to interfere with the use by pedestrians of the sidewalks or so
as not to obstruct the vision of the operators of motor vehicles at street
intersections.
PERSON — All persons, firms, corporations, owners, agents, tenants,
persons in possession by lease or otherwise of unimproved lots or any other
premises in the Borough of Wilson.
WEEDS — All rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious
odors, and also high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy
deposits and all unsightly or troublesome herbs or plants that are useless or
comparatively so.
§ 80-4. Commission of nuisance.
Any person who shall permit or suffer such weed or weeds, wild grasses,
brush or bushes to grow either in or upon improved or unimproved lots or
land or upon or along any of the footways, sidewalks or gutters fronting
upon such premises shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance.
§ 80-5. Notice to cut and remove.
A notice of the existence of weeds and directing their cutting and
destroying, published in the daily press, shall be deemed sufficient notice
to all persons for the general cutting and destroying of such plant growth
as shall be deemed a nuisance, but the Borough of Wilson does not obligate
itself to publish such notice.
§ 80-6. Duty of compliance.
It shall be the duty of all such persons as are specified in this article to
have such weed or weeds, grasses or brush which are herein declared to
be a nuisance cut close to the ground and destroyed and the premises upon
which same are growing maintained with weeds cut.
§ 80-7. Removal of brush, grass and weeds by Borough; costs.
[Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any such person or persons who shall neglect to cut and destroy such weed,
weeds or growth as directed in this article, or who, upon notice by a duly
authorized representative of the Police, Health or Highway Bureau, shall
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-7
1:63
fail to comply with such notice or who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance and, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in § 80-8. The Borough of Wilson,
through its Bureaus specified herein, shall be empowered, in case of neglect
or refusal of any person or persons to cut and destroy weeds, wild grasses
or brush as provided herein, to have same cut and destroyed at the expense
of such owner, agent or tenant, and any such owner, agent or tenant
refusing or neglecting to pay such expenses as charged on demand shall be
deemed as violating the provisions of this article and liable to the penalties
hereof.
§ 80-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654,
approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 80-9. Bamboo. [Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 784, approved
9-25-2017]
A. It shall be unlawful, and deemed a nuisance, for any owner, occupant or
operator of real property within the Borough to plant any species of
bamboo in the Borough as of the approval date of this section.
B. It shall also be unlawful, and deemed a nuisance, for any owner,
occupant or operator of real property within the Borough to continue to
grow or maintain any species of bamboo that was planted prior to the
approval date of this section in such a manner that the bamboo spreads,
invades or grows on adjoining or neighboring property. Any property
owner or resident who has planted, grown, or maintained bamboo prior
to the approval date of this section shall be required to take such
measures that are reasonably expected to prevent such bamboo from
invading or growing onto adjoining or neighboring properties. Such
measures shall include, but not be limited to, installation of sheathing
comprised of metal or other material impenetrable by bamboo at
sufficient depth within the property line or lines where the running
bamboo is planted or growing to prevent the growth or encroachment
upon adjoining or neighboring property by the bamboo. Any person
violating the provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable under § 80-8 of this article.
§ 80-7 WILSON CODE § 80-9
1:64
Chapter 83
(RESERVED)
Chapter 85
BUYER NOTIFICATION CERTIFICATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A. Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGREEMENT OF SALE — Any agreement or written instrument which
provides that title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one
owner to another owner, and shall include inter alia written leases which
provide that the lessee of the property shall acquire title thereto after
the payment of a stipulated number of regular rent payments or after a
stipulated period of time.
DISTRICT — Any jurisdictional area or zone as set forth in the Planning and
Zoning Code of the Borough.
OWNER — Any person, copartnership, association, corporation or fiduciary
having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. Whenever
used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "owner,"
as applied to copartnerships and associations, shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure situated in the Borough.
REGULATIONS — Include regulations promulgated by the Zoning, Building
and Health Codes of the Borough and by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry and all other applicable local, state or federal laws and
regulations.
§ 85-2. Certificate required prior to sale; duration.
A. Prior to entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any property,
or prior to the transfer of property when no agreement of sale is
utilized, the owner shall obtain from the Code Enforcement Officer the
certificate hereinafter set forth. However, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Where such properties are intended to be demolished and a valid
demolition permit, pursuant to the Building Code of the Borough,
has been obtained, the certificate shall not be required.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:65
§ 85-3. Application fee; contents of certificate; statement regarding
outstanding liens.
(2) When such properties are sold interfamily (husband and wife,
parents and children and spouses of children), the certificate set
forth herein shall not be required.
(3) When title to such properties pass by virtue of the laws relating to
decedents' estates, the certificate set forth herein shall not be
required.
B. The certificate shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year from
the date of issue.
A. Application fee; certificate contents.
(1) Upon application of the owner and payment to the Borough of a fee,
as follows, the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall
review the pertinent Borough records and inspect the premises in
question:
(a) Each dwelling unit to be inspected: $50. [Amended 6-8-2009
by Ord. No. 748; approved 6-8-2009]
(b) Each commercial or industrial use under 5,000 square feet to
be inspected, per building: $50.
(c) Each commercial or industrial uses over 5,000 square feet to
be inspected, per building: $150.
(2) Upon completion of the review and inspection, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall execute and deliver a certificate to the
owner which shall contain the following information:
(a) The street address or other appropriate description of subject
property.
(b) A statement of the district classifications applicable to the
property in question, together with an extract of the applicable
ordinance(s) showing the uses permitted within that district.
(c) A statement of the variances and use permits, if any, granted to
that property, together with the conditions and restrictions of
such permits.
(d) A statement as to whether any construction, electrical,
plumbing or building permits have been issued for work not yet
completed on those premises.
(e) A statement as to whether there appears to be any
nonconformity or illegality in the structures on the property or
the uses being made thereof. A statement shall also indicate
§ 85-2 WILSON CODE § 85-3
1:66
§ 85-4. Insertion of provision in agreement of sale.
§ 85-5. Disclaimer; waiver.
Notwithstanding any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter
may not be waived or disclaimed by any oral or written agreement executed
by any owner or purchaser.
§ 85-6. Delivery of certificate; receipt evidence of compliance.
whether the property has been approved or designated as a
nonconforming use.
(f) A statement of all violations of the housing, building, plumbing,
electrical, safety or fire ordinances and regulations.
B. The seller shall attach to the certificate to be delivered by the Code
Enforcement Officer cited above, a statement as to whether there are
outstanding against the property any liens or assessments for public
improvements or municipal services.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall be
required to make more than two inspections relative to the application,
there shall be a fee payable to the Borough of $75 for each additional
inspection that is required. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 748;
approved 6-8-2009]
A. Every owner shall insert in every agreement for the sale of property a
provision:
(1) Showing the district classification of such property, and stating
whether the present use of the property is in compliance with or in
violation of district laws and ordinances;
(2) Disclosing whether there exists any notice of an uncorrected
violation of the housing, building, plumbing, electrical, safety or
fire ordinances or regulations;
(3) Disclosing any outstanding liens against the property or
assessments for public improvements.
B. If any owner fails to include any provision required by this chapter in an
agreement for the sale of property, then in any action, at law or in
equity, instituted by a purchaser against an owner, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the owner at the time of the signing of such
agreement represented and warranted to the purchaser that such
property was being used in compliance with the then existing district
laws and ordinances, and that there was no uncorrected violation of the
housing, building, plumbing, electrical, safety or fire ordinances and
regulations.
§ 85-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-6
1:67
§ 85-7. Liability.
The buyer notification certificate shall be compiled from the records of
the Borough and from an inspection of the property. The issuance of the
certificate is not a representation by the Borough that the subject property
or its present use is or is not in compliance with the law. Neither the
enactment of this chapter nor the preparation and delivery of any certificate
required hereunder shall impose any liability upon the Borough for any
error or omissions contained in such certificate nor shall the Borough bear
any liability not otherwise imposed by law.
§ 85-8. Filing of appeal; fees.
§ 85-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined up to $300 or be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
A. No owner shall sell any real property, located within the Borough, or
any interest therein, unless the owner first delivers to the purchaser at
or prior to the execution of any agreement of sale, or prior to the
transfer of title should an agreement of sale not be utilized, the
certificate described herein.
B. The purchaser or transferee shall execute a receipt for the certificate,
as furnished by the Borough, and such receipt shall be delivered by the
owner to the Code Enforcement Officer within seven business days, as
evidence of compliance with the provision of this chapter.
A. Appeals from the findings set forth in the certificate must be filed in
writing with the Borough Planning Commission within seven business
days after issuance of the certificate, who will refer the appeal to the
board or boards as follows:
(1) The Borough Planning Commission where conditions reported
constitute violations of applicable codes of the Borough or deal
with the suitability of the dwelling or structure for continued
occupancy.
(2) The Board of Health where the conditions reported constitute a
violation of the applicable codes of the Borough, or any matters
relating to the structure or construction of buildings or structures
of the Borough.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board where the findings set forth in the
certificate relate to matters concerning the classification and the
use of property under the Planning and Zoning Codes.
B. Fees for any such appeals shall be established by the respective boards
to which such appeals are filed which fees shall be in addition to the
fees set forth in § 85-3 above.
§ 85-6 WILSON CODE § 85-10
1:68
§ 85-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2000.
Chapter 86
(RESERVED)
Chapter 86A
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Buyer notification certificates — See Ch. 85.
Fees — See Ch. 102.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 86A-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Wilson hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 86A-2. Adoption and incorporation of standards. [Amended
1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 734, approved 1-8-2007]
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, including the 2003 Code and all subsequent editions of the
Code as amended and superseded from time to time, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Wilson.
§ 86A-3. Administration and enforcement methods.
Administration and enforcement of the code within this Borough shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Borough
Council from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86A-3
1:69
§ 86A-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of
the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth
therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly
with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 86A-5. Effect on other regulations.
§ 86A-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 86A-7. Code Enforcement Officer status.
Nothing contrary contained in the code or hereafter as amended from time
to time shall change or alter the status of the code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough of Wilson as an at-will employee absent a written contract
between the Borough and the employee.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with mother municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Wilson on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 86A-3 WILSON CODE § 86A-8
1:70
§ 86A-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective April 9, 2004, after the date of passage of this
chapter.
Chapter 87
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Recreation Board — See Ch. 48.
Bicycles — See Ch. 77.
Noise — See Ch. 130.
§ 87-1. Curfew established; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be or remain
in or upon any public street, alley, highway, park or other public place or in
any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such street,
alley, highway, park or public place in the Borough of Wilson between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and unlawful under the same conditions
for children under the age of eight between the hours of 8:00 p.m. Eastern
standard time and 6:00 a.m.; and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. when daylight savings time is in effect unless:
A. Such child shall be accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person,
in parental relation, having the legal custody, control or charge of such
child; or
B. Such child shall be lawfully employed, in the course of which
employment it is necessary to use such public street, alley, highway or
other public place for such employment; or
C. Such child is on lawful and necessary business for his or her parent or
guardian or other person in parental relation having the legal custody,
control or charge of such child; or
D. Such child is returning from a school, religious, recreational or job
activity; or
E. Such child is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
Constitution; or
F. Such child is on an emergency errand authorized by his or her parent,
guardian or other person in parental relation having the legal custody,
control or charge of such child.
§ 86A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-2
1:71
§ 87-2. Parental responsibilities; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person in parental relation
having control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit such child
to be or remain in or upon any public street, alley, highway, park or other
public place or in any enclosure or vehicle which is in or close proximity
to any such street, alley, highway, park or public place in the Borough of
Wilson between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and unlawful under
the same conditions for children under the age of eight, between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. Eastern standard time and 6:00 a.m.; and between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. when daylight savings time is in effect unless:
§ 87-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be penalized as
follows:
A. Such child shall be accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person
in parental relation having the legal custody, control or charge of such
child; or
B. Such child shall be lawfully employed, in the course of which
employment it is necessary to use such public street, alley, highway or
other public place for such employment; or
C. Such child is on lawful and necessary business for his or her parent,
guardian or other person in parental relation having the legal custody,
control or charge of such child; or
D. Such child is returning from a school, religious, recreational or job
activity; or
E. Such child is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
Constitution; or
F. Such child is on an emergency errand authorized by his or her parent,
guardian or other person in parental relation having the legal custody,
control or charge of such child.
A. Offense of child.
(1) Any child in violation of this chapter shall be taken into custody by
the Police Department and released to his or her parents, guardian
or other person in parental relation having the legal custody,
control or charge of such child; and a report thereof shall be
immediately made to the Police Department, which shall make a
record thereof in a docket kept for that purpose.
(2) Any child who shall fail to comply with provisions of this chapter
relating to the evening curfew on a second or succeeding offense,
shall, on summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
not to exceed $300 for each offense, together with costs, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be referred by the
§ 87-2 WILSON CODE § 87-3
1:72
Chapter 89
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 89-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the terms and phrases listed
below shall be defined as follows unless otherwise indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — That person or persons designated by
Borough Council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Included in this
definition are all policemen who shall have the same power to act as the
Animal Control Officer.
ANIMALS — All quadrupeds, both male and female, including but not
limited to cats and dogs.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
District Justice to the Juvenile Court pursuant to the Juvenile Act,
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq. In lieu of a fine, community service may
be assigned by a District Justice at his discretion.
(3) Age determination. In taking children into custody, the Police
Department shall use its discretionary judgment in determining
age, and in doubtful cases may require proof thereof, and until such
proof is established the determination based on such officer's
judgment shall prevail.
(4) Identification. Any child violating this chapter, who does not
immediately upon being taken into custody by a police officer
disclose his identity and place of residence, shall be taken by such
police officer to a place of detention and held for questioning and
investigation.
(5) Multiple offenses. Any child, whether a resident or nonresident of
the Borough, who shall violate this chapter three or more times
shall be reported to the proper juvenile correctional authorities of
the County of Northampton for appropriate action pursuant to the
Juvenile Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
B. Offense of the parent. Every parent, guardian or person in parental
relation, having control or charge of any child who shall fail to comply
with the provisions of this chapter relating to evening curfew shall, on
summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$300 for each offense, together with costs, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. In lieu of a fine, community service may be assigned by a
District Justice at his discretion.
§ 87-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-1
1:73
OWNER — Includes every person, firm or corporation having a right of
property in any animal which is kept or harbored within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Wilson as well as every person, firm or corporation
occupying any premises within the corporate limits of the Borough of Wilson
which permits any animal to remain on or about its premises.
§ 89-2. License required; exceptions.
On and after the enactment of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to own, keep or harbor within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Wilson any animal six months or older unless such animal is licensed by the
Treasurer of the proper County in which it is kept and unless such animal
wears a collar and a proper license tag. This provision is not intended
to apply to animals whose owners are nonresidents and are temporarily
within the Borough nor to animals brought into the Borough of Wilson for
breeding, trial or show purposes nor to any Seeing-Eye animal properly
trained to assist blind persons when such animal is actually used by a blind
person for the purpose of going from place to place.
§ 89-3. Animals at large; impounding.
§ 89-4. Redemption or destruction of impounded animals; fees.
A. No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall permit the
animal to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others nor shall any
animal be permitted at large upon the streets or other public ways of
the Borough. Such action is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to
the public health and safety.
B. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer and every police officer
of the Borough of Wilson to seize and detain any animal, licensed or
unlicensed, found running at large, either upon the public streets or
highways of the Borough or on the property of any other person and
unaccompanied by its owner or a keeper.
A. The Animal Control Officer and any police officer of the Borough who
has seized an animal under the provisions of this chapter which does
not have a proper license affixed to its collar shall see that the same is
properly kept and fed and shall give notice, either personally or by
certified or registered mail, to the owner thereof, if he or she can be
ascertained, to claim such animal within five days from the date of the
notice. The owner of an animal so seized and detained may reclaim the
same by paying all expenses incurred for feeding and boarding it at a
rate in accordance with a schedule of fees which may from time to time
be adopted by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Wilson in
addition to a flat fee of $15, upon payment of which the animal shall be
returned.
B. Any animal seized and detained by the Animal Control Officer or any
police officer which has not been claimed by its owner nor sold at public
or private sale as herein provided shall be destroyed by the Animal
§ 89-1 WILSON CODE § 89-4
1:74
§ 89-5. Sale of unclaimed animals.
All animals seized and detained by the Animal Control Officer or any police
officer and not reclaimed by the owner within five days after seizure may
be sold by the Animal Control Officer, either at public or private sale,
and the proceeds shall be applied to discharge the costs of feeding and
harboring the animal, the costs of such sale and the costs and penalties
herein provided; provided, however, that no animal detained by the Animal
Control Officer shall be sold to anyone for the purpose of vivisection, and
further provided that no animal appearing to be suffering from rabies or
affected by hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease
shall be sold or released by the Animal Control Officer but shall forthwith
be destroyed as provided above.
§ 89-6. Dangerous dogs.
Dangerous dogs, as defined and determined by Act 46 of 1990,21 shall be
registered, regulated and controlled in accordance with the provisions of
such Act.
§ 89-7. Other dangerous animals.
§ 89-8. Control of animals to prevent rabies.
Control Officer in a humane manner, and the Animal Control Officer
shall receive the sum of $2 for properly disposing of the carcass thereof
by cremation, burial or other approved sanitary method.
A. In addition to dogs as governed by § 89-6, no fierce or dangerous animal
with vicious propensities or one in heat, whether licensed or not, shall
be allowed to run at large or upon the premises of one other than the
owner. Whenever any such animal is found running at large in violation
of this chapter, it shall be taken up and impounded and shall not be
released except upon approval of the Animal Control Officer after
payment of the fines provided herein.
B. Any police officer or the Animal Control Officer may kill any animal
which is found running at large and is deemed after due consideration
by the police officer or Animal Control Officer to constitute a threat to
the public health and welfare.
A. Persons bitten by animals. It shall be the duty of any person who has
knowledge that an animal has bitten or injured any person in this
Borough to immediately report the facts and whereabouts of such
animal to the Animal Control Officer or any police officer, and it shall be
the duty of the owner of every such animal to immediately confine it
with a leash or chain on his premises or in any such manner as will
prevent it from escaping or running at large. Upon receipt of such
report, the Animal Control Officer shall advise the owner as to the
21.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-502-A et seq.
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-8
1:75
§ 89-9. Impounding of large animals.
Should it be necessary for the Animal Control Officer or any police officer to
seize or pick up a large animal, such as a horse, cow, or mule or any other
animal not acceptable by an animal shelter or animal hospital, he is hereby
empowered to have such animal removed by a trucking firm to a farm or
stable where such animal can be housed. If no such place exists within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Wilson, it may be taken outside the
Borough limits. The disposition of such animal shall be the same as provided
in § 89-4 above.
procedure to be followed with respect to the further confinement and
examination of the animal.
B. Animals infected with rabies or animals bitten by an animal suspected
of rabies. It shall be the duty of any person who has knowledge that an
animal is infected with or suspected of being infected with rabies or
that an animal had been bitten or otherwise injured by or been exposed
to or been in contact with an animal infected with or suspected of being
infected with rabies to immediately report the facts of the whereabouts
of such animal to the Animal Control Officer or a police officer who are
hereby empowered to immediately remove such animal to and be
confined in a veterinary hospital acceptable to the Animal Control
Officer, and such animal shall not be released therefrom without
permission of the Animal Control Officer. Any animal found to be
infected with rabies shall be disposed of in such manner as the Animal
Control Officer may direct.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting that an
animal owned and being harbored by him has rabies to fail to confine
such animal with a leash or chain on his premises or in such other
manner as will prevent it from escaping or running at large or to allow
such animal to be taken off his premises or beyond the limits of the
Borough without the written permission of the Animal Control Officer.
D. Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the
dangers of hydrophobia, the Mayor, if he deems it necessary, shall issue
a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping an animal to
confine it securely on his premises unless such animal shall have a
muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any
unmuzzled animal running at large during the time of the proclamation
shall be seized and impounded, unless noticeably infected with rabies,
in which case it may be killed by any police officer or the Animal Control
Officer without notice to the owner. Animals impounded during the
period of such proclamation shall, if claimed within five days, be
released to the owner, unless infected with rabies, upon payment of the
impounding charges provided for herein. If unclaimed after that period,
such animal may be summarily destroyed in the manner provided
above.
§ 89-8 WILSON CODE § 89-10
1:76
§ 89-10. Interference with enforcement prohibited.
Any person who shall take away or attempt to take away or who shall
cut or attempt to cut the leash of any animal from the possession and
custody of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the Borough or
otherwise interferes with the Animal Control Officer or any police officer in
the enforcement of this chapter shall be guilty of violation of this chapter.
§ 89-11. Cleanup of fecal matter.
§ 89-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any of the terms or provisions hereof and authorized hereby shall, upon
conviction thereof, be ordered to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 89-13. Purpose; when effective.
This chapter is deemed to be necessary for the preservation of the public
peace, health and comfort of the citizens of the Borough of Wilson and shall
be in full force and take effect immediately upon the passage thereof.
Chapter 91
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
§ 91-1. Temporary obstructions.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any dumpster or other type of
trash receptacle in the right-of-way area of any Borough street, except upon
A. All owners of those animals which deposit fecal matter on property
other than that of the owner shall be responsible for cleaning up that
matter immediately and disposing of it in a manner consistent with the
Borough health regulations.
B. All owners of those animals which deposit fecal matter on the property
of the owner or upon someone else's property with permission shall be
responsible for the cleanup of that matter within 24 hours and
disposing of it in a manner consistent with the Borough health
regulations.
§ 89-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1
1:77
having obtained a dumpster permit to be issued by the Police Department
upon the following conditions:
§ 91-2. Snow emergency routes.
A. Dumpsters may not be placed on a sidewalk unless express permission
of the Police Department is given and has been noted on the dumpster
permit.
B. Dumpsters shall not extend into the travel portion of any roadway and
shall not be placed within 20 feet of a corner.
C. All dumpsters within the cartway shall be clearly marked with
reflectors or reflective tape.
D. All dumpsters shall be covered when not in use.
E. At no time will any materials be thrown from any structure to a
dumpster unless there is a chute or other device to ensure the safety of
pedestrians.
F. At no time will any materials extend above the solid sides of the
dumpster.
G. Dumpster permits must be obtained no less than five days before
delivery of the dumpster.
H. Dumpster permits must be displayed on the roadway side of the
dumpster.
I. A copy of the dumpster permit shall be retained by the property owner
or construction company using the dumpster and by the owner of the
dumpster during the time the dumpster is within the right-of-way.
J. Permits will be valid for the time period specified on the permit.
K. The owner of any dumpster shall not place a dumpster within any rightof-
way without having a valid dumpster permit in their possession and
affixed to the dumpster.
L. The fee for a dumpster permit shall be $40.
M. All applications for a dumpster permit will be accompanied by a sketch
showing the location of the dumpster.
N. If immediate removal of a dumpster is required due to an emergency
condition (including but not limited to street repairs, water and sewer
line breaks, fires, snow emergencies, etc.) removal of the dumpster will
be at the lessee's expense.
A. During a snow emergency the Borough, through the Mayor, Chief of
Police) or Code Enforcement Officer, may order the immediate removal
of any dumpster within the cartway of any snow emergency route.
§ 91-1 WILSON CODE § 91-2
1:78
§ 91-3. Trash at curbside.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent persons from placing
trash at the curbside for regular scheduled pickup.
§ 91-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $300, and costs.
Chapter 93
(RESERVED)
Chapter 96
ENTERTAINMENT AND BUSINESSES, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poolrooms — See Ch. 138.
§ 96-1. License required; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firms or corporations,
whether principal or agent, without first complying with the terms of this
chapter and, if permissible, paying the designated fee:
B. Costs for removal of the dumpster during a snow emergency will be the
responsibility of the lessee.
C. If any additional costs are incurred during a dumpsters removal due to
snow being plowed or otherwise placed in close proximity to the
dumpsters, these additional costs will be the responsibility of the
lessee.
A. To show, exhibit or conduct:
(1) Large circuses under canvas, with menagerie: $100 per day.
(2) Small circuses and Wild West shows: $75 per day.
(3) Merry-go-rounds: $15 per week.*
(4) Roller-skating rinks: $25 per year.*
(5) Shooting galleries: $50 per year.*
(6) Public bowling alleys: each alley, $5 per year not to exceed $25 per
year.*
§ 91-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-1
1:79
(7) Billiard, pool and combination tables or other gaming tables not
prohibited by law, except private: See Chapter 138, Poolrooms.*
[Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
(8) Museums and exhibitions: $15 per week.*
(9) Hurdy-gurdies, street pianos, street radios, street amplifiers and
loudspeakers: $1.50 per day.
(10) Theaters, opera houses, buildings or parts thereof open for
theatrical entertainments, moving pictures: $25 per year.*
(11) Penny arcades, nickelettes, etc.: $50 per year.*
(12) Miniature, pony or obstacle golf courses (outdoors): $50 per year.*
* NOTE: In all cases under Subsection A(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8),
(10), (11) and (12) where the services of an officer or officers are
required, the operator or operators shall reimburse the Borough
for the number of hours worked by each officer. [Amended
1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
B. To conduct dances to which the public is admitted, for which a license
fee of $1.50 per day shall be paid, and where the services of an officer
are required, the operator or operators shall reimburse the Borough for
the number of hours worked by each officer. [Amended 1-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
C. To sell from any permanent or temporarily standing position in any
public highway or on private property where the goods, wares or
merchandise are purchased by persons while using the public highway,
for which a license fee of $1.50 per day shall be paid.
D. To enter into, begin or desire to begin a transient retail business for the
sale of any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever and to hire, lease
or occupy a room, apartment, store, building or other structure for the
exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, for which a
license fee of $200 per month or fractional part thereof shall be paid.
Said license shall be renewed monthly during the continuance of the
sale, and upon failure to secure the license herein provided for, the
operator or operators shall be subject to the penalty provided for in
§ 96-9, provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to farmers
selling their own produce or to any sales of goods, wares or
merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are
to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. [Amended
1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
E. To maintain a gasoline or oil tank or pump for the same or both or like
commercial facilities permitted to be used on highways by abutters, for
which a license fee of $5 per year shall be paid for each, and where
more than one pump is used for said purposes, a license fee of $2 per
year additional shall be paid for each and every pump so used.
§ 96-1 WILSON CODE § 96-1
1:80
§ 96-2. Hours of closing. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654,
approved 1-22-1996]
All amusement places, dance halls and bowling alleys, together with the
subjects itemized in § 96-1A(1) through (6) and (8) through (12) of this
chapter, shall close and cause business to cease not later than 12:00
midnight, and any person, firm or corporation operating or conducting any
such place, failing to close at the hour as herein fixed, shall be subject to
the penalty provided for in § 96-9.
§ 96-3. Payment of fees; issuance of licenses.
The license fees herein provided for shall be paid to the Mayor of the
Borough of Wilson each and every year, and it shall be the duty of the said
Mayor upon the payment of said fee to issue a license to the person paying
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 96-4. Revocation of license.
The Mayor may at any time revoke any license or licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter for any breach of the terms or conditions thereof
upon giving to the person, firm or corporation to whom the same is issued
notice of such revocation; and from the time of such notice, any act done
under the color of such license of licenses shall subject the person doing
it or suffering it to be done to the same penalty as if he, she or they had
done such act without such permit, unless the revocation of such license is
disapproved as hereinafter provided.
§ 96-5. Appeal to Borough Council.
If any person, firm or corporation shall feel aggrieved by the neglect or
refusal of the Mayor to issue any such license of licenses or by the terms or
conditions imposed therein or by any revocation of such license or licenses
as aforesaid, said person, firm or corporation may appeal to the Borough
Council upon giving notice to the Mayor within one week thereafter, and
until such terms, conditions or revocations are disapproved by the Borough
F. To hawk, huckster or peddle, with or without a vehicle:
(1) Meats, fish, oysters, ice cream, soft drinks, milk, bread, cakes, etc.,
except produce of a farm or garden and cultivated by the vendor,
for which a license fee of $10 per year shall be paid, and where
more than one vehicle is used for said purposes, a license fee of $5
per year additional shall be paid for each and every vehicle so used.
[Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 345, approved 3-8-1954]
(2) Souvenirs, novelties, balloons, badges, toys and miscellaneous
merchandise, for which a license fee of $1.50 per day shall be paid.
G. To maintain billboards, for which a license fee of $1 per panel per year
shall be paid.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-5
1:81
Council, they shall be binding upon the applicant, and the Borough Council
may order such modification as it may deem proper, not, however,
inconsistent with the Borough ordinances.
§ 96-6. Licensing of honorably discharged veterans.
The Mayor may grant permits to every honorably discharged soldier, sailor
and marine of the military or naval service of the United States in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 17, 1921, P.L. 895,22 and
in such cases where the proceeds are to be applied to religions, charitable,
educational or beneficial purposes, without charge of license fee.
§ 96-7. Limited effect of license; nuisances.
This chapter does not authorize the use of highways for the purposes
mentioned in § 96-1 hereof in any case where such uses are prohibited or
restricted by any other ordinance of the Borough, the intention hereof being
to charge a license fee for a use which is permitted and not restricted
or prohibited. The payment of a license fee does not permit the holder to
create a nuisance, to do anything dangerous in itself or that may attract
children to danger. Anything done contrary to this chapter is a nuisance and
shall be abated as such in addition to the fine imposed.
§ 96-8. Duration of license.
All licenses issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be
valid only for one-year excepting in those cases where a shorter time is
stated. Licenses granted to individuals are not transferable. All licenses are
personal, and no such license shall permit the employment of unlicensed
agents. Any fractional part of any unit of time or space or number requires
the same license fee as the whole unit. No licenses shall extend beyond
December 31 of the year issued.
§ 96-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
22.Editor's Note: Former 60 P.S. §§ 61 and 62, License exemption for veterans, was repealed
Nov. 24, 1992, P.L. 717, No. 108.
§ 96-5 WILSON CODE § 96-9
1:82
Chapter 100
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
§ 96-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-9
1:83

ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 704, approved 2-24-2003]
§ 100-1. Definitions.
§ 100-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the Borough of Wilson, Pennsylvania, without
first securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 100-3. Application for a permit.
Any person who shall desire to make an opening or excavation in any of
the streets in the Borough of Wilson shall make application to the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing for that purpose. Such application shall
be made upon blank forms to be furnished by the Borough of Wilson
and shall set the approximate size or depth thereof and shall contain an
agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in full
compliance with the ordinances of the Borough of Wilson, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania, and the laws of the Commonwealth in relation
thereto, and the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep
harmless the Borough of Wilson from and indemnify it against any and all
actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by the reason of
the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages to persons or property
resulting in any manner therefrom, or occurring in the prosecution of the
work connected therewith, or from any other matter, cause or thing relating
thereto.
§ 100-4. Permit fee.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough of Wilson the applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street or
cartway which involves cutting, breaking, or disturbing the surface
thereof. In this article, the term "opening" shall have essentially the
same meaning as excavation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association
or municipal authority.
STREET — Any public cartway, avenue, road, square, highway or other
public place located in the Borough of Wilson and established for the
use of vehicles, but shall not include state highways.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine or the neuter.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:85
fixed according to a schedule established pursuant to resolution. When
application shall be made to open or excavate any longitudinal opening or
excavation in excess to the 10 feet, before any permit shall be issued to open
or excavate, the applicant shall pay in addition to such minimum fee and
additional fee at the rate for each 100 feet or fraction thereof to be opened
or excavated upon such street, pursuant to the fee schedule.
§ 100-5. Issuance of permits restricted.
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or
the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where such
opening or excavation is to be completed.
§ 100-6. Information contained on permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the
opening or excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size or
depth thereof and the time within which the work for which the permit is
granted is to be completed.
§ 100-7. Permit approval or disapproval.
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been filed. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval together with reasons therefor shall be given to the applicant.
§ 100-8. Responsibility to contact utilities.
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the
Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, § 1 et seq.,23 as amended or
supplemented from time to time. It shall be the permittee's responsibility
to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities in compliance with
said Act. A partial list of utilities providing service in the Borough of Wilson
and their office addresses may be obtained from the Northampton County
Recorder of Deed.
§ 100-9. Refilling of opening or excavation; restoration of surface;
responsibility for defects occurring with two years.
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Borough of Wilson
shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a
manner as to prevent any settling thereafter and shall restore the surface
to the same condition as it was before the opening or excavation and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Department
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are hereby
adopted as specifications of the Borough of Wilson for restoration of
services of streets in the Borough of Wilson, as restored; the surface shall
conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface covering as the part
of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. If within two years
23.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 100-4 WILSON CODE § 100-9
1:86
after restoration of the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear
therein resulting from defective backfill by the applicant, the applicant shall
reimburse for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 100-10. Responsibility of permit holder; right of the Borough to
do certain work; charges.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by or
for the person to whom or which the permit has been issued at his or its
expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this article
and to the supervision and approval of the designated official, provided
that the Borough Engineer may, if he deems it necessary to the proper
performance of work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and the
backfilling of all excavation therein shall be done by the Borough of Wilson,
in which event the applicant shall pay the actual cost of the work performed
by the Borough of Wilson.
§ 100-11. Requirements; corrections of unsatisfactory work;
completion of incomplete work.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the street a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line of
the street before being refilled and the surface of the street restored to
a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers, or their connections with the houses, or any
other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
has been ordained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Borough Engineer and the permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Borough Engineer, or another person designated by
Borough Council, and shall be done only in a method approved by him.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified
2A stones and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers
shall not exceed eight inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to
within 10 inches of the surface.
(1) The limit for a plate to be on an open trench shall be no longer than
seven days. If there is a snow storm coming that the Borough of
Wilson needs to plow or a snow emergency called, all plates must
be removed from the road surface. [Added 3-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 764, approved 3-25-2013]
§ 100-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-11
1:87
§ 100-12. Emergency openings.
In the case of any leak, explosion, or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus, to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all provisions of this article
are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
F. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bounded and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining and
maintained until completed with hot mix blacktop. All trenches must be
saw cut and replaced within 150 days. All completed trenches will be
the responsibility of the utility for two years after trench is completed.
[Amended 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 764, approved 3-25-2013]
(1) If a utility is doing a trench that covers half of the total road
surface, they must complete an entire road restoration unless
otherwise instructed. It will be within the sole discretion of the
Public Works Director to make that decision.
G. On concrete-based streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete
and the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square
feet.
H. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition
both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and
all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted under and
subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Borough of Wilson
from any loss and damages, or otherwise whatsoever, or by any leak,
explosion or any other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit, or any
other matter placed in the said excavation.
I. The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer who will notify
the Borough Engineer when the opening or excavation is ready for
backfilling before any backfilling is done, when backfilling work is
completed, when the temporary paving has been installed and when the
street has been permanently restored, so that inspections may be made.
J. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Borough Engineer, be unsatisfactory, and the same
shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within the
time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Borough
Engineer, the Borough of Wilson may proceed to correct such
unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed and
charge the cost thereof, plus 20% to the applicant.
§ 100-11 WILSON CODE § 100-12
1:88
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction, or apparatus, the Code Enforcement Officer, after such
notice as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular
case, shall proceed to have the Borough of Wilson do the work necessary
and required by such emergency, and charge the same on the basis of cost
plus 20% portent to such owner or person.
§ 100-13. Restrictions regarding trees and shrubbery.
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its
contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the
legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations and conditions as
the Borough of Wilson may prescribe.
§ 100-14. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done
prior to street improvement.
§ 100-15. Permittee responsibilities for future relocation of work.
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at his or its own cost and
expense.
§ 100-16. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new water, sewer, steam, or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility line shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main
or line shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough of Wilson
until the plan therefor shall be first filed with the Code Enforcement Officer
and such plan approved by the Borough Engineer or someone the Borough
Council designates.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give timely notice to all persons
owning property abutting on any street within the Borough of Wilson
about to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies
operating in the Borough of Wilson, and all such persons and utility
companies shall make all water, gas, or sewer connections, as well as
any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said
street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice, unless such time is
extended in writing for cause shown by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period of five years
after the completion thereof; except in case of emergency, the existence
of which emergency and necessity for the opening of such paving to be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. If it is sought to excavate
upon or open a sewer within five years after the completion of the
paving, applicant shall make written application to the Borough of
Wilson, and a permit for such opening shall be issued only after express
approval by the Borough of Wilson.
§ 100-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-17
1:89
§ 100-17. Bond required.
No company, corporation or association shall dig up any street or alley
without first giving the Borough of Wilson a bond with some acceptable
trust or surety company as surety in the sum determined by the schedule
of fees, conditioned for the faithful performance of these provisions and
also for any and all damages, claims, demands, suits, costs and counsel fees
occasioned or arising form the digging up, opening or closing of said streets
and alleys.
§ 100-18. Payment for work done by the Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough of Wilson under the provisions
hereof shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the
provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person
by the Borough of Wilson. Upon failure to pay such charges within such
time, the same shall be collectible by the Borough of Wilson by a civil action
or in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 100-19. Penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 100-20. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs.
§ 100-17 WILSON CODE § 100-20
1:90
Chapter 102
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Licensing of entertainment and
businesses — See Ch. 96.
Excavations — See Ch. 100.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Moving permits — See Ch. 128.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
§ 102-1. Fee structure established.
The Borough of Wilson shall charge for the following services, fees, and
permits, payable to the Borough of Wilson, for the rendering of said services
or permits according to the schedule of fees contained herein:
§ 102-2. Fee schedule.
A. Pavilion rental. Persons renting pavilions for private events may use
park facilities that are not already is use.
(1) Resident: $25, plus a $25 refundable cleanup deposit.
(2) Nonresident: $50, plus a $25 refundable cleanup deposit.
B. Park rental.
(1) Fees.
(a) Resident: $50, plus a $50 refundable cleanup deposit.
(b) Nonresident: $100, plus a $50 refundable cleanup deposit.
(2) Rental of Meuser Park does not include use of the pavilions or the
bandshell area. They must be rented separately.
(3) Public events held in Meuser Park and/or the bandshell will require
the services of at least one police officer for traffic control. The
person or organizations renting the facilities will be billed
accordingly for police services. Public events are defined as craft
shows, car shows, concerts, etc.
C. Bandshell rental.
(1) Fees.
(a) Resident: $50, plus a $50 refundable cleanup deposit.
§ 100-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-2
1:91
(b) Nonresident: $100, plus a $50 refundable cleanup deposit.
(2) Bandshell rental includes the stage, sound system, and the seating
area only.
(3) Public events held in Meuser Park and/or the bandshell will require
the services of at least one police officer for traffic control. The
person or organizations renting the facilities will be billed
accordingly for police services. Public events are defined as craft
shows, car shows, concerts, etc.
(4) All public events must provide evidence of liability insurance, with
the Borough of Wilson as a coinsured.
D. Community center.
(1) Resident: $125, plus a $100 refundable cleanup deposit.
(2) Nonresident: $175, plus a $100 refundable cleanup deposit.
E. Home inspection.
(1) Each dwelling unit to be inspected: $50.
(2) Each commercial or industrial use under 5,000 square feet to be
inspected: $75 per building.
(3) Each commercial or industrial use over 5,000 square fee to be
inspected: $150 per building.
(4) Certificate of occupancy: $25.
F. Building fees: $10 for the first $500 and $1 for each additional $100,
not to exceed $10,000.
G. Electrical fees: $10 for the first $500 and $1 for each additional $100,
not to exceed $10,000.
H. Plumbing fees.
(1) Ten dollars for the first $500 and $1 for each additional $100, not to
exceed $10,000, plus an additional $40 will be charged for each
inspection.
(2) The tapping fee will be $600 to tap into the sewer line off the
property, and $300 if you tap into the line within the property line.
If tapping into the sewer line off the property and in the street and
the Borough of Wilson must complete the blacktopping, it will cost
an additional $10 per square foot.
(3) There must be a master plumber on the job at all times with a
Borough of Wilson license only.
I. Trenches and excavations.
§ 102-2 WILSON CODE § 102-2
1:92
(1) Ten dollars per square foot of restoration.
(2) Permit: $25.
J. Demolition.
(1) Residential: $9 per 100 square feet.
(2) Commercial: $1 per 100 cubic feet.
K. Street signs.
(1) Handicap parking: $60.
(2) Business directional: $35 ($100 if pole is required).
(3) Business parking: $100.
L. Business privilege.
(1) Business privilege license: $5.
(2) Business privilege tax: .0015 of gross income earned in the
Borough.
M. Moving permit: $5.
N. Peddler's license: $5.
O. Health inspections and licenses.
(1) Initial inspection and license: $45.
(2) Renewal (per year): $30.
(3) Reinspection due to violation: $35.
(4) Temporary license (14 days or less per year): $10.
(5) Nonprofit organizations must comply with Chapter 78 of the
Department of Agriculture Code; however, no fee is required.
P. Grass/weed cutting or snow/ice removal from private property: the cost
of independent contractor will be passed on to property owner.
Q. Sewer fees are based on water consumption readings supplied by
Easton Suburban Water Authority. Each unit is approximately 750
gallons. The following chart is applicable:
Number of Units Fee
0 through 12 $40
13 through 18 $50
19 through 24 $60
25 through 30 $70
§ 102-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-2
1:93
Number of Units Fee
31 through 36 $80
37 through 42 $90
43 through 48 $100
R. Trash. The fees for collection and disposal of garbage placed for
collection at the curb from which collection is made shall be as follows:
(1) For each family unit, $39 per quarter for the collection of garbage;
except for a senior citizen 65 years or over living in a separate unit,
in which case the fee is $26.50 per quarter.
(2) For hotels, restaurants, and other businesses and institutions
electing to come under this subsection, the fees shall be charged as
follows:
(a) For garbage collection, $81 per quarter, which entitles the
aforesaid to the collection of four twenty-gallon containers per
collection.
(b) Additional containers shall be collected at multiples of the
above rates.
(c) Those not selecting collection must engage a private hauler.
S. Swimming pool.
(1) Preseason pool passes.
Type Fee
Resident single $60
Resident family $90
Nonresident single $90
Nonresident family $130
Resident senior citizen $25
Nonresident senior citizen $50
(2) Daily admission.
(a) Monday through Friday.
Type Fee
Adult $5
Child $4
Senior citizen $3
(b) Saturday, Sunday and holidays.
§ 102-2 WILSON CODE § 102-2
1:94
§ 102-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300, together
with cost of prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days; provided, each violation of any provision of this chapter,
and each day it is continued, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 103
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Type Fee
Adult $6
Child $5
Senior citizen $4
(3) Pool party: $140.
T. Escort services.
(1) Funerals, bank deposits: $10.
(2) Oversize/overweight transport, etc.: overtime rate for each officer
for each hour or a part thereof.
§ 102-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:95

ARTICLE I
Notification of Lost or Stolen Firearms
[Adopted 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 751,24 approved 5-10-2010]
§ 103-1. Notification required for lost or stolen firearm.
Any person who is the owner of a firearm that is lost or stolen shall report
the loss or theft to the Wilson Borough Police Department within 72 hours
after discovery of the loss or theft.
§ 103-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 103-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Shall have the definition given to it by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6102, as
may be amended from time to time.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 7-1-2010.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:97
Chapter 104
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 74.
Fireworks — See Ch. 107.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 117.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
§ 104-1. Adoption of standards by reference; copies to be on file.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Fire
Chief of the Borough of Wilson, known as the International Fire Code, 2006
Edition, including all appendix chapters and later amendments and special
interpretations to the 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Borough of
Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the
office of the Borough of Wilson are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, in any, prescribed in § 104-2 of this chapter.
§ 104-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1, insert: "Borough of Wilson" as the name of the
jurisdiction.
B. Section 109.3, insert, in part, under Violation penalties, that it is a
"summary offense punishable by fine of not less than $100 or more than
$300, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment."
C. Section 111.4, insert under Failure to comply concerning any person
who shall continue any work after being served with a stop-work order,
"shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $300."
§ 103-3 WILSON CODE § 104-3
1:98
§ 104-3. Geographic limits.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2006
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: With respect to
Sections 3204.3.1.1., 3404.2.9.5.1, 3406.2.4.4 and 3804.2, the geographic
limits shall be those limits established by law applicable in the Borough of
Wilson pertaining to the various zoning districts within the Borough.
§ 104-4. Repealer.
This article specifically repeals Section 3.3(d) and any other provisions of
Borough Ordinance No. 471 relating to the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention
Code and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith.
§ 104-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding, impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired
or existing, under any act or ordinance or part thereof hereby repealed as
indicated in § 104-4 of this article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
Chapter 107
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 104.
§ 107-1. Permit required for display.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the Borough
of Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, to sell, give, discharge, fire,
use, set off, ignite or explode any roman candle, rocket, sparkler, pistol,
blank cartridge, torpedo, firecracker or any other fireworks, explosive
noisemaking devices, explosive articles and substances whatsoever
intended for pyrotechnical display; provided, however, that the Mayor may
issue a permit for a community, civic or public display of certain fireworks
upon the submission to him of evidence of proper qualification, experience
and responsibility.
§ 107-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-2
1:99
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 110
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 107-2 WILSON CODE § 107-2
1:100
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 110-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 110-2. Applicability. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or corporation
to undertake or cause to be undertaken any construction or development
anywhere within the Borough of Wilson unless an approved building permit
has been obtained from the floodplain administrator of Wilson Borough
pursuant to this chapter and other requirements of the Borough of Wilson. If
there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter, the more
restrictive shall apply.
§ 110-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any provisions currently in effect in flood-prone
areas. However, any other or underlying ordinance shall remain in full force
and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 110-4. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage; and
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive developments in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside any identified flood-prone
area, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Wilson or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:101
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 110-4 WILSON CODE § 110-4
1:102
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 110-5. Building permits required.
Building permits shall be required before any proposed construction or
development is undertaken within any area of the Borough of Wilson.
§ 110-6. Issuance of building permit. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a building permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
(Act 1966-537, as amended);25 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);26 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);27 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, have been obtained. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council of the Borough of
Wilson for whatever action it considers necessary.
F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including but not
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-6
1:103
§ 110-7. Application procedures. [Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No.
627, approved 7-8-1991]
limited to finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the floodplain administrator.
I. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and the 2009
International Residential Building Code (IRC) or latest revisions
thereof.
A. In addition to the building permit application requirements normally
required by the Borough of Wilson, the floodplain administrator shall
require the following additional information, in writing, on forms
supplied by the Borough as part of the application for a building permit:
[Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location.
(5) Proposed lowest floor and basement elevations in relation to mean
sea level.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located within or
adjacent to any identified flood-prone area, applicants for building
permits shall also provide the following specific information:
(1) A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to
flooding, the location of the proposed construction, the location of
any other flood-prone development or structures and the location
of any existing or proposed stream improvements or protective
works. Included shall be all plans for proposed subdivision and land
development in order to assure that:
§ 110-6 WILSON CODE § 110-7
1:104
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(2) Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination: [Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(a) A completed building permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the
size of the site expressed in acres or square feet;
[4] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and land
development; and
[5] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways;
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[2] The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood;
[3] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a one-hundred-year flood;
[4] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures; and
[5] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(d) The following data and documentation:
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:105
§ 110-8. Review by County Conservation District. [Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified flood-prone area to be considered for
approval shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 110-9. Review of application by others. [Amended 7-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified flood-prone area to be considered for
approval shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other
[1] A document, certified by or registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the one-hundred-year flood
elevations, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[2] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 110-24, Development which may endanger human life,
including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any dangerous
materials or substances which are intended to be
used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on
site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 110-24 during a one-hundred-year flood.
[3] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
[4] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 110-7 WILSON CODE § 110-9
1:106
appropriate agencies and/or individuals, including the Wilson Borough
Planning Commission and the Engineer, for review and comment.
§ 110-10. Other permit issuance requirements. [Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the floodplain administrator
shall review the application for permit to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits such as those required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, the Water Obstruction Act of 1913, and the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1334. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
§ 110-11. Changes. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
After the issuance of a building permit by the floodplain administrator, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of
the plans, specifications, or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval or the floodplain administrator.
§ 110-12. Placards. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
In addition to the building permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue
a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall be in a manner and form
as designated by the Borough of Wilson and shall show the number of the
building permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the floodplain
administrator.
§ 110-13. Start of construction. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
773, approved 7-14-2014]
Work on the proposed construction shall begin within six months and shall
be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the building
permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in
writing, by the floodplain administrator. Construction shall be considered
to have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes or electrical or
other service lines from the street.
§ 110-14. Inspection and revocation. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
§ 110-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-14
1:107
application and with all applicable Borough laws and ordinances. In the
event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does not comply
with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that
there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the floodplain administrator shall revoke the building permit and report
such fact to the Council of Wilson Borough for whatever action it considers
necessary.
§ 110-15. Fees.
Applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the Borough of Wilson based upon the fee schedule of said Borough.
§ 110-16. Enforcement.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, such authority
shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such
notice shall be in writing; include a statement of their reasons for its
issuance; allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a
copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this state; and contain an outline
of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, and with the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
B. Hearings. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the
floodplain administrator, or by any of the requirements of this chapter,
may appeal to the Wilson Borough Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed in writing within 30 days after the decision or action of the
floodplain administrator. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 nor
more than 30 days, for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the
time and place of the hearing on the appeal shall be given to all parties,
at which time they may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Wilson
Borough Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
773, approved 7-14-2014]
C. Findings and order. After such hearing, the Wilson Borough Zoning
Hearing Board shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an
order, in writing, sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice,
which shall be served as provided in Subsection A of this section.
§ 110-14 WILSON CODE § 110-16
1:108
D. Record and appeals. The proceedings at such a hearing, including the
findings and decision of the Wilson Borough Zoning Hearing Board,
together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be
entered as a matter of public record in the Borough of Wilson, but the
transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial
review of the decision is sought as provided by this section. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Wilson Borough Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by the laws of this commonwealth.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all
of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses
to comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the
Borough of not less than $25 nor more than $300, plus costs of
prosecution. In default of such payment, such person shall be
imprisoned in County prison for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each
day during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council of
Wilson Borough to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
[Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
§ 110-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-16
1:109

ARTICLE III
Identification of Flood-Prone Areas
§ 110-17. Identification. [Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 627,
approved 7-8-1991; 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
The identified floodplain area shall be:
A. Any areas of the Borough of Wilson, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 16, 2014,
and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as
part of the Flood Insurance Study. The above-referenced FIS and
FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are hereby
adopted by the Borough of Wilson and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
B. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
C. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
D. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
§ 110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-17
1:111
§ 110-18. Changes in identification of flood-prone areas.
§ 110-19. Disputes. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
Should a dispute arise concerning the identification of any flood-prone area,
an initial determination shall be made by the floodplain administrator, and
any person aggrieved by such decision may appeal to the Wilson Borough
Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
A. The areas considered to be flood-prone may be revised or modified by
the Council of Wilson Borough where studies or information provided
by a qualified agency or person documents the need or possibility for
such revision.
B. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Borough Council where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revisions. However,
prior to any change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be
obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later
than six months after the date such information becomes available, a
community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard
area by submitting technical or scientific data. See § 110-20B for
situations where FEMA notification is required. [Amended 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
§ 110-17 WILSON CODE § 110-19
1:112
ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 110-20. General. [Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 627, approved
7-8-1991; 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001;
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the floodplain administrator's conditional approval
of map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of
the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating
the increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway
reflecting the post-project condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
§ 110-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-21
1:113
§ 110-21. Floodplain requirements for new development. [Amended
3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001; 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
Any new construction development, uses or activities allowed within any
identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations.
§ 110-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. [Amended
7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 627, approved 7-8-1991; 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
773, approved 7-14-2014]
Within any identified floodplain area, unless a variance is requested and
obtained, any new construction or substantial improvements shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial
improvements in the identified floodplain area in accordance with the
criteria in Article V, then the following provisions apply:
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 110-17D of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvements of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
§ 110-21 WILSON CODE § 110-22
1:114
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 110-17D of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W-2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International
Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions thereof, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designated and constructed to allow for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed
space" also includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all chapter requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific chapter requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
§ 110-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-22
1:115
§ 110-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction proposed
to be undertaken within any identified flood-prone area:
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from chapter requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
§ 110-22 WILSON CODE § 110-23
1:116
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the line from all points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
of erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are submitted to and
approved by the floodplain administrator; and [Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or
property. The system shall insure proper drainage at all points along
streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system
shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff
adjacent properties.
C. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(1) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(2) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(3) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize infiltration of flood waters into the system and be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
E. Street. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems being placed in the flood-prone areas should be located,
elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the change of
impairment during a flood.
§ 110-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-23
1:117
G. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, shall
be stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
H. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
I. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objections or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
J. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
K. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
L. Electrical system and components.
(1) Electric water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
systems, and other electrical equipment or apparatus shall not be
located below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 110-23 WILSON CODE § 110-23
1:118
§ 110-24. Development which may endanger human life. [Amended
3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001; 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(2) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
M. Plumbing.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No part of any on-site disposal system shall be located within any
identified flood-prone area. [Amended 3-26-2001 by Ord. No.
691, approved 3-26-2001]
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters. Additional provision shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter:
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,28
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances or which will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than
28.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 110-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-24
1:119
550 gallons or other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive
substances) of the premises shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 110-20, 110-21, and 110-22.
C. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any
nonresidential structure of the kind described in Subsection A,
above, shall be:
§ 110-24 WILSON CODE § 110-24
1:120
§ 110-25. Special requirements for manufactured homes. [Amended
7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 627, approved 7-8-1991; 3-26-2001 by Ord. No.
691, approved 3-26-2001; 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
(a) Elevated or designated and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood;
and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1997), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall:
(1) Be placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
B. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, Chapter 401-405, shall apply.
C. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
D. Within any identified floodway, all manufactured homes and any
improvements thereto shall be prohibited.
§ 110-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-25.1
1:121
§ 110-25.1. Special requirements for subdivision and development.
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 110-26. Activities requiring special permits.
A. Special hazards.
(1) It has been determined that the following activities and
development present a special hazard to the health and safety of
the general public or may result in significant pollution, increased
flood levels or flows or debris endangering life and property if such
activities and developments are located, either entirely or partially,
within an identified flood-prone area:
(a) Hospitals (public or private).
(b) Nursing homes (public or private).
(c) Jails or prisons.
(d) New mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions and
substantial improvements thereto.
(2) Because of the special hazards presented by the above list of
activities and development, they shall be prohibited from locating
within any identified flood-prone area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Borough of Wilson and the floodplain
administrator. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
B. Application for a special permit shall consist of at least six copies of the
following items, two of which shall be submitted to the Department of
Community and Economic Development, Strategic Planning and
Operations Office: [Amended 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved
3-26-2001]
(1) A written request which includes the information specified in
§ 110-7B(1).
(2) A plan of the site, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date.
§ 110-25.1 WILSON CODE § 110-26
1:122
(b) A location map showing the vicinity in which the proposed
activity or development is to be located within the municipality.
(c) Topography showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet.
(d) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways with information concerning widths, pavement
types and construction, and elevations.
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures, and other public or private facilities, and
other natural or man-made features affecting, or affected by,
the proposed activity or development.
(g) The location of the identified flood-prone area boundary line,
information and spot elevations concerning the one-hundredyear
flood elevations, and information concerning the flow of
water, including direction and velocities.
(h) A general plan of the entire site accurately showing the
location of all proposed buildings, structures, and any other
improvements.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) Detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor
plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate.
(b) The proposed finished floor elevations of any proposed
building.
(c) Complete information concerning the hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces and pressures that will exist during the
course of a one-hundred-year flood, including impact loads.
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and
accessways showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
(f) Profile drawings of all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades.
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
§ 110-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:123
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the proposed construction has been adequately
designed to protect against damage from the one-hundred-year
flood;
(b) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development;
(c) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
(d) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents;
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a one-hundred-year flood,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life;
(f) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations
and flows;
(g) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the one-hundred-year flood elevation
and the effect such materials and debris may have on onehundred-
year flood elevations and flows;
(h) Any other applicable permits such as but not limited to a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;
and
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood.
§ 110-26 WILSON CODE § 110-27
1:124
§ 110-27. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Wilson, the following procedures shall apply:
§ 110-28. Special technical requirements.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall notify
the applicant, in writing, stating in what respects the application is
deficient.
C. If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the
Department of Community and Economic Development by registered or
certified mail within five working days after the date of approval.
[Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days after
receipt of the notification by the Department to review the application
and the decision made by the Borough. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
F. If the Borough does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
[Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough and the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval and the
Borough shall not issue the special permit. [Amended 7-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the following minimum
requirements shall also apply to any proposed development requiring a
special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the following
requirements and those located elsewhere in this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
§ 110-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-28
1:125
(1) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed, and maintained in a manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants. At a minimum, all new structures shall be
designed, located, and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or
damage to either the structure itself or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
[2] The lowest floor elevation will be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution increased flood
levels or flows or debris endangering life and property.
B. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough and the Department of Community and
Economic Development. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
§ 110-28 WILSON CODE § 110-28
1:126
ARTICLE V
Variances
§ 110-29. General.
If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements of this
chapter would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder,
developer, or landowner, the Borough of Wilson Zoning Hearing Board may,
upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirement.
§ 110-30. Variance procedures and requirements.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Wilson Borough
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 110-16D and the following procedures: [Amended 3-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001]
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permits (§ 110-26) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 110-24).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Wilson Borough Zoning Hearing
Board may attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Wilson Borough Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Wilson Borough Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
§ 110-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-30
1:127
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public, or conflict with any other applicable local or state
ordinance and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Wilson Borough Zoning Hearing Board. In
addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and pressures, effects of buoyancy
and other forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 110-30 WILSON CODE § 110-30
1:128
ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Flood-Prone Areas
[Amended 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001]
§ 110-31. Existing structures.
Structures existing in any identified flood-prone area prior to the enactment
of this chapter, but which are not in compliance with these provisions, may
continue to remain, subject to the following:
A. Existing structures located in any designated floodway area shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on the one-hundred-year flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to any existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50%
of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall be considered a substantial improvement and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 110-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-31
1:129

ARTICLE VII
Definitions
§ 110-32. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 110-33. Specific definitions. [Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 627,
approved 7-8-1991; 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 691, approved 3-26-2001]
A. Words defined.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood.")[Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.[Added
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.[Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
BUILDING OFFICER — That person appointed by the Borough of
Wilson pursuant to the Floodplain Ordinance as the building officer.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving,
utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
§ 110-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-33
1:131
operations, the subdivision of land, and the storage of materials and
equipment.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.[Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads).[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any are subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
§ 110-33 WILSON CODE § 110-33
1:132
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See Article III, Identification of Flood-Prone. Areas, for the
specifics on what areas the community has included in the identified
floodplain area.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
773, approved 7-14-2014]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that
it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term does
include park trailers, travel trailers or other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either;
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 110-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-33
1:133
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two or more manufactured homes for nontransient use.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the
removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on July 16, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after
December 10, 1979, and before July 16, 2014, is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the
start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.[Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.[Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projections, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water or is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same
downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERMIT HOLDER —
(1) The owner of the premises;
(2) The applicant for a permit; and/or
(3) The person to whom the permit is issued.
§ 110-33 WILSON CODE § 110-33
1:134
PERSON — As used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean and
include any natural person or persons, association, partnership, firm,
public or private association or corporation, or other entity.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
January 16, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974,
or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
dated January 16, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would not
be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Added 7-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, 99, or AH.[Added
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
SPECIAL PERMIT — Special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home park or subdivision
and substantial improvements to such existing manufactured home
park or subdivision when such development is located partly or entirely
within a designated floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
(1) Built on a single chassis:
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 110-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-33
1:135
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain
administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved
7-14-2014]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds,
manufactured home or other similar items.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not
involving any new street or easement of access or residential dwellings
shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
§ 110-33 WILSON CODE § 110-33
1:136
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
773, approved 7-14-2014]
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
B. For the purposes of floodplain management, the words "mobile home"
or "mobile home park" shall be replaced with the words "manufactured
home" and "manufactured home park" within any delineated floodplain
area.
C. For purposes of flood insurance requirements, the "Federal Emergency
Management Agency" (FEMA) shall replace the "Federal Emergency
Management Agency" (FEMA). [Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
D. All references herein to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
1929 are now North Atlantic Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988. [Added
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
E. All references in this chapter to the "floodplain administrator" shall
hereafter be referred to as the "floodplain administrator," appointed to
administer and enforce this chapter. The floodplain administrator may:
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
§ 110-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-33
1:137
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR § 59.22.
F. Any reference to the "Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs"
herein shall be the "Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development." [Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773,
approved 7-14-2014]
§ 110-33 WILSON CODE § 110-33
1:138
ARTICLE VIII
Future Floodplain Data and Measures
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 773, approved 7-14-2014]
§ 110-34. Automatic adoption of future floodplain data and
measures.
Wilson Borough Council, upon motion or resolution, may automatically
adopt the most recent available flood elevation data provided by FEMA
and other floodplain measures, otherwise in accordance with the minimum
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
§ 110-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-34
1:139
Chapter 114
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 91.
Pest control — See Ch. 133.
§ 110-34 WILSON CODE § 110-34
1:140
ARTICLE I
Short Title and Definitions
§ 114-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Wilson Municipal Solid
Waste Ordinance."
§ 114-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being authorized as a collector.
ASHES — The residue from burning wood, coal, coke and other combustible
materials for the purposes of heating and cooking. It does not include the
cinders produced in industrial or manufacturing plants.
COLLECTOR — A person authorized to collect, transport and dispose of
municipal waste from the Borough of Wilson.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in such a
manner that the waste or a constituent of the waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storing, preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries and the like.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MANAGEMENT — The entire process or any part thereof of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of municipal
waste by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-2
1:141
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air-pollution control facility. (Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act, No. 97 Section 103)29
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution and agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of a
person.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part or
all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. "Processing" facilities include
but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators,
recycling facilities and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — The collective term applying to all garbage, rubbish, ashes, and
grass trimmings from residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
premises.[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 787; approved 3-26-2018]
REGULAR — At least three or more times per month.
RUBBISH — All waste materials not included in garbage and ashes, and
other waste materials which result from the ordinary conduct of
housekeeping. It does not include rubbish from building construction,
repairs, reconstruction or dismantling thereof, or street refuse, industrial
refuse, dead animals, abandoned heavy or bulky machinery or such other
waste material as do not normally emanate from or are not commonly
produced in homes, stores and institutions. It does not include tin cans and
bottles as those items are recyclable.[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
787; approved 3-26-2018]
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act. No. 97, Section
103).30
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste, and it shall
be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of oneyear
constitutes disposal.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103.
30.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103.
§ 114-2 WILSON CODE § 114-2
1:142
ARTICLE II
Storage of Municipal Waste
§ 114-3. Providing of containers.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person occupying
any dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the Borough of
Wilson where municipal waste is produced and is accumulated, at his own
expense and cost, to provide and keep at all times a sufficient number of
containers to hold all municipal waste which may accumulate during the
intervals between collections of such municipal waste by the Borough of
Wilson or an authorized collector.
§ 114-4. Preparation of waste for collection.
§ 114-5. Storage on residential properties.
A. All garbage, before being placed in containers for collection, shall have
drained from it all free liquids and must be wrapped in paper.
B. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for
collection. Newspapers shall be securely tied in small bundles.
C. All cans and bottles which have contained food shall be thoroughly
rinsed and drained before being deposited for collection.
D. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to
lengths not to exceed three feet and securely tied in bundles not more
than two feet thick before being deposited for collection. There shall
not be more than six bundles in any one collection.
A. Containers for the storage of municipal waste on residential properties
shall meet the following requirements: [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
(1) Receptacles shall be made of metal, plastic or other durable
material, must be watertight and provided with a tight-fitting cover
and with a handle or handles.
(2) No person shall use for the reception of municipal waste any
receptacle having the capacity of more than 20 gallons.
(3) Cartons containing paper or combustible material shall be securely
tied and shall not be larger than 18 inches by 20 inches by 36
inches.
(4) All receptacles shall be kept as sanitary as possible in view of the
use to which they are put and shall be thoroughly cleansed by the
occupant after contents are removed by the collector.
B. Receptacles shall be of a suitable kind which can be easily handled by
one man.
§ 114-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-5
1:143
§ 114-6. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial
properties.
C. All receptacles shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of the premises and shall be maintained in good condition.
Any receptacle that does not conform to the provisions of this article or
that may have jagged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be
promptly replaced upon notice. Failure to comply may result in refusal
to collect or the removal of the defective receptacle as refuse.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial, institutional
and industrial properties shall be done in the same type of containers as
required for residential properties, except that containers larger than
20 gallons may be used, where needed, to accommodate larger volumes
of municipal wastes, provided that approval is first obtained from the
superintendent of operations. Such containers shall be kept in good
working order.
B. Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be located on such premises
at a place which shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and exits to public or
private buildings.
§ 114-5 WILSON CODE § 114-6
1:144
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 114-7. Administration of collection procedures.
All refuse accumulated in the Borough shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by the Borough of Wilson on such days and at such times as
shall be designated by Council. No garbage or refuse will be removed from
industrial or institutional establishments or any other establishments except
those as may be approved and specified by Council. The cost of such service
shall be paid, as provided in the Schedule of Fees hereinafter set forth, by
the registered owner of the property upon which the refuse is produced,
accumulated or from which it is collected or removed.
§ 114-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-7
1:145

ARTICLE IV
Authorization of Collectors
§ 114-8. Unauthorized collection and transportation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the Borough of Wilson, to collect and transport solid waste
of any nature as a regular hauling business within or from the Borough of
Wilson. Authorization shall be given only as set forth below.
§ 114-9. Licensing procedure.
Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste for
persons other than oneself may be given only by the Borough of Wilson
through the issuance of a license. All applications for licensing shall be
approved in accordance with the following:
A. Eligible persons. Municipal solid waste collection licenses may be
issued to only those persons who can provide satisfactory evidence that
they are capable of providing the necessary services and can comply
with the provisions and intent of this chapter. The Borough of Wilson
reserves the right to disapprove any application for license.
B. Application procedure. Applicants for a municipal solid waste collection
license must furnish the following information:
(1) The make, model, license plate number and size of each vehicle to
be used for collection and transportation.
(2) The location, address and telephone number of the business office
of the applicant.
(3) A certificate of the applicant's workmen's compensation insurance
as required by law.
(4) A certificate of insurance coverage providing complete third-party
comprehensive, bodily injury and property damage liability
insurance, the limits of which shall not be less than
$100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 for property
damage.
(5) Any other information which the Borough of Wilson may request
and deem necessary prior to the issuance of a license.
C. Issuance. Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis but may be
revoked at any time by the Borough of Wilson for failure to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
D. Fees. Fees for licenses shall be set by the Borough of Wilson, and the
amount thereof shall be provided to any applicant or other person upon
request.
§ 114-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-9
1:147
E. License and capacity. Each vehicle must prominently display the name
and number of the licensee and the cubic yard capacity of the vehicle's
body.
§ 114-9 WILSON CODE § 114-9
1:148
ARTICLE V
Transportation of Solid Waste
§ 114-10. Prevention of spillage.
Any person transporting solid waste within the Borough of Wilson shall
prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transport of such solid waste.
§ 114-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-10
1:149

ARTICLE VI
Disposal of Municipal Waste
§ 114-11. Disposal sites.
All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within the
jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Wilson shall be, to the extent
permitted by law, disposed of at disposal facilities designated by the
Borough of Wilson and in accordance with any currently effective solid
waste management plan of the Borough of Wilson. In the absence of such
designated facilities and/or such currently effective solid waste
management plan, municipal waste from the Borough of Wilson must be
disposed of at a state-permitted facility.
§ 114-12. Notice to collectors.
If the Borough of Wilson designates the disposal facilities as provided
above, all authorized collectors and other interested persons shall be
informed of the location and other information pertaining to the designated
disposal facilities to be used for the disposal of municipal waste collected,
transported, removed and disposed of.
§ 114-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-12
1:151

ARTICLE VII
Points of Collection
§ 114-13. Placement of receptacles for collection.
A. Refuse receptacles shall be placed for collection at the curb in front, at
the side or in the rear of the property, as determined by the
superintendent of operations, and shall be removed promptly after
collection.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any garbage, ashes or
rubbish out for collection more than 24 hours prior to the designated
collection period. [Added 9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 613; approved
9-12-1988]
§ 114-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-13
1:153

ARTICLE VIII
Special Refuse Problems
§ 114-14. Contagious disease refuse.
The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or
other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed
shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the Health
Officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collections.
§ 114-15. Flammable or explosive refuse.
Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers
for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the
superintendent of operations or the Fire Chief, at the expense of the owner
or possessor thereof.
§ 114-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-15
1:155

ARTICLE IX
Schedule of Fees; Payment
§ 114-16. Annual fees; time for payment, delinquencies.
A. Fees. The fees for collection and disposal of garbage placed for
collection at the curb from which collection is made shall be as follows:
[Amended 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 602, approved 12-29-1986;
6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 606, approved 6-8-1987; 12-28-1988 by
Ord. No. 615, approved 12-28-1988; 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 624,
approved 12-26-1990; 9-26-2002 by Ord. No. 699, approved
9-26-2002; 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 723, approved 12-28-200431]
(1) For each family unit, $280 per year for the collection of garbage;
except for a senior citizen 62 years or over living in a separate unit,
in which case the fee shall be $230 per year.
(2) For hotels, restaurants, and other businesses and institutions
electing to come under this subsection, the fees shall be charged as
follows:
(a) For garbage collection, $280 per year, which entitles the
aforesaid to the collection of three twenty-gallon containers
per collection.
(b) Additional containers shall be collected at multiples of the
above rates.
B. The above fees shall be effective as of January 1 1991, and shall be
billed quarterly. If bills are not paid within 30 days of the due date,
there shall be added thereto a ten-percent penalty. [Amended
12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 602, approved 12-29-1986; 6-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 606, approved 6-8-1987; 12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 615,
approved 12-28-1988; 12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 624, approved
12-26-1990]
C. Delinquent charges, accounts and penalties shall be enforced by a legal
action in assumpsit and by such other method or in such manner
authorized and permitted by law for the collection of municipal claims.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2005.
§ 114-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-16
1:157

ARTICLE X
Exclusions
§ 114-17. Individuals disposing of own refuse. [Amended 3-26-2018
by Ord. No. 787; approved 3-26-2018]
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any residential
property occupant not regularly engaged in the business of collecting
municipal waste from hauling his own municipal waste on an irregular
and unscheduled basis to a state-permitted disposal facility so long as
the individual complies with all regulations for collections, conveyance
and disposal prescribed in this chapter or made by Council or by any
other governmental authorities. The resident shall maintain records that
the refuse was properly disposed of for a period of at least six (6) months
following the disposal.
§ 114-18. Farming activities.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming operation, including composting and
spreading of manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste.
§ 114-19. Hazardous or residual wastes.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not apply
therefor to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act.32
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 114-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-19
1:159

ARTICLE XI
Prohibited Disposal; Interference With Receptacles
§ 114-20. Prohibited disposal of refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of, throw or place any garbage,
ashes or rubbish in any street, alley or public place or upon any private
property, whether owned by such person or not, except into the containers
or receptacles herein provided for or under an express approval granted by
Council. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other
body of water. No person shall burn any garbage or rubbish.
§ 114-21. Interference with refuse receptacles.
No person other than the Borough, the occupants of the premises on which
refuse receptacles are stored or a licensed private collector shall remove
the covers or any of the contents of refuse receptacles.
§ 114-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-21
1:161

ARTICLE XII
Penalties; Additional Regulations
§ 114-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction by a District Justice, be subject to a fine of not more than $300,
together with the costs of prosecution, or, upon default in payment of the
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more
than 30 days. Every violator of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such violation
shall continue, and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section
for each and every such separate offense.
§ 114-23. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Borough of Wilson may require
the owner or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of solid
waste, and should said person fail to remove such solid waste after 10 days
following written notice, the Borough of Wilson may cause the solid waste to
be collected and disposed of, with the costs for such actions to be charged
to the owner or occupant of the property in a manner provided by law.
§ 114-24. Abatement of violations.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Borough of Wilson from instituting appropriate actions or proceedings to
prevent the violation of this chapter, to restrain, correct or abate any such
violation or to prevent any act, conduct, business or activity constituting a
violation.
§ 114-25. Effect of additional regulations.
This chapter shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including the rules and regulations as
set forth by the Department of Environmental Resources, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 114-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-25
1:163

ARTICLE XIII
Recycling
[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 630, approved 9-9-1991]
§ 114-26. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases or words shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum food and beverage containers which contain only
nonaerosol or edible substances.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson located in the County of Northampton,
Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipal corporation.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters, and shall also mean those facilities that house or serve groups
of people, such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers, universities and
nursing homes.
COMMINGLED — Aluminum, bimetallic and steel, glass and plastic food
and beverage containers, as defined herein, placed in a special recycling
container for the purpose of collection without having been segregated by
color or type.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic material is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
CONTRACTOR — An entity or organization authorized by the Borough to
collect, transport and dispose of the Borough's recyclables.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
GLASS — Glass food and beverage containers commonly found in the home.
It includes clear (fling), green and brown (amber) colored containers. It
excludes crystal, ceramics, light bulbs and plate, window, laminated, wired
or mirrored glass.
HAULER — A person who owns and/or operates vehicles engaged in the
collection or transportation of recyclables within the Borough.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All-white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY — Any property having five or more
dwelling units per structure.
§ 114-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-26
1:165
NEWSPAPER — Types of paper made from wood pulp and/or other fibrous
materials mixed together, either with or without chemicals, to produce thin
sheets of the products customarily and primarily used for the production of
newsprint.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency (including but not
limited to the Department of General Services and the Pennsylvania Public
School Building Authority) or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty, or any combination
of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC — Water and milk jugs, soda bottles and laundry product
containers. Additional categories may be included by mutual agreement.
PROCESSING CENTER — The location which may be maintained by the
contractor for the purpose of sorting, preparing and/or consolidating
recyclables for sale.
PUBLIC AWARENESS PROGRAM — The program developed and provided
by the contractor or the Borough to inform and encourage residents to use
the recycling collection services.
RECYCLABLES — All newspaper, glass, plastics, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic materials.
RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES — Those services to be performed by
the contractor as follows:
RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container made of rigid plastic construction
provided by the Borough.
RESIDENCE — Any single-family attached or detached dwelling or multiple
dwelling having four or fewer units from which refuse and recyclables are
collected.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC — Steel and bimetallic food and beverage
containers which contain only nonaerosol or edible substances.
§ 114-27. Separation and collection required.
The collection of recyclable materials from locations specifically
designated by the parties.
A.
B. Processing of recyclable materials as applicable.
C. Marketing of the recyclable materials.
A. All persons who are residents of the Borough shall source-separate all
designated recyclables from all other refuse produced at their homes,
§ 114-26 WILSON CODE § 114-27
1:166
§ 114-28. Designated recyclables; requirements.
apartments and other residential establishments and store such
material for collection. Designated materials shall be placed together at
the curbside or similar location on the day of collection designated by
the Borough.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place a recycling container or
designated material out for collection more than 24 hours prior to
the determined collection period.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of any owner or landlord of a
multifamily housing property may comply with his or its recycling
responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each
property. The collection system must include suitable containers
for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for
the containers and written instructions to the occupants
concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply
with this section shall not be liable for noncompliance of occupants
of their buildings.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other refuse generated at
their homes and other residential establishments for collection, unless
those persons have otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste.
The Borough or the Borough's contracted hauler shall provide curbside
pickup of leaf waste either once per month or twice per year with at
least one collection in the Spring and one in the Fall. The Borough shall
facilitate the residents' use of a leaf waste dropoff site by educating the
residents about the hours of operation and location of a nearby
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) approved dropoff
facility. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 787; approved
3-26-2018]
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper and leaf waste generated at commercial establishments and from
community activities and store the material until collection. A person
may be exempted from this subsection if the person submits
documentation to the Borough annually, indicating that the above
recyclables are being recycled in an appropriate manner. Said
documentation must state the weight of the recycled material, not the
volume. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 787; approved
3-26-2018]
D. The Borough shall provide for the collection of designated commingled
materials from homes and other residential establishments on a
biweekly basis.
A. Designated recyclables consist of the following: [Amended 11-8-1999
by Ord. No. 682, approved 11-8-1999]
§ 114-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-28
1:167
§ 114-29. Ownership of recyclables.
All designated recyclables placed by the resident for collection pursuant to
this article and the regulations hereunder shall from the time of placement
become the property of the hauler or the contractor.
§ 114-30. Unauthorized collections prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, other than the hauler
authorized by multifamily housing properties or authorized by each
commercial establishment or the contractor, to collect designated
recyclables placed by a resident for collection. Each unauthorized collection
in violation hereof on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 114-31. Sale or donation of recyclables.
Any resident may donate or sell designated recyclables to any person,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person shall
not collect such designated recyclables from the same collection point and
at times used by a designated hauler or the contractor.
(1) Aluminum beverage cans.
(2) Newspaper.
(3) Amber/brown glass containers.
(4) Green glass containers.
(5) Clear glass containers.
(6) Steel cans/tin plated.
(7) Plastics (PETE No. 1; HDPE No. 2).
(8) Aerosol cans.
(9) Corrugated paper.
(10) Magazines and colored newspaper inserts.
(11) Polycoated paper containers.
B. Requirements of designated recyclables shall be as follows:
(1) Glass, plastic containers, aluminum cans and steel and bimetallic
cans shall be rinsed and free of contaminants.
(2) Newspaper shall be bundled separately or placed in brown paper
bags.
(3) Recyclables will be set out in containers provided by the Borough.
§ 114-28 WILSON CODE § 114-32
1:168
§ 114-32. Leaf waste.
All persons shall separate leaf waste from other refuse. Tree leaves shall
either be placed loose in the street near the curb for municipal collection on
designated days or shall be placed in open bags at the same location with
notification made to the Highway Department of the need for collection.
After October 1, 1991, other leaf waste shall be taken for composting to a
site as designated by the Borough.
§ 114-33. Fees.
The Council of the Borough of Wilson shall from time to time, by resolution,
establish a schedule of fees for the collection of recyclables thereof and
amend said schedule and system from time to time as the need for
amendment may arise. The proceeds of said fee shall be applied toward the
general fund. The Council may also establish a schedule of fees for special
collections.
§ 114-34. Regulations.
The Council of the Borough of Wilson reserves the right to further
implement this article by rules and regulations which it may pass by
resolution from time to time. The rules and regulations shall be construed
as a part of this Article XIII.
§ 114-35. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article XIII shall
receive an official written warning of noncompliance for the first
offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article XIII shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500 and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided
that each day's continuance of a violation of any provision of this Article
XIII shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 114-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-35
1:169
Chapter 116
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 87. Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
§ 116-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 116-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATE — The removal, painting over or otherwise obscuring of graffiti from
view.
AEROSOL CONTAINER — Any aerosol-based container which is capable of
spraying painting, ink, dye or similar substance and leaving a visible mark
on any natural or man-made surface.
A. Graffiti is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
community in that it leads to urban blight; encourages gang activity; is
detrimental to property values, business opportunities and the
enjoyment of life; is inconsistent with the Borough's property
maintenance goals, aesthetic standards and clean and safe theme; and
results in additional graffiti, and in other properties becoming the
target of graffiti, unless it is quickly removed from public and private
property. Graffiti results in visual pollution and is a public nuisance.
Graffiti must be abated as quickly as possible to avoid detrimental
impacts on the Borough and its residents and to prevent the further
spread of graffiti.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to:
(1) Prohibit and restrict the possession of graffiti implements.
(2) Prohibit the application of graffiti on any public or private property.
(3) Require prompt removal of graffiti on all public or private property.
(4) Mandate the Wilson Police Department full jurisdiction over the
policies within this chapter.
C. It is the intention of the Borough of Wilson through the adoption of this
chapter to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property form acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. This
chapter is not intended to conflict with any existing and graffiti state
law.
§ 114-35 WILSON CODE § 116-2
1:170
ETCHING MATERIALS — Any etching tool, chemical, paste or similar
material which is capable of being used to etch glass.
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, adhesive
label, patch or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn,
painted or engraved on, or otherwise affixed to, any surface of public or
private property, including but not limited to buildings, structures or places.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Etching material or any aerosol container which
contains paint, ink, dye or any similar substance and which is capable
of resulting in the placement of graffiti upon any surface or substance,
including but not limited to glass, metal, concrete, wood and plastic.
OWNER — The owner of record of the property as set forth in the tax
records.
PROPERTY — A legal or equitable interest in real or personal property,
including but not limited to the interest of a tenant or lessee.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — An owner, or an entity or person acting as an
agent for an owner by agreement, which has authority over the property or
is responsible for the property's maintenance or management, irrespective
of any arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each owner shall
always be a responsible party for the purpose of this chapter. There may be
more than one responsible party for a particular property.
§ 116-3. Prohibited acts; removal by owner or Borough; fine and
reward approval.
A. It is unlawful for any person to, or endeavor to, apply graffiti on public
or privately owned buildings, permanent structures or places located
on public or privately owned property within the Borough. It is unlawful
for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti. It
is unlawful for any person to aid or abet or agree to aid or abet another
person to plan to apply or apply graffiti. A violation of this provision
shall constitute a summary offense.
B. It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, for the
purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement while in any public
park, school grounds, playground, swimming pool, public recreational
facility, any public right-of-way or other public grounds in the Borough
or while on private property not open to the public without the owner's
or agency's permission. A violation of this provision shall constitute a
summary offense.
C. It is unlawful for any owner or responsible party to maintain, permit or
allow graffiti to remain on any property or item within the Borough that
is visible to any person of normal eyesight utilizing any public road,
alley, sidewalk or other facility open to the general public. Any owner or
responsible party found in violation of this subsection shall be required
to remove, or cause to be removed, the graffiti from the surface on
which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not possible to determine
the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it shall be the duty of
§ 116-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:171
§ 116-4. Standards for graffiti removal.
Graffiti shall be removed or completely covered in a manner that renders
it inconspicuous. When graffiti is painted out, the color used to paint it
out shall match the original color of the surface, or the surface shall be
completely repainted with a new color that is aesthetically compatible
with existing colors and architecture. The removal shall not leave shadows
and shall not follow the pattern of the graffiti such that letters or similar
shapes remain apparent on the surface after graffiti markings have been
removed. If the area is heavily covered with graffiti the entire surface shall
be repainted.
§ 116-5. Rewards.
The Borough may offer a reward not to exceed $250 for information leading
to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who
willfully damages or destroys any public or private property by the use
of graffiti. The actual amount awarded (not to exceed $250) shall be
determined by the Chief of Police. Upon conviction, the Borough may seek
reimbursement of any reward as part of a claim for restitution against
the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor.
In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount
shall be divided by the Borough in the manner it shall deem appropriate.
Claims for rewards shall be filed with the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
No claim for reward shall be allowed unless the Borough investigates and
verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of
this section have been satisfied.
the owner or responsible party of the location on which the graffiti
was applied to remove the graffiti within 10 days, weather conditions
permitting, after receiving notice from the Borough. The notice shall
include references where the property owner or responsible party may
seek assistance in the abatement of the graffiti. If after 10 days of
notification of the violations no attempt has been made to remove the
graffiti from the premises, the Borough may undertake any necessary
cleanup. The Borough of Wilson will offer to remove said graffiti from
the premises at no cost to the property owner. If the property owner
does not allow the removal of the graffiti the Borough may require said
owner to pay for costs and expenses. Any cost or expense incurred by
the Borough for removal of graffiti and cleanup of private property may
be billed to the owner within 14 days of removal. Upon failure to repay
the Borough in a timely fashion, the Borough may file a municipal lien
against the property. Failure to remove the graffiti within the 10 days
shall constitute a summary offense.
D. Final approval concerning fine or reward will be made solely by the
Chief of Police.
§ 116-3 WILSON CODE § 116-6
1:172
§ 116-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating § 116-3A, B or C of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be fined not more than $300 and, in default of payment of fine and costs, be
imprisoned not more than 90 days.
Chapter 117
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 73. Fire prevention — See Ch. 104.
§ 117-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, firm or corporation to spill or otherwise discharge any
petroleum-type product, chemical product and/or hazardous materials
within the Borough of Wilson.
§ 117-2. Liability of owner.
A. The owner of petroleum and/or chemicals and/or hazardous materials
and/or the carrier of any such material whatsoever, including a pipeline
carrying said products, shall be liable to the Borough of Wilson for
control, extinguishing and/or cleanup of petroleum-type or chemical- or
hazardous-material-type spills and/or fires involving said chemicals or
petroleum or hazardous materials in the Borough of Wilson. In the
event of the failure by the owner and/or carrier of such materials to
comply with this section within the time deemed necessary by the
Borough, the Borough may perform the work as it deems appropriate.
B. The owner of any such materials and/or the carrier of any such material
spilled or otherwise discharged within the Borough of Wilson shall be
liable to the Borough of Wilson for the cost of any special equipment
and material and the cost of labor used by the Borough of Wilson to
cleanup or control such materials or to extinguish fires resulting
therefrom.
(1) Special equipment and/or materials may include but are not limited
to:
(a) Foam.
(b) Dry chemical extinguisher.
(c) Sand.
§ 116-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:173
§ 117-3. Billing procedure.
Bills for the amount of the above-described costs shall be forwarded by
the Fire Department to the Borough Manager, who shall bill the abovedescribed
liable party. If payment is not made in full within 30 days from the
date of mailing of said bill, the Borough Manager shall turn the matter over
to the Borough Solicitor for collection.
§ 117-4. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, firm or
corporation violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $300, together with costs of prosecution,
and, in default thereof, undergo imprisonment in Northampton County
Prison for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 119
(RESERVED)
Chapter 121
INSURANCE
(d) Any other equipment and/or material or materials deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief of the Borough of Wilson or the
officer in charge.
(2) The cost of labor shall be the actual wage rates, including fringe
benefits, paid by the Borough of Wilson to all personnel involved in
the extinguishing of any such fire or in cleaning up any spill
involving chemicals or petroleum or hazardous materials.
(3) The owner of any such materials and/or the carrier of said
materials shall also be liable for the cost of any temporary storage
of chemicals or petroleum or hazardous materials and/or the cost of
disposing of same.
§ 117-2 WILSON CODE § 117-4
1:174
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 637, approved 11-9-1992]
§ 121-1. Appointment of designated officer.
The Borough Treasurer or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 121-2. Certificate required; exception.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Wilson (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$5,000, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to § 508(b) of Act
98 of 199233 and unless there is compliance with § 508(c) and (d) of Act 98
of 199234 and the provisions of this article.
§ 121-3. Payment of claims.
A. Where, pursuant to § 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,35 the Municipal
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the following
procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of
$1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$20,000 or less, the amount transferred to the municipality shall be
$1,000; or
(2) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
33.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
34.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
35.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-3
1:175
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro-rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of
the estimate to the named insured, if the municipality has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall
do the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the municipality. Such costs shall
include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the municipality and notify
the named insured that the procedures under this subsection
shall be followed.
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer and if the municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the fund, and, if excess funds
remain, the municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
§ 121-3 WILSON CODE § 121-3
1:176
§ 121-4. Authorization to adopt regulations and fees.
The Borough Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Act 98 of 1992 and this article and may by resolution fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including but not limited to
issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 121-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:177
Chapter 125
(RESERVED)
Chapter 128
MOVING PERMITS
§ 128-1. Permit required. [Amended 4-10-2017 by Ord. No. 783,
approved 4-10-2017]
§ 128-2. Application for permit.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring such a permit for
the removal or transportation of household goods in the manner above
described shall make application to the Secretary of the Borough Council of
the Borough of Wilson, at the office of the Secretary, setting forth his, its
or their name and address and also setting forth the name of the owners or
reputed owners of the property to be moved, the address and location from
which the property is to be removed and the new address or location of the
place to which the property is to be delivered.
§ 128-3. Issuance of permit. [Amended 12-30-1976 by Ord. No. 530,
approved 12-30-1976; 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 690, approved
12-20-2000]
The Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Wilson shall, upon
application being made as provided for in § 128-2 of this chapter, issue a
permit for which a charge of $5 will be made, setting forth the name of
the permittee as well as the name or names of the owners of the goods to
be moved and the address from which the goods are to be moved and the
address to which the goods are to be delivered. This permit shall be signed
by the Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Wilson.
A. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be
moved from any place within the Borough of Wilson to another place
therein, or to any place beyond the limits thereof, any household goods
in bulk without first securing from the Secretary of the Borough Council
of the Borough of Wilson a permit for such moving or transportation.
B. Further, no person or persons, firm or corporation shall move or cause
to be moved any household goods in bulk into the Borough of Wilson
from beyond the limits of the Borough of Wilson, without first securing
from the Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Wilson a
permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 121-5 WILSON CODE § 128-4
1:178
§ 128-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 130
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 74.
Curfew — See Ch. 87.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 130-1. Declaration of public nuisance.
The making of unnecessary noises upon, near or adjacent to the streets,
public property or across a real property boundary within the Borough
by automobile horns, engines, machinery, whistles, bells, sirens, radios,
amplifying systems or otherwise is declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 130-2. Noise disturbances enumerated.
By way of amplification and not limitation, the following acts, and the
causing thereof, are declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in
violation of this chapter:
A. Radios, tape players, television sets, musical instruments, electronic
amplification equipment and similar devices. Operating, playing or
permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television,
phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, automobile
radio, automobile stereo or high-fidelity equipment or similar device
which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
(1) At any time of the day in such a manner from any source as to
create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary; or
(2) In such manner as to create a noise disturbance across any real
property boundary when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a
public right-of-way or public space; or
(3) In such manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by any
passenger on a common carrier; or
(4) At such a sound intensity that the sound is audible from a distance
of 40 feet in any public area, street or sidewalk of the Borough
§ 128-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-2
1:179
§ 130-3. Enumeration not limited.
The enumeration of the particular offenses particularly defined above shall
not be construed as limiting the generality of the offenses prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of the chapter shall, on summary
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300 for each
offense, together with costs, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
when the sound is in any public area, street or sidewalk of the
Borough.
B. Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting
the sounding of any signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren,
whistle or similar device intended primarily for nonemergency
purposes, from any place, for more than one minute in any hourly
period.
C. Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting
the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren,
whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for
emergency purposes or for testing.
D. Loudspeakers/public address systems. Using or operating any
loudspeaker, public address system or similar device:
(1) Such that sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
real property boundary; or
(2) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on
a public right-of-way or public space.
E. Vehicle, repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding or testing any motor
vehicle or motorcycle in such manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line.
F. Power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically
powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower or
similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential real property line except to effect an
emergency repair after giving notice of such emergency to the Police
Department.
§ 130-2 WILSON CODE § 130-4
1:180
Chapter 132
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog and other animals — See Ch. 89.
Firearms — See Ch. 103.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Noise — See Ch. 130.
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and entitled as the "Borough of Wilson Rules
and Regulations for Borough Parks and Recreation Areas."
§ 132-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to Boroughs
pursuant to the Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et seq., as amended,
and pursuant to such other police powers and other powers which may be
lawfully exercised by Boroughs.
§ 132-3. Interpretation and legislative findings.
This chapter is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the
Borough of Wilson and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the
preservation and protection of the natural environment, public peace,
health, safety and welfare. The Borough of Wilson finds as follows and
declares that this chapter is passed in response to the following facts:
A. Unlawful and inappropriate behavior in the parks and recreation areas
of the Borough diminishes these precious assets and deprives citizens
of the full use and enjoyment of the natural beauty, recreational
opportunities and peaceful repose that parks and recreation areas are
intended to preserve.
B. In addition to more serious criminal acts that threaten personal injury
and property damage, a wide range of illegal disorderly behavior can
transform a park or recreation area into an unwelcoming, unattractive
and ultimately unsafe public space requiring increased expenditures for
public safety and maintenance.
C. The laws intended to preserve and protect the parks and recreation
areas for the benefit of all are effective only if those who use the parks
and recreation areas obey the law. The current criminal and civil
penalties for violating the law are frequently inadequate alone to deter
illegal behavior, prevent its recurrence or provide for the removal of the
offender from the park or recreation areas.
§ 130-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:181
§ 132-4. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have
the meanings set forth herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson.
CAMP — To remain overnight, to erect a tent or other shelter or to use
sleeping equipment, a vehicle or a trailer camper for the purpose of or in
such a way as will permit remaining overnight.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Wilson.
DEPARTMENT — The Public Works Department of the Borough of Wilson.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department as determined from time
to time by the Council and the authorized agents of the Director, who
may include, without limitation, the Chief of Police of the Borough and
his/her subordinate officers, animal control officers and duly authorized
Department or other Borough employees in the performance of their official
duties.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Wilson.
PARK — All lands, water, buildings and facilities now or hereinafter
comprising the parks and recreation system of the Borough, including any
and all parks and bodies of water contained therein or adjacent thereto,
playgrounds, athletic fields, sports courts, pavilions, picnic facilities, trails,
bike paths, walkways, drives, parkways, boulevards, boat launch areas,
waterfront areas, golf courses, museums, aquaria, zoos, botanical gardens,
greenbelts, parking lots, community centers and other park, recreation and
open space areas and buildings and facilities.
PARK RULE — Those particular rules, code of conduct or prohibited conduct
set forth in this chapter, or adopted by the Council under § 132-6, for which
a violation may lead to exclusion from a park under § 132-9 and/or the
imposition of the penalties set forth in § 132-11.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE — The Parks and Recreation
Committee of the Borough of Wilson.
RECREATION PROGRAM — Any program or activity conducted, sponsored
or assisted by the Department, whether or not it occurs in a park.
VIOLATION — An act or omission or combination thereof that is contrary
to any park rule or any civil or criminal provision of the statutes, laws,
regulations, codes or ordinances, laws of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or the Borough proven by a
preponderance of the evidence or such other evidentiary standard or
burden of proof as may be imposed by applicable Law.
D. Compliance with the law, including the rules and regulations set forth
herein, will be enhanced by the immediate administrative sanction of
excluding from Borough parks and recreation areas those who violate
the law.
§ 132-3 WILSON CODE § 132-5
1:182
§ 132-5. Purpose and interpretation.
§ 132-6. Manager and Director's authority; rule-making;
enforcement.
The Manager and the Director, under the direction and control of the
Manager, shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and post appropriate signs in the parks regarding the conduct proscribed
by this chapter. The Manager and the Director, under the direction and
control of the Manager, and in conjunction with the authority granted by
the Council to the Parks and Recreation Committee, may propose additional
rules and regulations consistent with this chapter for approval and adoption
by resolution of the Council, to manage and control the park and recreation
areas of the Borough, including rules that:
A. Purpose. These regulations are established to govern the conduct of
members of the public in the parks and to protect Borough property.
B. Interpretation. Whenever consistent with the context of this chapter,
words in the present, past or future tenses shall be construed to be
interchangeable with each other, words in the singular number shall be
construed to include the plural and words of gender shall apply to all
genders.
A. Clarify, interpret or apply this chapter.
B. Regulate the use of parks.
C. Regulate conduct in parks.
D. Designate restricted areas in parks.
E. Regulate recreation programs.
F. Establish times for opening and closing of any particular park or park
facility to public use and/or for entry or use by vehicles.
G. Restrict and/or prohibit the use of any bicycle, skateboard, rollerskate,
coaster or other similar device in any park or part of a park. This
prohibition shall not apply to wheeled equipment by a person with a
disability, who uses such wheeled equipment in order to be ambulatory.
It is Borough policy that restrictions or prohibitions on the use of
recreational equipment on a surface that is paved or improved for
travel be imposed only to the extent appropriate to preserve the park
from damage and/or avoid impairing the use and enjoyment of the park
by others. Bicycles are permitted within the areas designated by the
Manager.
H. Impose a speed limit on use of any or all park paths, trails and walks,
improved or unimproved. Such speed limit may apply to pedestrians
and/or those persons using rollerskates, skateboards, coasters,
bicycles, carts or any similar device or conveyance.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-7
1:183
§ 132-7. Permit system.
A. Establishment of permit system. The Manager may establish a permit
system and require a permit for:
(1) Reserving any room or part of a community center, play or athletic
field, pavilion, picnic facility or other defined area of a park for a
certain time or series of times and granting the exclusive use
thereof during the time reserved.
(2) Posting any signs, posters or notices, placing or erecting any
structure or obstruction of any kind within a park, whether
temporary or permanent, engaging in any competitions involving a
vehicle, boat or aircraft, or launching or landing aircraft, rockets or
other airborne conveyance or cutting or removing any tree or plant
material.
(3) Making any improvement to or in a park or construction a public
work.
(4) Conducting a commercial activity, using any outdoor electrical
power outlet, laying cables or extending wires in or over a park or
using any park or facility during the hours it is closed to the public.
(5) Making any use of a park or recreational facility for an event that
differs in kind from the use and enjoyment of the park or
recreational facilities by the general public of the premises.
B. Permit exemptions. No permit is required of Borough employees acting
in the scope and course of their official duties. Exemptions may be
made for abutting owners, who maintain park boulevards, with respect
to the area maintained, for concessionaires as to the area under
concession and as to governmental officials acting under authority of
law.
C. Permit fees and refunds. Issuance of a permit shall be subject to
payment of such fees or charges as may be established, from time to
time, by ordinance or resolution of the Council. The Manager is
authorized to make refunds of fees upon timely cancellation of an event
or activity and to return all or any portion of any security deposit when
no longer needed or after costs that may be charged against the permit
have been paid.
D. Permitted signs. A permit for an event may authorize the placing of
temporary signs, posters or notices reasonably related thereto. All
permits shall be wholly of a temporary nature, shall vest no permanent
right and may be revoked upon 10 days' notice or, if the permit so
states, upon shorter notice.
E. Permit terms and conditions. The Manager may impose such terms and
conditions on the issuance of any permit as he or she deems
appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and/
§ 132-7 WILSON CODE § 132-7
1:184
§ 132-8. Prohibited activities.
The following are violations of this chapter and subject the violator to park
exclusion pursuant to § 132-9, and to the penalties set forth in § 132-11:
or the park, to avoid or limit unnecessary interference with other
uses or users of the park, to minimize disturbance of the surrounding
neighborhood and to require the user to leave the area under permit
in a condition after the activity or event as it was beforehand. For this
purpose, the Manager may require the user to furnish public liability
and property insurance, naming the Borough as an additional insured,
in such amounts as reasonably necessary to provide recompense for
personal injury or death or property damage to a member of the public
as a result of the event or activity, execute an indemnity and/or hold
harmless agreement and/or make a reasonable security deposit or
provide a bond. The terms and conditions of a permit (including
providing insurance and/or security deposit) shall not infringe upon
rights of petition, assembly or free expression protected by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution and/or provisions of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If an applicant
asserts that a term or condition proposed by the Manager infringes
upon a constitutional right, the Manager shall have the burden of
showing that the proposed term or condition is a reasonable restriction
on the time, place and manner of exercising the right and is valid.
F. No person under the age of 18 shall be issued a permit.
G. The Manager shall take the following additional considerations into
account in considering permit requests to fairly determine as to
whether a permit should be issued hereunder and may require the
requester to complete a special event application to aid in its
determination:
(1) The size and purpose for which the park is normally used.
(2) The location of the park and the area surrounding it.
(3) The facilities available to accommodate the intended use.
A. The posting of signs, posters and notices, including the use, placement
or erection of any signboard, sign billboard, bulletin board, post, pole or
device of any kind for advertising or notification in any park or to attach
any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, railing,
post or structure within any park, except as may be expressly permitted
by the Manager.
B. The distribution of handbills, including the distribution of any handbills,
circulars or signs in any park in any manner that interferes with or
obstructs the normal passage of people in vehicles.
C. Except for duly authorized Department or other Borough employees in
the performance of their official duties or other persons duly authorized
§ 132-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:185
pursuant to law, the following regarding any "no trespassing" areas;
"authorized personnel only" areas; "no admittance" areas; "keep off"
areas; removal or destruction of property; structures or obstruction:
(1) To enter or go upon any area which has been designated and
posted by or under the authority of the Manager as a "no
admittance," "no trespassing," "authorized personnel only" or
"keep off" area for the purpose of protecting such area or person or
other property from potential harm.
(2) To fail or refuse to leave, upon the request of any Borough
employee, any area no posted as "no admittance" or "no
trespassing" but which, because of weather or emergency
conditions, cannot be occupied or used without a risk, in the
opinion of the Director, of causing potential harm to such area or
persons or other property.
(3) To remove, mutilate, deface, damage or destroy any public notice,
structure, lawn, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence,
railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, geological formation, plant,
flower, lighting system, sprinkling system, gate, barricade or lock
or other property lawfully in any park or to remove rocks, sand, soil
or sod in any park.
(4) To place or erect in any park a structure or obstruction of any kind
without a permit from the Manager.
D. Animals shall be prohibited as follows:
(1) Except as expressly allowed in Subsection D(2), for any person to
allow or permit any animal in any park. This prohibition shall not
apply to:
(a) Any animal used by a person with a disability, including, but
not limited to, a Seeing Eye or Hearing Ear dog as a disability
aid.
(b) Animals used by public law enforcement agencies and under
control of a law enforcement officer.
(c) Wildlife.
(2) Horses and domestic pets are permitted within the areas
designated by the Manager under the following conditions:
(a) Any person who takes a horse or domestic pet into such areas
must have physical control of the animal and be responsible
and liable for the conduct of the animal.
(b) Domestic pets must be controlled by means of an adequate
leash.
§ 132-8 WILSON CODE § 132-8
1:186
(c) All domestic pets must be licensed and display valid license
tags and up-to-date rabies vaccination tags attached in
accordance with applicable law.
(d) Any person with a domestic pet in his or her possession or
under his or her control in such areas shall carry equipment for
removing feces and shall remove feces from such areas and
dispose of the same in a lawful and sanitary manner.
(3) The Manager is authorized to prohibit horses and domestic pets
within the areas designated in Subsection D(2) on a temporary or
permanent basis if in his or her opinion it is determined that such
closure is necessary for the preservation and protection of the
natural environment, public health or safety. Prior to closing such
areas, the Manager shall consult with the Director and the Parks
and Recreation Committee.
E. Wildlife and plants.
(1) Wildlife shall not be disturbed except for the duly authorized
Department or other Borough employees in the performance of
their official duties or other person duly authorized pursuant to law
to enter or go upon any areas or place in any park designated and
posted by the Manager or by appropriate state or federal agencies
as a game refuge, sanctuary or reserve (unless designated by the
Manager for entry) or to injure, molest or disturb any wildlife
thereon, its nests or strike any wildlife with any device or thing or
throw or otherwise propel any missile or other object at or in the
vicinity of any such wildlife. No person shall pursue, hunt, catch,
attempt to catch, strike, molest, wound or kill any bird, animal or
reptiles. No person shall use vehicle headlights or spotlights for the
purpose of viewing any animal after sunset when the park is not
open to the public.
(2) No person shall:
(a) Cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush or
shrub, or break or remove any branch, foliage, tree or shrub, or
pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or
grass, or chisel, drill or remove any natural stone deposit
except with the written permission from the Manager.
(b) Remove or cause to be removed or to dig any sod, earth,
humus, peat, boulder, rock, gravel or sand except with written
permission from the Manager.
(c) Hitch, tie, fasten, nail, anchor, screw, or otherwise attach any
wire, cable, chain, rope, card, sign, poster, advertisement,
notice, announcement, handbill, board, or other articles or
device to any post, tree, shrub, rock outcropping or structure
except in accordance with a special event permit issued by the
Manager.
§ 132-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:187
F. The use, possession, or discharge of any air pistol, air rifle, air gun, bow
and arrow, crossbows, slingshot or other device the purpose of which is
to propel an object away from the person using it, except at places and
times set aside by the Manager as safe for such activity and posted by
signs specifying the permitted activity.
G. Firearms: The use, possession or discharge of a firearm in any park,
except for law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
H. Fireworks: The use, possession or discharge of any fireworks in any
park, except at places and times permitted by the Council or Manager.
I. The hitting or driving of golf balls, except at places and times set aside
by the Manager as safe for such activity and posted by signs specifying
the permitted activity.
J. Urinating or defecating in any park, except in restroom facilities
specifically provided for that purpose.
K. Soliciting, including the solicitation of contributions for any purpose,
including charitable, education or scientific purpose in any park.
L. The sale of merchandise, including the sale or attempted sale of any
merchandise, liquid, edible or any other tangible or intangible things,
right, privilege or claim in any park without having an authorized
concession contract or use permit from the Manager.
M. The use of sound-amplifying devices, including the use of any public
address system, loudspeaker or other sound-amplifying device in any
park, except as permitted by the Manager for specific events and times
or except as necessary for the preservation of public peace or safety.
N. The use of drives, parkways, park boulevards, sidewalks, pathways, and
trails; speed limits and obstructions, including riding, propelling,
driving, or directing any vehicle over or through any park except along
and upon the park drives, in excess of 10 miles per hour where no speed
limit is posted or allowing or permitting any vehicle to obstruct any
park parkways and park boulevards or to do so at a speed in excess of
the posted speed limit, in any parkway, park boulevard, sidewalk,
pathway or trail.
O. Entry upon areas closed to general vehicular access, including the
driving or operating a vehicle in any park or in any area therein which is
designated and posted as being closed to general vehicular traffic
access, except for the duly authorized Department or other Borough
employees in the performance of their official duties.
P. Illegal drugs and controlled substances defined as follows:
(1) No person shall:
§ 132-8 WILSON CODE § 132-8
1:188
(a) Consume or possess any illegal drug, drug paraphernalia or
controlled substance while in or upon any property within a
park.
(b) Enter or remain within the park while under the influence of a
controlled substance as defined above, except those taken
pursuant to the lawful order of a doctor.
(2) All illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia or controlled substances in
any person's possession may be confiscated.
Q. Personal conduct, defined as follows. No person shall:
(1) Engage in any loud, fighting, threatening, violent, tumultuous or
abusive behavior or other disorderly conduct tending to create a
breach of peace, or to disturb or annoy others, while in or on any
property within a park.
(2) Use obscene language, or make an obscene gesture.
(3) Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor while in or on any
property within a park.
(4) Engage in any form of sexual activity.
(5) Appear in public in a manner that exposes his or her genitalia or
buttocks while in or on any property within a park.
(6) Smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other tobacco products within an
area of a park designated as "no smoking."
R. The use of metal detectors.
S. Testing vehicles, including the operating of a motor vehicle for the
purpose of testing it along or upon any park drive, parkway or park
boulevard.
T. The operation or use of any minibike, snowmobile, go-cart or all-terrain
vehicle in any park.
U. Except for duly authorized Department or other Borough employees or
emergency services personnel in the performance of their official
duties, no person shall act in contravention of the following regarding
the restrictions on uses of vehicles in a park, when the park is not open
to the public or otherwise:
(1) To drive or ride in or on any vehicle in any park when the park is not
open to the public or when the park, roadway or parking lot is, by
order of the Manager, closed to entry or use by vehicles except on a
street serving as necessary access through such park to a
residential or commercial area.
§ 132-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:189
(2) To park or leave a vehicle unattended in any park during hours
when the park is not open to the public or when the park, roadway
or parking lot is, by order of the Manager, closed to entry or use by
vehicles, except pursuant to a permit from the Manager. Vehicles
parked or left unattended in violation of this section are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be impounded in accordance
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., or similar law or laws providing for
impoundment with or without citation and without prior notice to
the owner.
(3) To park or leave a vehicle unattended in any areas designated as
"no parking," areas designated as being restricted to parking for a
particular purpose, or areas designated for loading and unloading.
(4) The prohibitions contained in this subsection shall not apply to a
vehicle driven or parked, as the case may be, by a person
participating in an activity either conducted by the Department or
conducted pursuant to the terms of a permit from the Department.
V. Engaging in competitions regarding any airborne or other craft without
obtaining a required permit in any park, including engaging in
conducting or holding any trials or competitions for speed, endurance,
hill climbing or similar competition involving any vehicle, boat or
aircraft whether or not such vehicle, boat or aircraft is designed for
carrying persons or to operate, launch or land any hangglider,
helicopter, hot-air balloon or other airborne conveyance, except
pursuant to a permit from the Manager and at specified places and
times designated for such activities by the Manager and upon his or her
determination that:
(1) Adequate provision has been made to ensure that the health and
safety of participants in and spectators of any such activity will not
be unduly endangered.
(2) Such activities will be conducted in such a manner as to minimize
potential damage to public or private property.
(3) Such activities will not constitute a public nuisance.
(4) Such activities will not unduly interfere with the use of park
facilities by the general public.
W. Acting in contravention of park operating hours, including the entering
or going upon, or a failing or refusing to leave any park when a park is
not open to the public. General park operating hours shall be between
sunrise and sunset.
X. Camping, including the camping in any park except pursuant to a
permit from the Manager.
§ 132-8 WILSON CODE § 132-8
1:190
Y. The consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage in any park
except pursuant to a permit from the Manager and, as applicable, the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. The Manager is authorized to issue
permits for the possession and consumption of beer and wine only, for
service in non-glass cups or similar containers, to organized groups
having a permit for the use of one or more pavilions.
Z. Littering or dumping, including the throwing or depositing any refuse
or other material in any park, except in receptacles designated for
deposit of trash by the public, or to take garbage or refuse to a park for
disposal in the park or to deposit garbage or refuse generated outside a
park in a receptacle within the park designated for deposit of trash by
the public.
AA. The igniting, maintaining or using of any fire or to participating in
igniting, maintaining or using any fire within any park except in a grill
or similar receptacle solely for cooking food or to ignite or to participate
in igniting any material or substance in any grill or similar receptacle
any material other than fuel for cooking food.
BB. The use of athletic fields and sports courts, except in the following
manner:
(1) To use any athletic field or sports court for any purpose not
designed or intended for such field or court except pursuant to a
permit from the Manager; provided, nevertheless, that athletic
fields may be used for any lawful purpose not otherwise prohibited
or restricted herein during such times and in such places that such
use does not interfere with the use of such field by others either:
(a) Having a permit from the Manager reserving the use of such
fields.
(b) Using such fields for their designed or intended use.
(2) It is the intention of this subsection to recognize that sports courts
have special surfaces that may be damaged by uses not intended
for such surfaces and that the open areas of athletic fields may be
used as general park and recreation areas but that such general
nonathletic uses shall be subordinate to the designed and intended
athletic use of such fields by persons wishing to occupy them for
such use.
CC. Entry upon areas reserved for others or scheduled for use by the
Department, including the failing or refusing to leave any areas which
have been:
(1) Reserved by permit from the Manager for the use of others upon
the request of any Borough employee or any person to whom such
permit has been issued.
§ 132-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:191
§ 132-9. Park exclusion.
§ 132-10. Discrimination prohibited.
(2) Scheduled for use by the Department when, in the opinion of the
Director, the exclusive use of such area by the Department is
necessary to reduce or prevent conflicting uses or activities of
others which may substantially interfere with such Department
use, upon the request of any Borough employee.
DD. Use without required permit: The use of a park or conducting of any
activity or holding an event in any park for which a permit is required
by this chapter or any rules or regulations enacted pursuant hereto,
without first obtaining a permit from the Manager.
A. The Director may, by causing the delivery of an exclusion notice in
person to the offender by any Borough employee, exclude for a period
not to exceed 72 hours from any park anyone who within a park:
(1) Violates any provision of this chapter.
(2) Violates any park rule adopted pursuant to § 132-6 hereof.
(3) Violates any other provision of the Borough Code, Borough
ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The offender need not be charged, tried or convicted of any violation in
order for an exclusion notice to be issued or effective. The exclusion
may be based upon observation by the Director, Department or other
Borough employees or upon the sort of civilian reports that would
ordinarily be relied upon by police officers in the determination of
probable cause.
A. It is the policy of the Borough, in the exercise of its police powers for
the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare and for
the maintenance of peace and good government, to assure equal
opportunity for full enjoyment and use of park facilities to all persons,
free from restrictions because of race, color, sex, marital status, sexual
orientation, gender identity, political ideology or affiliation, age, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin or disability as defined by state or
federal law.
B. It is a violation of this chapter for any person occupying or using any
park or recreation facility for any event, activity or exhibition open to
the public, whether or not under a permit and whether or not an
admission or entrance fee is charged, to deny to any other person the
full use and enjoyment of such park and recreation facility because of
race, creed, color, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, political ideology or affiliation, age, religion, ancestry, national
origin or disability as defined by state or federal law. In addition to
other sanctions, any permit issued hereunder to any person who is in
violation of this section may be canceled and after notice and hearing,
§ 132-8 WILSON CODE § 132-10
1:192
§ 132-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The rules and regulations contained in this chapter may be enforced by the
Manager and authorized agents of the Manager, who may include, without
limitation, the Chief of Police of the Borough and his or her subordinate
officers, animal control officers and duly authorized Department or other
Borough employees in the performance of their official duties.
Chapter 133
PEST CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds, and debris — See Ch. 80. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
§ 133-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of Wilson Borough or any
officer or authorized representative thereof.
ERADICATION — The elimination of rodents or insects and other pest
life from any building, lot or premises through the use of traps, baiting,
fumigation or any other method of extermination approved by the Board of
the Manager may order that such person shall not be eligible for any
similar permit for access to, or use of, a park and/or recreation facility
for a period up to three years.
C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the exercise of constitutional
liberties or the use of a bona fide qualification or restriction that does
not infringe upon civil rights or civil liberties recognized by federal or
state law or Borough Ordinance.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction therefor in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a
fine or penalty to the Borough as follows:
(1) For a first offense, the sum of $100 plus costs.
(2) For a second offense, the sum of $300 plus costs.
(3) For a third offense, the sum of $600 plus costs.
(4) For all subsequent offenses, the sum of $1,000 plus costs.
B. In default of payment of said fine or penalty, such person shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:193
Health and subject to applicable laws relating to poisonous substances and
fumigants.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents, insects or other pest life.
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot or
premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation; the agent or
occupant of a building, lot or premises; or any person who has the use or
custody of the same or any part thereof, whether an individual, partnership
or corporation.
RATPROOFING — The treatment or shielding, with material impervious
to rodent gnawing, of all actual or potential openings in the exterior and
interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, foundations, basements,
sidewalk gratings and other places that may be reached by rodents from the
ground or by climbing or burrowing.
§ 133-2. Elimination of harborages.
§ 133-3. Prohibited conditions; rat-eradication measures.
A. All buildings, lots or premises within the corporate limits of Wilson
Borough shall be kept free from any condition conducive to rodent,
insect and other pest life. The person in control shall not allow the
accumulation of automobiles or trucks without current license plates or
a current inspection sticker, garbage, refuse or any material which may
afford harborage or provide food for rodents, insects or other pest life.
B. Whenever conditions inside or under unoccupied buildings provide
extensive harborage for rats, the Health Officer is empowered, if said
conditions are not corrected within a period of 60 days after written
notification to the owner, to institute condemnation and demolition
proceedings. The cost of such proceedings is to be borne by the owner.
A. No person in control shall feed wild birds other than in suitable,
properly shielded containers for the food, installed in such a manner as
to be inaccessible to rodents and to prevent the scattering of food on
the ground.
B. No person shall place food in the open for feeding any animal except in
a container which will prevent the scattering of food upon the ground.
Unconsumed food shall not be allowed to remain where it is accessible
to rodents, insects or other pest life.
C. Garbage and waste material shall be placed in nonleaking containers
made of metal, plastic or other durable material, with tight-fitting lids
and stored in such a manner as not to create an attraction or harborage
for rodents, insects or other pest life. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
D. When the Health Officer notifies the occupant or occupants of a
building in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation on the
§ 133-1 WILSON CODE § 133-3
1:194
§ 133-4. Continuous eradication measures; building demolition.
§ 133-5. Rodentproofing requirements.
§ 133-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
premises, the said occupant or occupants shall immediately institute
rat-eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such
measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises is declared by the
Health Officer to be free of rat infestation. Unless said measures are
undertaken within five days after receipt of notice, it shall be construed
as a violation of the provisions of this chapter and the occupant shall be
held responsible therefor.
A. When any building, lot or premises is subject to infestation by rodents,
insects or other pest life, the person in control shall apply continuous or
repeated eradication measures, as required by the Board of Health,
until there is no evidence of infestation remaining.
B. No building shall be demolished until the Board of Health certifies to
the Borough of Wilson that the building and premises are free from the
infestation of rodents, insects or other pest life.
A. Whenever conditions inside, outside or under a building or on any lot or
premises provide harborage for rodents, the Board of Health may
require any one or more buildings to be rodentproofed.
B. The person in control of a building or premises required to be
rodentproofed shall maintain the rodentproofing in good repair. No
person shall injure the rodentproofing. When the rodentproofing is
injured in making alterations, installations, additions or repairs to the
building, the person in control shall restore the rodentproofing in good
condition.
§ 133-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-6
1:195
Chapter 136
(RESERVED)
Chapter 138
POOLROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of entertainment and
businesses — See Ch. 96.
§ 138-1. License required; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firms or corporations,
whether principal or agent, to operate billiard or pool rooms or to offer the
use of billiard or pool rooms to the public without first obtaining a license
and paying a fee of $5, per table per year, not to exceed $25 per year.
§ 138-2. Hours of operation; age of patrons. [Amended 4-12-2004
by Ord. No. 712]
It shall be unlawful for a licensed keeper, proprietor, owner or
superintendent of any public poolroom or billiard room located within the
Borough of Wilson to permit such place to remain open between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
§ 138-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before any District Justice in the County of Northampton, be
fined not more than $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, or be
imprisoned not exceeding 30 days if the amount of the fine and costs are not
paid. Each day on which any person violates any provisions of this chapter
may be considered as a separate offense and punishable as such.
Chapter 138A
PROPERTY, FORECLOSED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 104.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Graffiti — See Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
§ 133-6 WILSON CODE § 138-3
1:196
§ 138A-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Borough to establish a process to
address the deterioration and blight of Borough neighborhoods caused by
an increasing amount of foreclosed or abandoned, real property located
within the Borough, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number
of abandoned properties located within the Borough. It is the Borough's
further intent to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect
neighborhoods from becoming blighted due to lack of adequate
maintenance and security of foreclosed and abandoned properties.
§ 138A-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any real property in the Borough that has
become both vacant and blighted.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property or structure that is
accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. or a
structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow
access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, the Borough's
Property Maintenance Code,36 the Borough's Building Code,37 the
Borough's Zoning Code,38 the Borough's Code of Ordinances ("Borough
Code"), and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.39
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any building official, zoning officer, code
enforcement officer, building inspector, fire inspector, law enforcement
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Borough Codes;
or
B.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the Borough Codes.
C.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Property Maintenance.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86A, Uniform Construction Codes.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
39.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 138-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138A-2
1:197
officer, or other person authorized by the Borough to enforce the applicable
code(s).
FORECLOSED PROPERTY — Any real property located in the Borough,
whether vacant or occupied that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on the property,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is subject to
an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessors lien sale, or has
been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "foreclosed" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A property manager, property
maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the management
and/or maintenance of real property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building or structure that is not legally
occupied.
§ 138A-3. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the Borough above and beyond any other state, county
or local provisions for same.
§ 138A-4. Establishment of Registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 138A-5, the Borough or designee shall
establish a registry cataloging each foreclosed or abandoned property
within the Borough, containing the information required by this chapter.
§ 138A-5. Registration of foreclosed or abandoned real property.
A. Upon default by the mortgagor of the mortgage on any real property
located within the Borough of Wilson, the mortgagee (lender) who holds
such mortgage shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy. The mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the
inspection, register the property with the Codes Department, or its
designee, on forms or a website provided by the Borough, and indicate
whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is
required for each property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in mortgage default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until:
(1) The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
§ 138A-2 WILSON CODE § 138A-5
1:198
(2) The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at
which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall,
within 10 days of that inspection, update the property registration
to a vacancy status on forms or website access provided by the
Borough.
C. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
D. This section shall also apply to properties that have been identified by
the Codes Department as being vacant and abandoned, through the
investigation of code violations or blighted conditions on such
properties.
E. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
property owner, the mortgagee and the foreclosure process server or
attorney; the direct mailing address of the owner, the mortgagee and
the server or attorney; a direct contact name and telephone number for
all parties; facsimile number and e-mail address for all parties; the
Northampton County tax parcel identification number of the property;
and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of any
property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property.
(1) If the property is vacant, the front door of the property shall be
posted legibly and clearly with the name and twenty-four-hour
contact telephone of the owner, mortgagee or designated local
agent. The posting shall contain the following language:
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY:
TO REPORT ANY PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS, CALL:
F. A nonrefundable annual registration fee shall accompany the
registration form or website registration, the amount of which shall be
set by resolution as part of the Borough's fee schedule. The annual
registration fee shall be valid for one calendar year and shall be due on
the date of registration and every year thereafter until such property
becomes legally occupied.
G. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, server,
trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees will not be accepted
without the prior consent of the Borough and/or its authorized
designee.
H. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
Once the property is no longer in foreclosure or is sold to a person or
entity other than the mortgagee, the mortgagee must provide proof of
§ 138A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138A-5
1:199
§ 138A-6. Maintenance requirements.
sale or written notice of termination of the foreclosure proceeding to
the Borough.
I. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
J. Failure of any mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this chapter is a violation of the Chapter
and shall be subject to enforcement.
K. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this chapter, the Borough may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be compliant with all applicable
Borough codes. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly
maintain the property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s)
and issuance of a citation or notice of violation. Pursuant to a finding
and determination by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, District
Magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Borough may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance.
B. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of trash, junk, or
debris; building materials; unlicensed or junk vehicles; any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, printed material or
notices, except those required by federal, state or local law; discarded
personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, and
appliances; and any other items that give the appearance that the
property is abandoned.
C. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
D. Yard and/or landscape maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or
landscape. All sidewalks adjoining the property shall be kept clear of
snow and ice.
E. Yard and/or landscape material shall include, but not be limited to,
grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for
residential installation. Acceptable yard and/or landscape material shall
not include weeds, fallen trees or branches, gravel, broken concrete,
asphalt or similar material.
§ 138A-5 WILSON CODE § 138A-6
1:200
§ 138A-7. Security requirements.
§ 138A-8. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which, pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Borough
of Wilson.
§ 138A-9. Violations and penalties; schedule of civil penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter may by cited
and fined as provided in § 139-1 of the Wilson Borough Code of Ordinances.
The following table shows violations of these sections, as may be amended
from time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this
regulation; and the dollar amount of civil penalty for the violation of these
sections as it may be amended. The descriptions of violations below are for
informational purposes only and are not meant to limit or define the nature
of the violations or subject matter of the Borough Code sections, except to
the extent that different types of violations of the Code section may carry
different civil penalties. For each Code section listed in the schedule of civil
penalties, the entirety of the section may be enforced by the mechanism
provided in this section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed
or required are described in the "Description of Violation" column. To
determine whether a particular activity is prescribed or required by this
code, the relevant Borough Code section(s) shall be examined.
F. Pools, spas and other bodies of water, including ponds, shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. Pools
and spas shall be secured in accordance with Borough code.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a person to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a person to access the interior of the property or structure must
be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the
window, not by placement of wood or other material.
C. If the mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become
vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into
compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must
perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements
of this chapter, and any other applicable laws.
§ 138A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138A-9
1:201
Description of Violation Civil Penalty
Failure to register abandoned or
foreclosed real property on an
annual basis and/or any violation of
the sections stated within
$500
§ 138A-10. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any person, legal entity or
agent from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which
may apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of title to the property,
the owner shall be responsible for all violations of the applicable code(s)
and the owner shall be responsible for meeting with the Borough's Code
Department within 45 days for a final inspection report.
§ 138A-11. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement office or any person
authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided
in this chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or
a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 138A-12. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Borough to enforce
the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal
for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge
of duties imposed by this chapter.
§ 138A-13. Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect or impair any of the remaining portions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Wilson Borough
Council that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
Chapter 139
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 104.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 140.
§ 138A-9 WILSON CODE § 138A-13
1:202
§ 139-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 3-26-2007 by Ord. No.
738, approved 3-26-2007]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary of the Borough of Wilson, 2040 Hay Terrace, Wilson
Borough, Pennsylvania 18042, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code and each sequential update or
revision as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Wilson, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 139-2 of this chapter.
§ 139-2. Modifications to standards.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. In Section 101.1, insert "Borough of Wilson, Northampton County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania."
B. In Section 103, change the heading to "Department of Code
Administration."
C. In Section 103.1, change to read: The office of Code Administration
shall be in charge of the enforcement of this Code. The Code
Administrator appointed by Borough Council shall be known herein as
the Code Official."
D. In Section 103.2, delete it in its entirety.
E. In Section 103.3, delete it in its entirety.
F. In Section 106.3, change "misdemeanor" to a "summary offense."
G. In Section 107.5, after the heading, change to read: "It shall be unlawful
for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a
compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to
sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee or transferee, a true copy of any compliance order
or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the
Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee or
transferee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such
§ 138A-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-2
1:203
§ 139-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 139-4. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any right acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed
as cited in § 139-4 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right of remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 139-5. Fee schedule.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Borough in carrying
out the provisions of the Code as referenced in Section 103.6, shall be as
indicated in the following schedule:
Type Fee
Each dwelling unit to be inspected $50
Each commercial or industrial uses under 5,000 square
feet to be inspected per building
$75
Each commercial or industrial uses over 5,000 square
feet to be inspected per building
$150
Certificate of occupancy $25
compliance order or notice of violation or as may otherwise be required
by other ordinances relative to the sale or transfer or real estate."
H. In Section 110.3, change the word "shall" to "may."
I. In Section 111.25, delete it in its entirety.
J. In Section 111.7, after the heading, change to read: "Any person,
whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to
appeal the decision of the Board pursuant to the Local Agency Law40"
K. In Section 303.14, insert "March 16 to October 14."
L. In Section 602.3, insert "October 15 to March 15."
M. In Section 602.4, insert "October 15 to March 15."
40.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 139-2 WILSON CODE § 139-5
1:204
Chapter 140
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114. Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
§ 140-1. Abandonment without removing door prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall leave or permit to remain at any place
out-of-doors within the Borough of Wilson or within any building accessible
to children and under the control of such person, firm or corporation any
abandoned, discarded or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other container
having any door or lid to which is attached a lock or latching device of
any kind which cannot be released from inside such box, refrigerator or
other container by the application of pressure from within such icebox,
refrigerator or other container, unless the door or lid thereof shall have
been removed.
§ 140-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 142
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 74.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 114.
Noise — See Ch. 130.
Pest control — See Ch. 133.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 139-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:205

ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 604, approved 3-23-1987]
§ 142-1. Certified list of renters required.
Effective as of the effective date of this article, every owner of real estate
in Wilson Borough who rents or leases any parcel thereof; in whole or in
part, to any other person or entity, shall make one filing with the Borough
Secretary at the Municipal Building, 20th and Hay Terrace, Wilson Borough,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, of a written certified list of all persons
or entities who presently rent or lease real estate from said owner. Said
list shall include the names and addresses of all such persons or entities
and shall be filed with the Borough Secretary to be received no later than
June 1, 1987. In addition to the requirement of the aforesaid filing, every
such owner of real estate shall file a separate, certified written list with the
Borough Secretary within 30 days of the date of any additional person or
entity so renting or leasing the subject premises.
§ 142-2. Persons paying minimal or no rent to be included.
For the purposes of this article, the fact that an owner of real estate rents
or leases any property for minimal or no rent to another person or entity
shall not excuse said owner from the filing of the certified lists required in
§ 142-1 hereof.
§ 142-3. Violations and penalties.
Every owner of real estate who fails to so comply with the requirements of
this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary offense and be
liable for a fine not exceeding $300 and, in default thereof, imprisonment
not exceeding 10 days in the Northampton County Prison. For the purposes
of this article, every day that an owner of real estate is late in filing said
certified written lists, as required above, shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:207

ARTICLE II
Licensing and Inspection
[Adopted 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 741, approved 6-23-2008]
§ 142-4. Purposes and findings.
§ 142-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings. If a term is not defined in this section, but is defined in the
Borough Uniform Construction Code,42 then that definition shall apply to
this article. If a term is not defined in any of those codes, but is defined in
A. Purposes. This article is intended to serve the following purposes:
(1) To assist the Borough of Wilson (the "Borough") in protecting and
promoting the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;
(2) To establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants
relating to the rental of certain residential units in the Borough of
Wilson and to seek that owners and occupants properly maintain
rental housing within the Borough;
(3) To ensure that owners, managers and occupants share
responsibilities to comply with codes, to prevent overcrowding and
to avoid nuisances for neighboring residents; and
(4) To provide for a system of inspections; issuance and renewal of
licenses; and establish penalties for violations.
B. Findings. In considering the adoption of this article, the Borough of
Wilson makes the following findings:
(1) This article is enacted under the authority of the Borough Code of
Pennsylvania.41
(2) There is a greater incidence and greater severity of violations of
various codes of the Borough at rental residential properties than
at owner-occupied residential properties.
(3) There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and
upkeep of rental residential properties than at owner-occupied
residential properties.
(4) There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood at rental residential
properties than at owner-occupied residential properties.
(5) A systematic inspection process can avoid life-threatening
problems, such as a lack of functioning smoke detectors.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86A, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:209
the Borough Zoning Code,43 then the definition in such code shall apply to
this article.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS DAYS — Days in which the offices of the Borough of Wilson are
open for public business.
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in and for
the Borough of Wilson concerning fitness for habitation or the construction,
maintenance, operation, occupancy, use, vermin or rodent control, or public
health matters of any premises or dwelling unit. This shall include, but
not be limited to, the Borough existing Uniform Construction Code,44 the
International Existing Building Code (IEBC), the National Electrical Code
(NEC), the International Residential Code (IRC), the International Building
Code (IBC), the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), solid
waste and water ordinances, public health ordinances, and noise control
ordinances.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having the duty to enforce this article, the aforementioned codes
and similar codes of the Borough of Wilson, and any assistants or deputies
thereof.
COMMON AREA — In multiunit buildings, space which is not part of an
individual regulated rental unit and which is shared among occupants of the
dwellings. Common areas shall be considered as part of the premises for
purposes of this article.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT —
A form of conduct, action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused or
permitted by an occupant or guest of a regulated rental unit that:
Is a violation of ordinances of the Borough of Wilson and that is
so loud, untimely as to time of the day, offensive and/or nuisancecausing
that it unreasonably interferes with the peaceful enjoyment
by other persons of their premises or causes damage to property
that is owned by others;
(1)
Involves music or noise that is disruptive to persons occupying a
different dwelling unit;
(2)
Involves music that is audible from a street, sidewalk or dwelling
from a minimum distance of 50 feet away from the premises where
the sound is originating;
(3)
(4) Is the subject of a criminal citation for disorderly conduct; or
Is the subject of a criminal citation under the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code45 or the Pennsylvania Liquor Code.46
(5)
A.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch . 86A, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 142-5 WILSON CODE § 142-5
1:210
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
that is completed by a police officer or Borough Code Enforcement Officer
who investigated the matter.
DWELLING — A building including one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential living area for one household that is used
for living and sleeping purposes and that has its own cooking facilities and
a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub and/or shower.
GUEST — A person on the premises of a regulated rental unit with the
actual or implied consent of an occupant.
LANDLORD — This term shall have the same meaning as "owner."
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit under this article. The manager shall be the agent of the owner
for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the
obligation of the owner under this article and under rental agreements with
occupants.
MULTIUNIT BUILDING — A building containing two or more dwelling units
that are not completely separated from each other by vertical party walls.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit.
OWNER — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all
or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including but not limited to a mortgage holder who is in possession of a
regulated rental unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which at least
one owner of record of the property resides as his/her primary dwelling.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.
POLICE — Sworn law enforcement officers of the Police Department of the
Borough of Wilson or the Pennsylvania State Police.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in the Borough, including the land
and all buildings and structures, on which one or more regulated rental unit
is located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit or rooming house unit that
is occupied for residential purposes and that is not an owner-occupied
dwelling unit and exempted by this article from needing a residential rental
license. A college fraternity or sorority used for residential purposes shall
In order for such disruptive conduct to constitute an offense under this
article, a written report must be issued by a sworn police officer or
a Borough Code Enforcement Officer and notice must be sent to an
occupant and the owner or manager.
B.
45.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
46.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 142-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:211
be considered a regulated rental unit, unless it is within a dormitory that is
owned by a college.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement or other legally enforceable
agreement between owner and tenant, which is required to be
supplemented by the addendum47 provided in this article, embodying the
terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a specified
regulated rental unit.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE — The license issued to the owner of
regulated rental units under this article which is required in order to
lawfully rent and occupy regulated rental units. Until a rental unit has
been inspected and a certificate of occupancy issued, the residential rental
license shall be considered a residential rental registration.
ROOMING HOUSE UNIT — A living unit that does not meet the definition
of a dwelling unit and that is not within a Borough-permitted hotel or bedand-
breakfast inn.
TENANT — An occupant of a regulated rental unit with whom a legal
relationship with the owner is established by a lease or other enforceable
agreement under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
UNRELATED PERSONS — Two or more persons who reside in a dwelling
unit and who are not related to each other through blood, adoption,
marriage or formal foster relationship. A person who is only related as a
cousin shall be considered unrelated for the purposes of this article. The
term "related" shall be restricted to the following relationships: spouse,
parent, child, sister, brother, grandchild, great-grandchild, grandparent,
great-grandparent, aunt, uncle, or any of these same relationships in a step
or in-law situation.
§ 142-6. Duties of owner; enforcement of codes; repairs made by
Borough.
A. General.
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all
regulated rental units in compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code,48 as amended, and to keep such property in good and safe
condition.
(2) As provided for in this article, every owner shall be responsible for
regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every
dwelling which he, she or it owns. Every owner shall be responsible
to act to minimize disruptive conduct on the premises by the
occupants of regulated rental units through the rental contract and
through its enforcement of leases.
47.Editor's Note: The Required Addendum to Residential Rental Agreement is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86A, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 142-5 WILSON CODE § 142-6
1:212
(3) A residential rental license is required by § 142-8 for each
regulated rental unit. If a valid license has not been issued within
the timeframe established by this article, or the license has been
suspended or revoked, then the rental unit shall not be rented for
residential use. If a regulated rental unit is rented for residential
use without a valid residential rental license, such action shall be a
violation of this article.
(4) This article shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in
any way, the responsibility of occupants or their guests for their
conduct or activity; nor shall it be construed as an assignment,
transfer or projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility
or liability which occupants or their guests may have as a result of
their conduct or activity under any private cause of action, civil or
criminal enforcement proceeding, or criminal law; nor shall this
article be construed so as to require an owner to indemnify or
defend occupants or their guests when any such action or
proceeding is brought against the occupant based upon the
occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to
impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners other
than that which is imposed by existing law.
(5) This article is not intended, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the Borough
against an owner, occupant or guest thereof.
(6) The owner and/or owner's agent shall accompany the Code
Enforcement Officer in all scheduled inspections at the property
conducted under this program.
B. Designation of manager.
(1) If the owner is not a full-time resident of the Borough of Wilson nor
resides within a twenty-mile radius of the Borough of Wilson, then
the owner shall designate a person to serve as manager who does
reside or work on a daily basis within a twenty-mile radius of the
Borough of Wilson. If the owner is a corporation, a separate
manager shall be appointed, unless an officer of the corporation is
appointed as the manager and such officer lives within a twentymile
radius of the Borough of Wilson. If the owner is a partnership,
a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside within a
twenty-mile radius of the Borough of Wilson. Said partner shall
perform the same function as a manager. The manager shall be the
agent of the owner for service of process and receiving of notices
and demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the
owner under this article and under rental agreements with
occupants.
(2) The legal name, mailing address, daytime physical address (not a
post office box) and daytime and evening telephone number(s) of a
person who is designated as the manager shall be provided, in
§ 142-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-6
1:213
writing, by the owner to the Borough, and such information shall
be kept current and updated within five business days after it
changes.
(3) The manager shall be authorized to accept service of process on
behalf of the owner.
(4) In addition, an owner may designate an agent to serve all of the
same purposes of the owner. If an Agent is designated, then the
Borough is not required to provide separate notice to the owner.
C. Disclosure. The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in
writing, on or before the commencement of the tenancy: the name,
address and telephone number of the manager; or the name, address
and telephone number of the owner of the premises if a manager is not
required to be designated.
D. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
International Property Maintenance Code/2006, as amended, and
shall regularly perform all routine maintenance, including lawn
mowing and ice and snow removal, and shall promptly make any
and all repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.
(2) However, the owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is
to perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or
remodeling, if such responsibilities are established in writing. Such
an agreement may be entered into between the owner and
occupant only if entered into in good faith and not for the purpose
of evading the obligations of the owner or occupant.
(3) The existence of an agreement between owner and occupant shall
not relieve an owner of any responsibility under this article or other
Borough codes for proper repair and maintenance of a building or
premises.
E. Rental agreement and addendum.
(1) All rental agreements for regulated rental units shall be in writing
or otherwise legally enforceable.
(2) The owner and occupant shall not include text in a rental
agreement that is contrary to the provisions of this article.
(3) Addendum to rental agreement. After the effective date of this
article, an addendum to each rental agreement for regulated rental
units shall be provided by the owner to the occupant before a rental
agreement is presented for signing by an occupant. The text of the
Addendum shall be consistent with Appendix A,49 unless an
49.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Required Addendum to Residential Rental Agreement, is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 142-6 WILSON CODE § 142-6
1:214
alternative version is preapproved by a Code Enforcement Officer.
The owner shall secure a written acknowledgment from the
occupants that the occupants have received the addendum. Upon
oral or written request by the Borough of Wilson, the owner, within
10 days of the request, shall furnish to the Borough copies of the
acknowledgment that the occupants received the addendum.
F. The owner and occupants shall comply with all provisions of the
Pennsylvania Landlord-Tenant Act.50
G. Common areas. The owner shall be responsible to minimize disruptive
conduct by occupants and guests in any common area and the premises
and to maintain proper physical conditions in such areas. The owner
shall be required to ensure that common areas and the outside
premises are in compliance with Borough codes.
H. Eviction. In the event that an occupant(s) of a regulated rental unit is
involved in a third disruptive conduct violation within any three year
period during which a residential rental license was required, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide a written statement to the owner or
his manager that the property shall be vacated. If the disruptive
conduct was caused by only one occupant, then the owner or his
manager officer shall limit the vacate order to that person. Occupants
shall be responsible to prevent their guests from engaging in disruptive
conduct on the premises. The owner shall begin eviction proceedings
within 15 days after receiving such statement and shall continue such
proceedings to completion, without interruption, unless the occupants
vacate the premises. Once an eviction is ordered, those occupant(s)
shall not be permitted to occupy any area on the same lot for a
minimum period of two years. In addition, once an eviction is ordered,
those occupant(s) shall not, for a minimum period of two years, be
permitted to occupy any dwelling unit or boarding/rooming house unit
that is owned by the same person or entity within the Borough of
Wilson.
(1) Failure of an owner to comply to vacate the premises shall result in
the suspension or revocation of the residential rental license and
shall be a violation of this article.
(2) This article shall not limit the ability of an owner to evict tenants in
compliance with state law for reasons other than violations of this
article.
(3) A requirement to evict occupants shall not apply if a successful
appeal is made to the Property Maintenance Board of Appeals, or if
the District Magistrate rules in the occupant's favor during eviction
proceedings, or where a court appeal or other legal action has been
filed that would lawfully prevent eviction.
50.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 142-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-6
1:215
§ 142-7. Duties of occupant.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a list of occupants
who were ordered to be evicted and the affected addresses. Such
list shall be maintained for a minimum of three years and shall be
available for public review.
I. Code violations. Upon receiving notice of any Code violations from the
Code Enforcement Officer, the owner shall take necessary action, or
cause such action to be taken, to eliminate the violation within the time
limit provided on the notice or citation.
J. Borough can make repairs.
(1) In case the owner of premises shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with any notice from the Borough or its Code Enforcement Officer
to correct a violation relating to maintenance and repair of the
premises under any Code within the period of time stated in such
notice, the Borough may cause the violation to be corrected. There
shall be imposed upon the owner a charge of the actual costs
involved, plus 25% of said costs or $50, whichever is greater, for
each time the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected. The
owner of the premises shall be billed after such work has been
completed. Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding
after the time specified therein for payment shall be grounds for
the imposition of interest and a municipal lien upon the premises as
provided by law. Such a lien may be reduced to judgment and
enforced and collected as provided by law, together with interest at
the legal rate, attorney's fees and court costs.
(2) The remedies provided by this subsection are not exclusive and the
Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may invoke such other
remedies available under this article or other applicable Codes,
ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate,
condemnation proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for
habitation; or suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the
residential rental license.
K. The owner or manager shall allow and schedule inspections by a Code
Enforcement Officer of the premises during Borough business hours
after a minimum of seven calendar days notice have been provided to
the owner or manager. The owner or manager shall provide a minimum
of three calendar days' advance notice to at least one adult occupant of
each rental unit of the time and date of the inspection. These advance
notice requirements shall not apply when the Code Enforcement Officer
has reason to believe that an imminent threat to public health and
safety may exist. See also § 142-8.
A. General.
§ 142-6 WILSON CODE § 142-7
1:216
(1) The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon
occupants by this article, all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough and all applicable provisions of state law.
(2) A regulated rental unit shall not be occupied by more than three
unrelated persons (as defined in § 142-5) unless specifically
permitted otherwise by the Borough Zoning Ordinance.51 A
regulated rental unit shall also comply with the occupancy limits of
other Borough codes.
B. Health regulations. Occupants shall collect and dispose of all rubbish,
garbage and other waste in a clean and sanitary manner and comply
with Borough solid waste and recycling regulations.
C. Illegal activities. Occupants shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit
guests on the premises to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under
any federal criminal statute, and/or under the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et
seq.), or the illegal sale or distribution of controlled substances under
the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S.
§ 780-101 et seq.), or their successor laws.
D. Disruptive conduct. (See definition in § 142-5.)
(1) Occupants shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit guests on
the premises to engage in, disruptive conduct or other violations of
the article.
(2) When police investigate an alleged incident of disruptive conduct,
the police officer shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a
finding that the reported incident did, in his or her judgment,
constitute disruptive conduct, as defined herein. The information
provided in this report shall include, if possible, the identity or
identities of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct
and the factual basis for the disruptive conduct.
(3) When a police officer issues a disruptive conduct report concerning
a regulated rental unit, a copy shall be provided by the police to the
Code Enforcement Officer, who shall maintain records of such
reports. The Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of the
disruptive conduct report to an occupant and the owner or
manager after his/her receipt of the report.
(4) A criminal or civil citation is not required in order for a disruptive
conduct report to be issued.
(5) If a citation is issued and successfully prosecuted or a guilty plea
entered before a District Justice, such citation may automatically
be considered a disruptive conduct report. However, if an appeal of
a citation is filed from a decision of a District Justice, the matter
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-7
1:217
§ 142-8. Licenses and inspections; fees.
shall not be deemed to constitute disruptive conduct unless a
finding of guilty is affirmed by a final decision on appeal.
E. Damage to premises. The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit nor tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises. Conduct
which results in damages in excess of $500 shall be considered
disruptive conduct under this article.
F. Inspection of premises. Occupants shall permit inspections by a Code
Enforcement Officer of the premises during Borough business hours
after receiving notice from the owner, manager or the Borough. See
also §§ 142-8 and 142-6.
A. License requirement.
(1) A residential rental license or proof of application shall be required
for all occupied regulated rental units. Not later than April 1 each
year the owner or his duly authorized agent shall be required to
apply for a license for each regulated rental unit. For a rooming
house, a single license is allowed for all units within a rooming
house building. A residential rental license shall not be issued or
renewed until: [Amended 2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 746, approved
2-23-2009]
(a) All overdue real estate taxes and business license, water,
sewage and garbage collection fees that are owed to the
Borough of Wilson or its authorities have been paid in full; and
(b) The owner has provided information concerning a manager, if
applicable, and has provided a list of names of occupants age
18 or older.
(2) The following shall not be considered regulated rental units for the
purposes of this article:
(a) Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than
two unrelated individuals, in addition to the owner and his/her
relatives, occupy the dwelling unit at any given time.
(b) Hotels and motels used for transient visitors to the area, but
without units that serve the same purposes as rooming house
units.
(c) Hospitals and state-licensed nursing homes and bed-andbreakfast
homes, as defined in the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance.52
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 142-7 WILSON CODE § 142-8
1:218
(d) One dwelling unit that is on the same lot as a second dwelling
unit, provided the two dwellings are only occupied by the
owner and persons who are related to the owner.
(e) On-campus dormitories owned by an accredited college or
university.
(3) The application for the license shall use a form provided by the
Borough.
(4) The owner or manager shall:
(a) Maintain a current list of all occupants age 18 or older in each
regulated rental unit, which shall include their name, address
and telephone number;
(b) Furnish such list to the Borough annually, in writing, with
license renewal of each year; and
(c) Notify the Borough, in writing, of any changes in the number or
names of occupants age 18 or older within 30 days after a
change.
B. Licenses and fees.
(1) Each residential rental license shall have an annual term and each
regulated rental unit shall be subject to a minimum of at least one
inspection every three years, based upon a schedule established by
the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
establish three geographic areas and require that regulated rental
units in each of those geographic areas be made available for
inspection in the designated year and then reinspected on a
schedule of one inspection every three years. The Borough is not
obligated to complete all inspections within this schedule. If the
Borough, through no fault of the owner, manager or tenant, was not
able to complete an inspection in a regulated rental unit in the
designated year, the Borough may inspect the unit in one or more
following years.
(2) The following time extensions shall apply for the requirements to
have a rental unit inspection, unless there is evidence of a possible
Code violation on the property. These time extensions shall only
apply after the first initial inspection and if the property has not
been subject of any Code enforcement actions (other than items
that were satisfactorily corrected within 30 days), and has no
outstanding taxes, fines or fees due to the Borough of Wilson or a
Borough Authority. If a regulated rental unit was inspected by the
Borough for Code compliance within the previous three years, then
an inspection under this article may be delayed to result in a
minimum of three years until the next inspection.
§ 142-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-8
1:219
(3) Upon application for a license and prior to issuance or renewal
thereof, each applicant shall pay to the Borough an annual license
and inspection fee.
(a) The annual fee for a residential rental unit shall be as stated in
the attached fee schedule.53 The fee for a calendar year shall
be paid by January 1 of each year. If the annual fee is not paid
by February 1, additional fees as stated in said fee schedule
shall apply. This fee is intended to cover the Borough's actual
costs for administering the program and for inspections and
related vehicle, office, administrative and overhead expenses.
(b) If a second inspection or subsequent inspection is needed for a
dwelling unit or rooming house unit because the unit was
found to be in violation of Borough codes during the initial
inspection or a license was previously revoked and
reinstatement applied for, then additional fees as stated in said
fee schedule shall apply.
(c) The fees provided in said fee schedule may be revised by
written resolution of Borough Council.
(d) A residential rental license shall not be issued or renewed if
the owner has not paid any fines and costs arising from
enforcement of this article or any codes of the Borough of
Wilson relating to land use and/or code enforcement or if any
licensing fees under this article are past due to the Borough.
(e) If a second or subsequent inspection is needed for a dwelling
unit or rooming house unit because the Code Enforcement
Officer was not able to enter the unit at the time that had been
scheduled with the owner or manager, then an additional fee
shall apply as stated in the attached fee schedule.
(4) A license or inspection by itself shall not warrant that a rental unit
is lawful, safe, habitable or in compliance with all Borough codes.
C. Inspection.
(1) Each regulated rental unit shall be subject to inspection by the
Code Enforcement Officer or another duly authorized agent of the
Borough under the schedule outlined in this article.
(2) Borough Code Enforcement Officers are the officials authorized to
enforce this article, and to take appropriate measures to abate
violations hereof, for and on behalf of the Borough of Wilson.
(3) This article shall not be construed as to limit the Code Enforcement
Officer's authority to conduct inspections or enforcement actions
under other Borough codes or to require that a property be made
53.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Rental License and Inspection Fees is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 142-8 WILSON CODE § 142-8
1:220
§ 142-9. Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
available for inspection whenever there is probable cause that a
violation of Borough codes may be present.
(4) To minimize disruption to occupants, owners and managers are
encouraged to ask to attempt to schedule inspections during times
when a rental unit is unoccupied between tenants.
D. Warrant. Within the limitations of federal and state law, a Code
Enforcement Officer may apply to a District Justice having jurisdiction
for an administrative search warrant to enter and inspect a regulated
rental unit and the premises. Such warrant is only required where
access to a regulated rental unit or common areas is denied to the Code
Enforcement Officer after a request.
A. General. A Code Enforcement Officer may initiate the following
enforcement actions against an owner for violating any provision of this
article that imposes a duty upon the owner and/or for failing to regulate
the breach of duties by occupants as provided for herein.
B. Responses to violations of this article and other Borough codes.
(1) Notice of violations. A Code Enforcement Officer shall provide
written notification of violations of Borough codes and require that
they be corrected within a reasonable maximum time period that
the Code Enforcement Officer establishes in the enforcement
notice.
(a) A Code Enforcement Officer may determine that the rental unit
is unfit for human habitation, in which case it shall be vacated
and remain vacated until such situation is corrected.
(b) For serious violations that do not require the property to be
immediately vacated, a Code Enforcement Officer may require
that the violations be corrected within 24 hours, or another
time period stated on the notice or citation.
(2) Nonrenewal. A Code Enforcement Officer shall delay or deny the
renewal of a residential rental license if there are outstanding
violations of Borough codes for that rental unit that have not been
corrected at the time of license renewal. If the violations are not a
threat to the safety of the occupants or other members of the
public, a Code Enforcement Officer shall permit the current
occupants to continue to reside in the premises for a reasonable
period of time established by a Code Enforcement Officer in the
notice of nonrenewal, with the time limit removed when the
violations of Borough codes are corrected. A Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a temporary license that is conditioned upon
certain actions being taken within a maximum time period.
§ 142-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:221
(3) Revocation. The immediate revocation of the license to rent a
regulated rental unit shall occur if a Code Enforcement Officer
determines that violations of Borough codes present a threat to the
safety of the occupants or other members of the public. Such
revocation shall occur until violations of Borough codes are
corrected and the property has been reinspected. Upon revocation,
the owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants and/or
to locate alternative housing for the occupants.
(4) Suspension. A Code Enforcement Officer may suspend the license
to rent a regulated rental unit if violations of Borough codes have
not been corrected within a time limit established by a Code
Enforcement Officer. Such suspension shall continue until such
time as a violation(s) of Borough codes is corrected.
(a) If the violations are not a threat to the safety of the occupants
or other members of the public, a Code Enforcement Officer
shall permit the current occupants to continue to reside in the
premises for a reasonable period of time established by a Code
Enforcement Officer in the notice of suspension.
(b) A Code Enforcement Officer may suspend the license to rent a
regulated rental unit if the owner or his/her designated
manager are not available or do not respond to contacts by a
Code Enforcement Officer, or if the name and contact
information for the owner or manager is no longer valid, or if
the manager no longer represents the owner.
(5) Reinstatement. A residential rental license shall be reinstated if the
owner of a regulated rental unit corrects the reason for the
revocation of the residential rental license and has paid the
residential rental license reinstatement fee.
C. Criteria for applying sanctions. The Code Enforcement Officer, when
deciding upon the sanctions provided in Subsection B above, shall
consider the following:
(1) The effect of the violation on the health and safety of occupants of
the regulated rental unit, other residents of the premises, and
neighboring residents.
(2) Whether the owner has prior violations of this Code and whether
those violations were satisfactorily corrected in a timely manner.
(3) The effect of sanctions upon the occupants, particularly when the
occupants did not cause the violation.
(4) The actions taken by the owner to remedy the violation and to
prevent future violations, including any written plan submitted by
the owner and good faith efforts of the owner to bring the property
into compliance.
§ 142-9 WILSON CODE § 142-9
1:222
D. In addition to enforcing sanctions set forth above, a Code Enforcement
Officer may establish reasonable conditions upon a residential rental
license that will fulfill the purposes of this article.
E. Grounds for imposing sanctions. Any of the following may subject an
owner to sanctions as provided for in this article:
(1) Failure to abate a violation of Borough codes and ordinances that
apply to the premises within the time directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by a Code
Enforcement Officer as required by this article.
(3) Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this article
by occupants of regulated rental units as required by this article.
(4) Failure to evict occupants after having been directed to do so by a
Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in this article.
F. Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.
Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation of a license exist, a Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
owner or manager of the action to be taken and the reason therefor.
Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner or
manager in question, and shall contain the following information:
(1) The address of the premises in question and identification of the
affected regulated rental unit(s).
(2) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(3) A statement that the license for said regulated rental unit(s) shall
be suspended, revoked or will not be renewed for the next license.
Time deadlines shall be provided in the notice. In the case of a
revocation, the notice shall state the date upon which such
revocation will commence.
(4) A statement that during the license nonrenewal or revocation, the
property shall not be rented for occupancy, except for any
temporary conditional license extension that a Code Enforcement
Officer may issue.
(5) Information regarding the appeal process.
G. Appeals.
(1) Any person affected by a decision, notice or order of a Code
Enforcement Officer under this article or any issuance of a
disruptive conduct report or any eviction order under this article
shall have the right to appeal to the Borough of Wilson Property
Maintenance Board of Appeals. An application for appeal may be
made when it is claimed that the provisions of this article have been
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:223
improperly applied or administered or that factual errors were
made by the Code Enforcement Officer, or for such other grounds
under this article as the applicant may allege. A written application
for appeal is required to be filed within 20 days after the day the
decision, report, notice or order was received or served. A fee of
$200 shall be paid in advance by the person requesting the hearing
for each appeal to the Property Maintenance Board of Appeals. If
the appeal is found in favor of the applicant, then such fee shall be
returned to the person or entity who paid it.
(2) The Property Maintenance Board of Appeals shall also hear all
appeals of enforcement matters under the Borough of Wilson
Existing Structures Code. The appeal provisions in such code are
hereby included by reference.
(3) The Property Maintenance Board of Appeals is hereby established
and shall consist of five members who are appointed by the Mayor
of Wilson, with confirmation required by Borough Council. No more
than two members shall be employees of the Borough of Wilson. A
minimum of one member shall own rental housing in the Borough
of Wilson. The members shall serve staggered three-year terms,
with at least one term ending each year.
(a) A minimum of three votes shall be needed for any action by the
Board, such as to delete a disruptive conduct report or to halt
an order for eviction. A two-to-two vote shall be considered to
have been no action, in which case the determination of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall stand.
(b) Two alternate members of the Property Maintenance Board of
Appeals may also be appointed by the Mayor, who may be
named by the Chairman of the Board to serve when regular
members are unable to serve.
(c) Decisions of the Property Maintenance Board of Appeals may
be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas, provided a notice
of appeal is filed, in writing, with the Borough's Solicitor's
office within 30 days after a party's receipt of the decision of
the Property Maintenance Board of Appeals.
(d) The Property Maintenance Board of Appeals shall have the
authority to elect its own officers and to establish and revise
bylaws for its own procedures, actions and meetings.
(e) Decisions of the Property Maintenance Board of Appeals shall
be provided, in writing, to the Code Enforcement Officer and to
the last known address of the owner, the manager, if
applicable, and the affected occupant within 10 days after the
conclusion of a hearing on a matter.
§ 142-9 WILSON CODE § 142-9
1:224
§ 142-10. Violations and penalties.
(f) Any compensation for the members of the Property
Maintenance Board of Appeals shall require approval by
Borough Council.
(g) A stenographic record is not required for meetings of the
Property Maintenance Board of Appeals. Minutes shall be
maintained and a tape recording of meetings may occur.
(4) Other boards. The Borough of Wilson Board of Health shall
continue to hear appeals concerning health regulations. The
Borough of Wilson Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to hear
appeals concerning the Zoning Ordinance.54 The Borough of Wilson
Code Board of Appeals shall continue to hear appeals as provided
in the existing codes.
H. Notifications.
(1) Notices of violations and license suspensions, revocations and
nonrenewals shall be sent to the owner, and manager if applicable,
by certified mail. In the event that the notice is returned by the
postal authorities marked "unclaimed" or "refused," then the Code
Enforcement Officer shall attempt delivery by personal service on
the owner, or manager, if applicable. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall also post the notice at a conspicuous place on the premises.
(2) The Borough shall not be responsible for failing to provide notice
where the owner has not provided an up-to-date name and address
for the owner or the manager for the rental unit.
(3) For purposes of this article, any notice required hereunder to be
given to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
(4) There shall be a presumption that any notice required to be given
to the owner under this article shall have been received by such
owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner provided
by this article.
(5) A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder cited shall not be a defense to rental license
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation or an eviction order as long
as all required notices involving such proceedings have been sent
to the last known address of the owner.
A. Basis for violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner
or manager of a regulated rental unit, to operate without a valid,
current residential rental license issued by the Borough authorizing
such operation. It shall also be unlawful for any person, either owner or
manager, to allow the number of occupants of a regulated rental unit to
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-10
1:225
§ 142-11. Changes in ownership or occupancy; owners separately
responsible; severability; repealer; enactment and effective date.
exceed the maximum number allowed by Borough codes, or to violate
any other provision of this article. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
manager or occupant to violate this article.
B. Penalties.
(1) The penalties and remedies for a violation of Borough Construction
Codes or the Borough Existing Structures Code shall be as
established in such other code.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, be liable to pay the
following penalties:
(a) First violation on a lot with no prior violations in the previous
12 months: a fine of $200;
(b) Second violation on a lot within a twelve-month period: a fine
of $500;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation on a lot within a twelvemonth
period: a fine of $1,000.
(d) If an owner fails to obtain a residential rental license that is
required, a fine of $500 shall apply. A second violation and each
violation thereafter shall be a fine of $1,000. [Amended
8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 765, approved 8-12-2013]
(e) For each week that a violation continues to exist after the time
limit established for correction of the violation by a Code
Enforcement Officer, a separate violation shall have been
deemed to occur, requiring an additional fine.
(3) In addition, an eviction of occupants of a regulated rental unit may
be required under provisions of this article, and the residential
rental license that grants the privilege to rent a regulated rental
unit may be revoked, suspended or withdrawn.
C. Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions of this section and the
license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in
this article shall not limit the ability of the Borough to enforce other
Borough ordinances and to utilize the penalties, remedies and
procedures provided under such other Borough ordinances and state
law.
A. Changes in ownership/occupancy.
(1) Each owner of a regulated rental unit shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer, in writing, within five business days after any
change in ownership of the premises or of the number of regulated
§ 142-10 WILSON CODE § 142-11
1:226
rental units on the premises, and to submit new contact
information.
(2) The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing,
within a maximum of five business days after the changing of a
dwelling unit from owner-occupied to being a regulated rental unit
for purposes of this article. Failure to so notify the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be considered a violation of this article.
B. Owners separately responsible. If any regulated rental unit is owned by
more than one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or
otherwise, each person shall be jointly and separately responsible for
the duties imposed under the terms of this article, and shall be
separately subject to prosecution for the violation of this article.
C. Severability. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of law, such
holding shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this
article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and, to this end, the provisions of this article are declared
severable.
D. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which clearly are
inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
E. Enactment and effective date. This article is hereby enacted as an
ordinance of the Borough of Wilson, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, and shall take effect in 30 days after its enactment.
§ 142-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-11
1:227
Chapter 144
SANDBLASTING
§ 144-1. Sandblasting prohibited certain months.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to sandblast
structures of any kind whatsoever in the Borough of Wilson, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania, during the months of May, June, July, August and
September.
§ 144-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 147
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Excavations — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 149.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
§ 142-11 WILSON CODE § 144-2
1:228
ARTICLE I
Sewer Rents and Charges55
[Adopted 8-11-1952 by Ord. No. 337, approved 8-18-1952]
§ 147-1. Annual rent or charge. [Last amended 11-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 790, approved 11-12-2018]
§ 147-2. Computation of amount of sewage.
A. There is hereby established a rental or charge beginning December 1,
2018, for all properties within or without the corporate limits of the
Borough of Wilson connected with and using the sanitary sewerage
system of said Borough in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) A charge of $5.50 per unit as given to the Borough of Wilson by
Easton Suburban Water Company for all properties discharging
through a single connection or lateral into the sanitary sewerage
system.
B. Wherever service is rendered for which none of the rates presented
above are applicable, the rate shall be fixed by the Sewer Board with
the same force and effort as if included in the foregoing schedule.
A. The amount of sewage deposited into the sanitary sewerage system by
any one property shall be computed as being 100% of the quantity of
water furnished by the Water Board of the City of Easton or from other
sources to the respective properties. Properties not metered for water
shall be computed as depositing into the sanitary sewerage system
100% of the water used by metered properties of comparable size and
purpose within that vicinity.
B. Where the owner of a property and the Health, Sanitation and Highway
Committee cannot agree upon the basis to be used to determine the
quantity of sewage deposited into the sanitary sewerage system, the
Health, Sanitation and Highway Committee may require the owner at
his, her or its own expense to install and maintain a sewerage meter of
design and style approved by the Health, Sanitation and Highway
Committee to accurately measure the sewage deposited into the
system. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved
1-22-1996]
55.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 584, adopted and approved 2-27-1984, is on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary, Ord. No. 584 imposes a sewer use charge system for the use of the
treatment works of the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority; provides for the collection
thereof; regulates the discharge of waste in the sewer system and into the treatment
works; defines prohibited discharges; provides for pretreatment standards; provides for
permits, sampling and inspection of industrial users; and provides for enforcement of the
ordinance and penalties.
§ 147-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-3
1:229
§ 147-3. Proportional deductions from schedule of charges.
[Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
The Health, Sanitation and Highway Committee is hereby empowered to
make proportionate allowances and deductions from the foregoing schedule
of charges or rental based on water service for water which has been served
to said properties but not discharged into the sewer.
§ 147-4. Apportionment of charges for a part of year.
Rental charges shall be apportionable into months where connection is
made after July 1 of the current year or in any other year. Rental charges for
connections made prior to the 15th of any month shall be prorated on the
annual rental from the first day of the month, and for connections made on
or after the 15th day of any month, shall be prorated on the annual rental
from the first of the succeeding month.
§ 147-5. Quarterly and semiannual billings.56 [Amended 3-11-1985
by Ord. No. 390, approved 3-11-1985]
Bills for sewerage services shall be rendered quarterly beginning March
1, 1985, for all properties depositing a daily average of 1,000 gallons and
upwards. All other bills shall be rendered semiannually beginning July 1,
1985, until January 1, 1986, when such bills shall likewise be rendered
quarterly.
§ 147-6. Penalty for late payment. [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No.
390, approved 3-11-1985]
Effective January 1, 1986, if bills are not paid within 30 days of the due date,
there shall be a penalty of 10% of the bills added to the bill.
§ 147-7. Lien for rental charges. [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No.
390, approved 3-11-1985]
All rental charges shall be a lien against the properties until paid, and
delinquent bills may be filed as a lien against the property served, in the
office of the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton
County and collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and
collecting of municipal claims. In addition to the filing of liens, the Borough
of Wilson shall have the right to enforce the collection of all bills remaining
unpaid by a suit in assumpsit either before a District Justice or in the Court
of Common Pleas of Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
56.Editor's Note: Original Section 5 of Ord. No. 337, which provided for a Sewer Board, has
been deleted, since the Sewer Board no longer exists.
§ 147-3 WILSON CODE § 147-8
1:230
§ 147-8. Shutting off service for delinquent charges. [Amended
1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
Where rental charges are delinquent, the Health, Sanitation and Highway
Committee may shut off sewerage service to said property upon 10 days'
written notice and shall restore sewerage service thereto upon payment of
all delinquent bills against the same, together with a reasonable charge for
shutting off and restoring said service.
§ 147-9. Records and forms. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654,
approved 1-22-1996]
The Health, Sanitation and Highway Committee shall provide all necessary
books, records, bills and other forms for the proper record of all charges,
service rates and rentals and all payments hereunder, whether collectible
by the Treasurer or Solicitor or otherwise.
§ 147-10. Collection of rents and charges; reports.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer of the Borough to collect all sewer
rentals other than delinquent accounts certified by him to the Solicitor. The
Treasurer and Solicitor shall report monthly to the Council of the Borough
all payments received during the preceding month.
§ 147-11. Deposit of collections.
All sewerage rentals and interest thereon collected by the Treasurer or
Solicitor shall be deposited in the Borough of Wilson Sewer Revenue
Account Fund and shall be applied towards any and all expenses incident to
the collection and disposal of the sewage.
§ 147-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-11
1:231

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 1-25-1982 by Ord. No. 565A, approved 1-25-1982]
§ 147-12. Building sewer connections and specifications.
A. Regulations requiring use of public sewer where available.
(1) It is required that all residential, commercial and industrial
properties containing sanitary facilities or generating acceptable
liquid waste to which the sewer system is reasonably accessible
shall be connected to the sewer system. The term "reasonably
accessible" is defined as being 150 feet or less from the nearest
line.
(2) Connection to the sewer line must be made within 60 days of notice
to do so in the case of existing improved properties.
(3) In the case of new construction, connection to the sewer and final
inspection of that connection must be completed before occupancy
of the improved property.
B. Permit for building sewer construction.
(1) Prior to any construction, a permit to connect the proposed
building sewer to the sewer system must be obtained from the
municipality.
(2) The permit for residential or commercial sewer connections shall
include:
(a) The name of the property owners.
(b) The exact location of the property.
(c) The name of the firm or persons employed to construct the
building sewer.
(d) A list of the number and types of plumbing fixtures to be
connected.
(e) The owner's agreement to abide by all pertinent laws,
ordinances and regulations and to install and maintain the
proposed building sewer at his own expense.
C. Independently sewered properties. Improved properties connected to
the sewer system must have independent building sewers. In some
cases, exception to this requirement will be allowed, but only by prior
permitted approval of the municipality.
D. Responsibility for building sewer construction.
§ 147-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-12
1:233
(1) It is the property owner's responsibility for the proper installation
of the building sewer. The installation must be inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector prior to its use.
(2) In some cases where installation of the building sewer entails
excavation through or under a street or sidewalk, the applicant for
a permit may be required to deposit cash or an acceptable surety
bond to guarantee proper execution and completion of the work
without damage to the municipality.
E. Application and/or inspection fee. A permit application fee may be set
and charged by the municipality to cover costs incidental to the
processing of building sewer applications and inspection of
connections.
F. Reuse of existing building sewers. The use of an existing building sewer
where a new building or plumbing system replaces an old one is
allowed if the existing building sewer is found, after inspection by the
Plumbing Inspector, to conform to all requirements of this article.
G. Minimum grades and sizes of building sewers.
(1) Minimum grade on building sewers shall be 1/4 inch per foot.
(2) Minimum size of all new residential and commercial building
sewers shall be four inches to the property or right-of-way line and
six inches from the property or right-of-way line to the sewer main.
Size of industrial building sewers is dependent on the type and
quantity of the wastewater discharged, but in no case shall the size
or slope be less than the residential and commercial requirements.
(3) In some cases exception to these requirements will be considered
by prior approval of the municipality.
H. Building sewer materials.
(1) Building sewers must be constructed using standard materials of
proven fitness. Types of materials used will be subject to the
municipality's approval, taking local conditions into account.
(2) Building sewers will generally be required to be made of clay and/
or cast-iron pipe conforming to the following specifications:
Clay Pipe
ASTM Specifications
C13-57T Clay Pipe, Standard Strength
C462-60T Clay Pipe, Standard Strength, Ceramic Glazed
C261-60T Clay Pipe, Standard Strength, Unglazed
C200-59T Clay Pipe, Extra Strength
C453-60T Clay Pipe, Extra Strength, Ceramic Glazed
§ 147-12 WILSON CODE § 147-12
1:234
C278-60T Clay Pipe, Extra Strength, Unglazed
C479-61T Vitrified Clay Liner Plates
C425-60T Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints Using Materials Having
Resilient Properties
Federal Specifications
SS-P-361 Pipe, Clay, Sewer
Cast-Iron Pipe
ASTM Specifications
A74-72 Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings
A377-57 Cast Iron Pressure Pipe
WW-P-356 Pipe; Cast Iron, Drainage, Vent and Waste (Threaded)
WW-P-401 Pipe and Pipe-Fittings; Soil, Cast Iron
WW-P-491 Pipe-Fittings; Cast Iron, Drainage
General Codes, Testing and Installation
ASTM C301-60T Methods of Testing Clay Pipe
C13-58T Recommended Practice for Installing Vitrified Clay
Sewer Pipe
National Plumbing Code, ASA A40.801955 (ASA, ASME and
APHA)
Manual of Practice No. 9, Design and Construction of Sanitary
and Storm Sewers (WPCF and ASCE)
Clay Pipe Engineering Manual (Clay Products Association)
Concrete Pipe Lines (American Concrete Pipe Association)
Concrete Pipe Field Manual (American Concrete Pipe
Association)
I. Building sewer construction.
(1) Building sewers shall be constructed in such a manner that results
in the building sewer meeting all local and state requirements.
(2) Installation of the building sewer shall be in accordance with the
following standards and all other practices to ensure a quality
installation:
(a) Bedding. All pipe used for building sewers is to be laid on
proper bedding. This bedding shall consist of crushed stone
laid to a minimum depth of six inches under clay pipe. No stone
bedding is required under cast-iron pipe unless subsurface
conditions such as rock are encountered. In these cases,
proper bedding is required. No slag will be allowed as bedding
or fill in building sewers.
§ 147-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-12
1:235
§ 147-13. Right of access.
The Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority shall have the right of access at
all times to any part of any improved property served by the treatment
works as shall be required for the purposes of inspection, measurement,
sampling and testing and for performance of other functions relating to
service rendered by the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority through the
treatment works.
§ 147-14. Additional rules and regulations.
The Authority shall have the right to adopt, from time to time, such
additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in
connection with the use and operation of the treatment works, which rules
and regulations shall become effective as though set forth herein.
(b) Joints. All pipe joints used in building sewers must be in
accordance with ASTM standards utilizing resilient materials.
Every joint must be watertight so as to not allow groundwater
infiltration.
(c) Connection to public sewer mains.
[1] Connection of building sewers to the public sewer mains
will be made by utilizing existing Y-fittings or laterals
which were installed and plugged during construction,
where they exist.
[2] Connection of building sewers to public sewer mains
where no Y or lateral exists will be done by means of
cutting the main line and installing a Y-fitting whenever
feasible.
[3] Where it is not feasible to install a Y-fitting in the existing
main line, it may be necessary to tap into the main line.
These tapped connections are frequent sources of future
trouble and consequently must be made with the utmost
care. Supervision of tapping procedures may be required
by the Plumbing Inspector.
(d) Location of potable water line relating to building sewers.
Potable water lines are to be laid in a separate trench from the
building sewer whenever feasible. If the potable water line
must be laid in the same trench as the building sewer, the
water line must be laid as far as possible above the elevation of
nearby sewers.
(e) Clean, select backfill only must be used and is to be properly
placed over pipes in such a manner as not to cause damage or
potential damage to them. Backfill will be tamped to minimize
settling. The surface will be returned to its original or
satisfactory condition.
§ 147-12 WILSON CODE § 147-15
1:236
§ 147-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 147-16. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
Authority's service area.
§ 147-17. Interpretation.
When the provisions herein specified for health, safety and welfare are more
restrictive than other applicable ordinances or regulations, this article shall
control; but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either this article or
other applicable ordinances or regulations shall apply whenever they may
be in conflict.
§ 147-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-17
1:237
Chapter 149
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
[Ordinance No. 643, adopted and approved 6-26-1995, implementing
the Bushkill Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, is on
file in the office of the Borough Secretary. This ordinance also
superseded former Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development,
Part 2, Flood Management Provisions, adopted 12-10-1979 by Ord.
No. 551, approved 12-10-1979. Ordinance No. 735, adopted and
approved 2-12-2007, superseded Ord. No. 643 and is also on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.]
[Ordinance No. 681, adopted and approved 9-13-1999, implementing
the Fry's Run Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, is on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary. Ordinance No. 736, adopted and
approved 2-12-2007, superseded Ord. No. 681 and is also on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.]
[Ordinance No. 726, adopted and approved 2-28-2005, implementing
the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, is
on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.]
Chapter 150
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Excavations — See Ch. 100.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 147-17 WILSON CODE § 147-17
1:238
ARTICLE I
Permits for Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 3-9-1925 by Ord. No. 102, approved 3-9-1925]
§ 150-1. Permit and line and grade required for construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation owning
property in the Borough of Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, to
lay or have laid any sidewalk, curb or gutter along the streets and alleys of
the Borough of Wilson unless a permit shall have been first issued therefor
by the Secretary of the Borough of Wilson or by such other officer as shall
be designated by the Council of the said Borough of Wilson and until the
line and grand thereof shall have been given by the Engineer of the said
Borough of Wilson.
§ 150-2. Permit fees.
The Secretary of the said Borough of Wilson or the duly appointed officer
as aforesaid shall receive, for the use of the Borough of Wilson, the sum of
$3 for every permit granted to lay a sidewalk, curb and gutter where the
length thereof shall be 50 feet or less and the sum of $0.04 per foot for each
additional foot over 50 feet.
§ 150-3. Numbering of permits; duplicates.
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall be numbered and
two duplicate copies thereof shall be made, one for the use of the Borough
Engineer and the other for the records of the said Borough of Wilson.
§ 150-4. Indication of line and grade.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation having secured a permit for the
laying of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, after notice to the Borough Engineer
of his or its intention to proceed with the work within a period of not less
than three days, shall have the line and grade thereof suitably indicated by
the Engineer of the said Borough of Wilson.
§ 150-5. Securing of second permit. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 654, approved 1-22-1996]
If, after the line and grade have been indicated by the Borough Engineer for
the laying of sidewalks, curbs and gutters under any permit issued under
the provisions of this article and due to the failure of the person, persons,
firm or corporation to use said permit within a reasonable time or due to the
failure of the said person, persons, firm or corporation to protect the stakes
and marks placed and established by the said Borough Engineer, the stakes
and marks are disturbed or destroyed, it shall thereupon be necessary for
said person, persons, firm or corporation to secure another permit before
the Borough Engineer shall be authorized to again give the line and grade
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-5
1:239
for the laying of said sidewalks, curbs and gutters. Said permit is to be
issued and charged for as provided in § 150-2.
§ 150-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 150-5 WILSON CODE § 150-6
1:240
ARTICLE II
Concrete Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-10-1930 by Ord. No. 165, approved 3-18-1930]
§ 150-7. Compliance required.
It shall be the duty of all owners of real estate and contractors to comply
with the following regulations in the construction of concrete curbs, gutters
and sidewalks within the limits of the Borough.
§ 150-8. Excavation or fill.
The excavation or fill for curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be carried to the
proper depth and grade as directed by the Borough Engineer. The subgrade
shall then be thoroughly compacted and so shaped that the surface of same
shall be at the required depth below the grade for the finished curb, gutter
and sidewalk. On the subgrade a foundation of not less than four inches of
clean cinders or gravel shall be placed, which shall be wetted thoroughly
and tamped or rolled to an even surface.
§ 150-9. Materials.
§ 150-10. Concrete.
The concrete shall be composed of one part Portland cement, two parts
sand and four parts crushed stone or gravel. All concrete shall be mixed by
machine for at least one minute except when the Engineer shall otherwise
permit under special conditions. A batch mixer of any approved type shall
be used. If concrete is mixed by hand, the mixing shall be done on a
watertight wooden platform or other suitable hard, clean surface. The
concrete mixture shall contain no more water than is necessary to produce
a workable mass which can be brought to a satisfactory finish in the
pavement. The amount of water used shall not exceed 6 1/2 gallons per sack
A. Cement. All cement used shall pass the requirement of the current
Standard Specifications for Portland Cement of the American Society
for Testing Materials.
B. Fine aggregate. The fine aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, durable,
uncoated particles of sand or stone free from all organic material. One
hundred percent shall pass a one-fourth-inch screen and 95% shall be
retained on a one-hundred-mesh screen.
C. Coarse aggregate. The coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed stone
or gravel free from vegetable or other organic matter. One hundred
percent of the coarse aggregate shall pass a one-inch screen and at
least 95% shall be retained on a one-fourth-inch screen, with all
intermediate sizes retained.
D. Water. The water shall be clean and free from alkali, oils or acid.
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:241
of cement when the aggregates are dry. Concrete that has developed initial
set shall not be retamped or used in any way.
§ 150-11. Forms.
Forms shall be made of substantial materials, preferably steel. They shall be
smooth and clean and shall be held rigidly in place by stakes or braces with
top edge at true line and grade as given by the Engineer.
§ 150-12. Placing and finishing.
After pouring concrete into the forms, it shall be puddled and spaded so
as to ensure a thorough mixing, eliminate air pockets and create uniform
and smooth sides. The surface shall be finished with a wooden float until
the surface has a true contour and the concrete is thoroughly compacted.
During hot weather, newly laid concrete shall be kept damp by sprinkling
with water for a period of not less than three days.
§ 150-13. Curbs.
The curb shall be seven inches in width at the top, nine inches in width
at the base, 24 inches in depth and seven inches from the top of curb to
the top of gutter. The front face shall have a batter of one inch to one foot
and the corner rounded to a three-fourths-inch radius. The forms must be
removed within 24 hours after the placing of concrete and the exposed
surface rubbed down or floated to a smooth, even surface. If any holes or
defects develop, they shall be filled with mortar composed one part cement
and two parts sand and then floated with a wooden float to a smooth, even
surface.
§ 150-14. Gutters.
Concrete gutters shall have a width of three feet on all streets more than
20 feet wide and a width of two feet on streets 20 feet wide or less and
shall not be less than seven inches in depth. The gutter shall be carefully
constructed to the lines and grades given for same, with joints for the entire
depth. These joints shall be uniformly spaced not more than 10 feet apart
and formed by removable plates set perpendicular to the surface of the
gutter. The slope of the gutter shall be one inch per foot toward the gutter.
§ 150-15. Sidewalks.
The concrete sidewalk shall not be less than five inches in depth and shall
slope 1/4 inch per foot from the building line of the street to the outside
edge of the curb unless otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer. The
sidewalk should be constructed in sections of not more than six feet in
length with vertical joints for the full depth of the pavement and shall be of
a width corresponding with the established width of the street on which it
is laid unless otherwise ordered by the Borough Engineer.
§ 150-10 WILSON CODE § 150-16
1:242
§ 150-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996 ]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
§ 150-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-16
1:243

ARTICLE III
Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 7-14-1947 by Ord. No. 308, approved 8-5-1947]
§ 150-17. Construction by property owners.
Whenever ordered by the Council of the Borough of Wilson, County of
Northampton and State of Pennsylvania, the owner or owners of any lot
or lots of ground facing, siding, fronting or abutting on any of the public
streets, lanes, alleys or footwalks of said Borough shall grade, curb, build
and pave sidewalks, curbs, gutters or combined curbs and gutters along the
public streets, alleys or footwalks upon which the said lot or lots of ground
shall face, side, front or abut, according to the ordinances, rules and general
regulations of the said Borough of Wilson governing the same.
§ 150-18. Repair by property owners.
Whenever ordered by the Council of the Borough of Wilson aforesaid, the
owner or owners of lots of ground fronting, facing, siding or abutting on any
of the public streets, lanes or alleys of said Borough of Wilson along which
the sidewalk or sidewalks are out of repair shall repair the same according
to the ordinances, rules and general regulations of the said Borough of
Wilson governing the same.
§ 150-19. Performance of work by Borough; lien for costs.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any of the owners of property
aforesaid to build or repair the sidewalks, curbs, gutters or combined curbs
and gutters along the public streets, lanes or alleys of the said Borough of
Wilson within 30 days after having been given notice so to do from the said
Council of the Borough of Wilson, then and in that event the said Council
of the Borough of Wilson shall have the right to construct and repair the
sidewalk, curb, gutter or combined curb and gutter and to do the said work
and file a lien in the name of the said Borough of Wilson against the said
property and the owner or owners thereof along the front or side, or both,
of which the sidewalk, curb, gutter or combined curb and gutter is built
or repaired, or the said Council of the said Borough of Wilson may, at its
option, collect for the said Borough, in any manner provided for by law for
the collection of municipal claims, the costs of said sidewalks, curbs, gutters
or combined curbs and gutters, work and materials used in the construction
or repair of the same, with 10% additional, together with all charges and
expenses thereof.
§ 150-20. Service of notice.
The notice provided for in this article shall be signed by the Borough
Secretary, and the notice or notices shall be served upon the owner of
the premises to which the notice refers if such owner is a resident of the
Borough of Wilson. If the owner is not a resident of the Borough of Wilson,
then the notice may be served upon the agent or tenant of the owner or
§ 150-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-20
1:245
upon the occupant of such premises. If the owner has no agent or tenant
or there is no occupier of such premises, then service of the said notice
or notices shall be by printed or written notice or notices posted upon the
premises to which the notice refers.
§ 150-20 WILSON CODE § 150-20
1:246
ARTICLE IV
Removal of Snow, Ice and Debris
[Adopted 10-11-1948 by Ord. No. 316, approved 10-15-1948]
§ 150-21. Owner or occupant to remove snow and ice.
It shall be the duty of the occupant or occupants of any dwelling, tenement,
store, storehouse, shop, manufactory or other building fronting on any
paved or unpaved sidewalk or gutters in or upon any public street in the
Borough of Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, and of the person
or persons having charge or care of any church, schoolhouse or any public
building situate as aforesaid, to remove or cause to be removed all snow,
ice or sleet from the sidewalks, and also all snow from the gutters in front
of and around their respective premises, within 15 hours after the same
shall have ceased to fall or accumulate thereon or therein. When a building
has two or more occupants, the duty of cleaning the sidewalks and gutters
as aforesaid shall devolve upon the occupant or occupants on the first or
ground floor; and if said ground-floor occupants number two or more, each
such occupant shall clean the sidewalk, gutters and drains immediately in
front of his, her or their respective portions of the building, together with 1/
2 of the space, if any, intervening between said portion and that of the next
adjoining occupant. Occupants of corner buildings shall clean the sidewalks
and gutters in front thereof and also on the sides for the distance back from
the corner to which their occupancy may extend. Sidewalks and gutters in
front of and at the sides of vacant lots or vacant buildings shall be cleaned
as aforesaid by the owner or owners of such vacant buildings or lots. In all
cases the snow, ice or sleet, when so removed, shall be thrown toward the
outside of the sidewalk into the roadway and not into the gutters paralleling
the sidewalks; provided, however, that wherever and whenever it may be
impossible to remove all snow, sleet or ice which may have been compacted
by travel or formed on sidewalks so as to present a slippery surface, it shall
be the duty of the occupant, agent or owner of the premises abutting to
cover the same with ashes, cinders, sand, grit or any suitable substance in
such manner as to make walking upon said sidewalks safe.
§ 150-22. Keeping drains and gutters clear.
No person or persons designated in § 150-21 shall suffer or allow ice or
snow to remain or accumulate in any drain or gutter crossing or paralleling
any sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, so as to impede the flow of water
therein, in case of thaw or rain.
§ 150-23. Removal of dirt and debris from sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of all persons designated in § 150-21 to remove or cause
to be removed any dirt or debris from sidewalks fronting their respective
premises within 24 hours after the dirt or debris has been placed thereon
or within 24 hours after the dirt or debris has been permitted to accumulate
thereon.
§ 150-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-24
1:247
§ 150-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and each day of the continuance of a violation shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense.
§ 150-24 WILSON CODE § 150-24
1:248
Chapter 153
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 86A.
Excavations — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 149.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 150-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-24
1:249

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 153-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Pennsylvania
State Act No. 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.57
§ 153-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and land developments located
within the Borough of Wilson. This chapter has been adopted for the
purpose of regulating subdivision and land development within Wilson
Borough in order to create conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 153-3. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the above-stated purposes. Where provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than those of this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
§ 153-4. Grant of power to Borough Council.
The Council of the Borough of Wilson (the "Council") will receive and
review all plans submitted under this chapter to determine compliance
with this chapter, and the Council is hereby granted the power to approve,
disapprove or approve with conditions all plans required to be submitted
under the terms of this chapter.
§ 153-5. Compliance required.
No subdivision or land development (as defined herein) of any lot, tract or
parcel of land shall be carried out; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use and travel or the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 153-6. Recording of approved plan.
A. Within 90 days of the approval of the final plan for any subdivision and
land development, the subdivider shall record a copy of said final plan
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County, as
required in § 153-19.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-6
1:251
§ 153-7. Status of recorded plans.
§ 153-8. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Wilson Borough."
§ 153-9. Repealer.
The Wilson Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance adopted
on March 24, 1975, and all amendments thereto, are hereby completely
repealed by this chapter. All other existing ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this chapter, to the extent of such conflict and no
further, are hereby repealed.
B. The Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County shall not accept any
such plan for recording unless it is the record plan, as defined herein,
which shall contain the official original endorsements of approval by the
Council, the Wilson Borough Planning Commission, the review by the
Joint Planning Commission and evidence that the plan has complied
with the requirements of Pennsylvania Act 247.58
C. Failure to record the final record plan as required herein shall render
all approvals null and void.
A. Any subdivision or land development plan recorded prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter in the event that any change or resubdivision is made or legally
required to be made in said plan.
B. When a final record plan has been approved and recorded, subsequent
to the effective date of this chapter and in conformance with the terms
of this chapter, then no subsequent change or amendment in any
zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and
to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year
period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In
the case of any doubts as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the
terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the application of
such approval was duly filed.
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-6 WILSON CODE § 153-9
1:252
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 153-10. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; the term "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 153-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS — The means by which vehicles or pedestrians obtain entrance or
entry into a parcel, lot or building or into a subdivision or land development.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES —
ALLEY — A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access
to abutting lands.
APPLICANT — Any person who submits subdivision plans to the Borough,
on behalf of the subdivider, for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
EASEMENT OF ACCESS — An easement granted for use by the public
for the purpose of providing vehicular and/or pedestrian access to a
parcel, lot, building, subdivision or land development.
A.
RIGHT-OF-ACCESS — The right of the public to have vehicular and/
or pedestrian access over a specifically designated area, easement or
property.
B.
The use of a parcel of land primarily for one or more of the following
purposes:
The raising, harvesting and selling of crops, including grains,
vegetables or fruits, trees and other produce, and all structures
and activities customarily associated with this activity.
(1)
The feeding, breeding, management and sale of livestock, poultry,
fur-bearing animals, honey bees or of the products thereof, etc.,
not including household and farm pets, and all structures and
activities, including the raising of livestock feed or pasturing,
customarily associated with this activity.
(2)
A.
A parcel of land shall not be considered to be used for "agricultural
purposes" if the subdivision of land is also intended for use primarily
as a recreational subdivision, as defined herein, or for residential,
commercial or industrial purposes in which one or more of the
agricultural activities listed above are undertaken as an incidental or
secondary use as determined by the Borough Council.
B.
§ 153-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:253
BLOCK — Property bounded on one side by a street and on the other three
sides by a street, railroad right-of-way, waterway, unsubdivided area or
other definite barrier.
BONA FIDE BID — A bid secured by the subdivider, from a contractor or
contractors, for the purpose of verifying the estimated cost to complete the
required improvement or improvements which are the responsibility of the
subdivider to provide under the terms of this chapter. Said "bona fide bid"
shall include all costs and activities, as determined by the Borough Council,
which will provide for the completion of all of the required improvements or
maintenance.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The Borough's engineer or other qualified
representative, designated by the Borough in which the subdivision is
located, to perform various engineering duties required by this chapter.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The minimum distance from the front lot line
to any building or structure to be erected on the lot.
CARTWAY — Includes the portion of the entire right-of-way of a street which
contains an improved travel way for vehicles, including space for shoulders
and/or parking lanes.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of Wilson.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The complete plan, or any part of a plan which
may be adopted by the Borough, which is designed to serve as a guide for
the future development and growth of the Borough.
COUNCIL or BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough
of Wilson.
COUNTY — Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — See "Joint Planning Commission."
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any
general and public or limited public use, reserving to himself no other rights
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the
public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DEVELOPER — See "subdivider."
EASEMENT — A limited right of use granted in private land for a public or
quasi-public purpose.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed by the State of
Pennsylvania.
FINANCIAL SECURITY — A deposit made out to the benefit of the Borough,
as determined by the Borough Council, in an amount sufficient to guarantee
and cover the entire costs of any required improvement or maintenance
which is the responsibility of the subdivider to provide under the terms
§ 153-11 WILSON CODE § 153-11
1:254
of this chapter, but which will allow the Borough to complete said
improvements or maintenance in their entirety, without any additional cost
to the Borough, in the event of a default, negligence, cost overrun or
inflationary increase in price or failure of any type of the subdivider to
provide or complete said required improvements or maintenance. Said
"financial security" shall be approved by the Borough Council and may
include irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in
a federal- or commonwealth- chartered lending institution or other type of
financial security acceptable to the Borough Council, and such security shall
be posted with a bonding company or with a federal- or commonwealthchartered
lending institution authorized to conduct business in the
commonwealth.
FRONTAGE — The portion of a parcel or lot which abuts a street.
JOINT PLANNING COMMISSION — The Joint Planning Commission of the
Counties of Lehigh and Northampton, also referred to as the "Joint Planning
Commission," designated to perform various administrative, review,
supervisory and other duties required by this chapter or duties set forth
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code59 for County Planning
Commissions.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot which has frontage on and access from
two streets which are approximately parallel to each other.
A.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A double frontage lot which extends
between and which has frontage on a major street and a minor or
collector street and which has access only from the minor or collector
street and which has its access prohibited from the major street.
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively; or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
A.
A subdivision of land, as defined herein, shall also be considered to be
a "land development."
B.
The following shall be excluded from the definition of "land
development" if it only involves the following:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
(1)
C.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:255
LOT — A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership use or for development.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling constructed on
a permanent foundation, intended for permanent occupancy for use by one
family, contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that
it may be used without a permanent foundation, except for a travel trailer,
as defined herein.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot, parcel or tract of land at least 10 acres in
size, upon which three or more mobile homes are located for occupancy and
used by persons of different families other than members of one household.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Wilson in which a proposed subdivision
or land development is located.
OFFICIAL MAP — Any map adopted by ordinance of the Borough pursuant
to Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code (Act 247 of 1968, as
amended by Act 170 of 1988).
PLAN — A map or chart, also known as a "plat," indicating the subdivision or
resubdivision of land, which in its various stages of preparation can include
the following:
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subclause, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan indicating salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision to be used as a basis for informal consideration by the
Borough.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A tentative plan, in lesser detail than a final
plan, showing proposed streets and lot layout and such other
information as required by this chapter.
B.
§ 153-11 WILSON CODE § 153-11
1:256
PLANNER — A qualified community or City planner with certification from
the American Institute of Certified Planners.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — See "frontage."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk,
other means of travel or for other public purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The maximum width to which an existing
or proposed right-of-way may be widened in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan or Plans of the Borough, county, Joint Planning
Commission or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or other
appropriate official agency.
SETBACK OR BUILDING LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any structure and the adjacent rightof-
way.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street.
STREET — A strip of land designed for use by the public, including the
entire right-of-way intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation. "Public streets" are streets offered for dedication to the
Borough and accepted by the Borough to ensure permanent public
ownership and maintenance by the Borough. "Private streets" are streets
not offered for dedication or not accepted by the Borough. Such streets are
not normally permitted by this chapter. Classes of streets according to use,
function and width shall be as designated in the Comprehensive Plan or, if
not so designated, shall conform with the following:
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan, prepared for official
recording as required by this chapter to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements, as required by this chapter.
C.
RECORD PLAN — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements or approvals of the Borough and other agencies which
is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds, as
required by this chapter.
D.
MAJOR or ARTERIAL STREET — Those streets which serve internal
county movements and provide connections between traffic generators
serving or anticipated to serve moderately heavy traffic volumes at a
design speed of 60 miles per hour.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — Those streets which intercept local streets,
provide access to abutting properties and serve individual
B.
§ 153-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:257
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or equitable owner of a property to be
subdivided or authorized agent of the owner, including but not limited to an
individual, partnership or corporation that undertakes a subdivision or land
development or any of the activities covered by this chapter, particularly
the preparation of a subdivision plan or land development showing the
layout of the land and the public and private improvements involved therein.
The term "subdivider" is intended to include the terms "developer" and
"applicant" even though the personnel involved in successive stages of the
project may vary.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, petition by the Court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A division of any part, parcel or area of land which
does not fall within the category of a minor subdivision, as defined below.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A division of any part, parcel or area of land
which complies with the following:
neighborhoods or areas, and their function is to collect and distribute
traffic to the local streets and to feed traffic into the major streets.
They are anticipated to serve moderate traffic volumes and shall have a
design speed of 45 miles per hour.
MINOR or LOCAL STREET — Those streets used primarily to provide
access to abutting property and to feed into the collector streets. They
are anticipated to serve relatively low traffic volumes and shall have a
design speed of 35 miles per hour.
C.
NONRESIDENTIAL STREETS — Streets designed to serve and give
access to commercial, industrial, public and other nonresidential uses.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — Local streets, parallel and adjacent
to major traffic streets, providing access to abutting properties and
providing control of intersections with major streets.
E.
A. Contains not more than five lots.
Involves no new road or street or easements of access other than a
private driveway.
B.
Involves no installation of other required public or private
improvements.
C.
D. Total tract size of less than 10 acres.
§ 153-11 WILSON CODE § 153-11
1:258
SUBDIVISION OFFICER — The specific person designated by the Borough
Council to perform all of the administrative duties required by this chapter.
SURVEYOR — A professional surveyor licensed by the State of
Pennsylvania.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle, less than 36 feet in length, standing on
wheels and containing not more than one dwelling unit which may be used
for temporary living or sleeping purposes and not intended for occupancy
for more than 100 days during any one year.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Land in parcels sufficiently large for future
subdivision which is presently in agriculture or woodland.
Is consistent with any Borough Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or
Zoning Ordinance which may apply and with all provisions of this
chapter.
E.
§ 153-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:259

ARTICLE III
Plan Submission Procedures
§ 153-12. General provisions.
The following procedures shall be observed by all subdividers.
§ 153-13. Submission procedures for all plans.
A. It is the intent of the Borough Council to expedite the receipt and
processing of plans so as to reduce delays which may result in
increased costs or inconvenience to the subdivider or to the Borough.
B. The procedure set forth below establishes maximum time limits
permissible under state law but the Borough Council, wherever
possible, express its intent to have all reviews completed in a more
timely manner.
C. Sketch plans. Sketch plans are not required by this chapter, but it is
recommended that the subdivider submit such a plan to the Subdivision
Officer in order to establish, at an early stage in the planning of the
subdivision or land development, the basic conditions required for the
approval of a preliminary and a final plan.
D. Required plans. Preliminary and final plans and other required
supporting data for all proposed subdivisions and land developments in
Wilson Borough shall be submitted by the subdivider to the Borough for
review and action by the Borough.
(1) Preliminary plan. Except for any sketch plan which is submitted,
the initial plan filed with the Borough for review shall be
considered the official preliminary plan. Said preliminary plan shall
be reviewed to determine compliance with these regulations, and
said plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or rejected
or disapproved and the subdivider notified accordingly. However,
the Borough Council may proceed to final action at the first
consideration of a plan for a minor subdivision, as defined herein,
in accordance with the procedure set forth in § 153-20.
(2) Final plan.
(a) After approval of the preliminary plan, the final plan for the
entire subdivision or land development or a final plan for a
section or stage of development which has been prepared in
accordance with the approved preliminary plan shall be
submitted by the subdivider to the Borough. Said final plan
shall be reviewed to determine compliance with these
regulations, and said plan shall be approved, approved with
conditions, rejected or disapproved and the subdivider notified
accordingly.
§ 153-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-13
1:261
(b) Prior to submitting the official preliminary plan for review, the
subdivider is encouraged to prepare a sketch plan for informal
discussion with the Wilson Borough Planning Commission and/
or with other appropriate Borough personnel.
E. County and other agency reviews. Copies of all plans submitted to the
Borough shall be forwarded by the Borough to the Joint Planning
Commission and to other appropriate agencies upon their receipt for
review and advice by these agencies within a period of 30 days.
F. Consideration of plans. Subdivision and land development plans and
supporting data submitted to the Subdivision Officer will be referred to
the Planning Commission and to the Borough Council. Initial
consideration shall occur at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Borough Planning Commission, provided that the plans are received at
least 10 calendar days in advance of said meeting. Findings and
recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be referred to the
Borough Council for consideration and appropriate action.
G. Action and notification.
(1) The Planning Commission shall consider all plans submitted to
determine compliance with this chapter and shall submit its
findings and recommendations to Borough Council. Action on all
plans received shall occur in accordance with the procedure set
forth in §§ 153-15 through 153-18.
(2) After the plan is filed and all required copies of plans, engineering
drawings, fees and other required exhibits have been received by
the Borough, the Borough Council shall reach a decision on the
plan no later than 90 days following the date of the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission which follows the date that
application is filed, provided that should said next regular meeting
of the Planning Commission occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the application, said ninety-day period shall be measured
from the 30th day following the day the application has been filed.
(3) The Borough Council shall notify the subdivider, in writing, no later
than 15 days after the date when a decision is reached. When a
plan is not approved, or approved with conditions, the decision of
the Borough Council shall specify the defects found in the plan and
shall cite the provisions of this chapter which have not been met.
(4) Failure of the Borough to render a decision and communicate it to
the subdivider within the time and in the manner required herein
shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as
presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation and communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation and communication shall have like effect.
§ 153-13 WILSON CODE § 153-13
1:262
§ 153-14. Fees.
Fees for review and processing of subdivision and land development plans
to determine compliance with this chapter shall be charged to the
subdivider/applicant in accordance with Appendix B attached hereto.60 Said
Appendix B may be amended from time to time by the Borough Council by
ordinance or resolution.
§ 153-15. Sketch plan application.
(5) If the preliminary or final plan is approved, subject to conditions,
then the subdivider shall either accept or reject such conditions, in
writing, within a period of 15 days of receipt of such conditions.
Any conditional approval shall be rescinded automatically if the
subdivider fails to accept or reject such conditions within the
fifteen-day time period established above.
H. Public hearing. Before acting on any preliminary or final plan, the
Borough Council may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
I. Recording of final plan. After the effective date of final plan approval by
the Borough Council, the subdivider/applicant shall record such plan in
the form of a record plan within a period of 90 days in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County.
A. Sketch plans and supporting data shall comply with the provisions of
Article VII of this chapter.
B. For the purpose set forth in § 153-13C, six copies of the sketch plan may
be submitted by the subdivider to the Subdivision Officer, together with
the required application form. No fee shall be required.
C. The Subdivision Officer shall transmit copies to the following:
(1) Wilson Borough Council: three copies.
(2) Wilson Borough Planning Commission: two copies.
D. At its next regularly scheduled meeting, the sketch plan shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission. It is recommended that the
subdivider be present at the meeting to answer questions. The
Commission shall identify areas of concern or possible modification
which may be required in the plan to comply with this chapter.
E. Since the sketch plan is not officially required, no official action need be
taken by the Planning Commission or Borough Council. However, the
areas of concern or possible modification shall be summarized in letter
form and submitted to the subdivider and the Borough Council within
15 days of the date of the meeting.
60.Editor's Note: Said Appendix B, Subdivision and Land Development Review Fees, is on file
in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-16
1:263
§ 153-16. Preliminary plan application.
A. Preliminary plans and supporting data shall comply with the provisions
of Article VII of this chapter.
B. Eight copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted by the
subdivider to the Subdivision Officer, together with the required
application form and fee. Additional copies may be requested if
required for submission or reference to other appropriate agencies.
C. The Subdivision Officer shall inform and transmit copies of the
preliminary plan, application form and supporting data to the following:
(1) Wilson Borough Council: two copies.
(2) Wilson Borough Planning Commission: two copies.
(3) Joint Planning Commission: two copies.
(4) Other appropriate agencies: one copy, as determined by the
Planning Commission, to the County Conservation District, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and/or other agencies or
utility companies affected by or having an interest in the plan. Such
agencies shall be requested to submit their comments and advice
to the Borough Council within 30 days of submittal of the plan to
the agency.
D. The preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission,
and the Commission shall submit a letter or report to the Borough
Council setting forth its findings and recommendations for approval,
approval with conditions or disapproval and setting forth the reasons
for such recommendations. Said action by the Planning Commission
shall only be advisory, and final action shall be the responsibility of the
Borough Council.
E. Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations from the Planning
Commission and from other appropriate agencies or from any engineer
or professional persons retained by the Borough, the Borough Council,
at its next regular meeting, shall review the preliminary plan and all
other applicable comments received. The Council may also hold a
public hearing on the plan subject to public notice, as defined herein.
Upon conclusion of its deliberations, the Borough Council shall take
action to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the
subdivision plan or land development with reasons for disapproval
specifically stated. When such a preliminary plan is approved subject to
conditions or other actions to be taken by the subdivider, the Borough
Council shall specify a time limit for compliance by the subdivider.
F. The official action and decision of the Borough Council shall be in
writing and shall be forwarded to the subdivider at his last known
address, not later than 15 days following such action, with a copy to
§ 153-16 WILSON CODE § 153-16
1:264
§ 153-17. Final plan application.
both the Borough and the Joint Planning Commissions. In the case of a
rejection or disapproval of the plan, the Borough Council shall specify
the defects of the plan and the requirements of this chapter which have
not been complied with.
G. Approval of the preliminary plan, subject to conditions, revisions and
modifications as stipulated by the Borough Council as required herein,
shall constitute conditional approval of the subdivision as to the
character and intensity of the development and the general layout and
appropriate dimensions of streets, lots and other proposed features,
and such approval shall entitle the subdivider to submit plans for final
review as set forth below.
A. A final plan with supporting data shall be submitted within one year
after approval of the preliminary plan, provided that an extension of
time may be granted by the Borough Council upon written request for a
valid reason presented by the subdivider. Otherwise, the plan submitted
may be considered as a new preliminary plan.
B. The final plan shall conform in all important respects to the preliminary
plan as previously reviewed by the Borough Council and shall
incorporate all modifications and revisions specified in any prior
conditional approval of the preliminary plan. A final plan may be
accepted for review which has been modified to reflect changing
conditions since the time of preliminary plan review. Other
modifications, not previously submitted to and considered by the
Borough, may be sufficient cause for considering the plan to be a
revised preliminary plan.
C. The Borough may permit submission of the final plan in sections or
stages, each covering a portion of the entire proposed subdivision as
shown on the preliminary plan, except that the first stage shall be
submitted within one year after approval of the preliminary plan as
required in Subsection A.
D. The Borough may require that any final plan or any section or stage of a
final plan which is not completed within five years from the date of
preliminary plan approval, as required by § 153-7, may require a new
preliminary plan submission to reflect changing conditions or legal
requirements which may affect the subdivision or land development
unless an extension of this five-year limit is granted by the Borough
Council upon written request.
E. The final plan and supporting data shall comply with the provisions of
Articles VII and VIII of this chapter. Failure to do so may be sufficient
cause for tabling or rejecting the plan.
F. Copies.
§ 153-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-17
1:265
(1) Eight copies of the final plan with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Subdivision Officer. The Subdivision Officer shall
transmit copies of the plan to:
(a) Wilson Borough Council: two copies.
(b) Wilson Borough Planning Commission: two copies.
(c) Joint Planning Commission: two copies.
(d) Utility companies: one copy.
(2) The Planning Commission shall determine if additional copies of
the plan are required by the Borough to properly review the plan.
G. The final plan shall be received by the Planning Commission and the
Commission shall submit a letter or report to the Borough Council
setting forth its findings and recommendations for approval, approval
with conditions or disapproval and setting forth the reasons for such
recommendations. Said action by the Planning Commission shall only
be advisory, and final action shall be the responsibility of the Borough
Council.
H. Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations from the Planning
Commission and from other appropriate agencies or interested parties
or any engineer or professional persons retained by the Borough, the
Borough Council, at its next meeting, shall review the
recommendations and comments received. The Council may also hold a
public hearing on the plan subject to public notice, as defined herein.
Upon conclusion of its deliberations, the Borough Council shall take
final action to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the final
plan or land development with reasons for disapproval specifically
stated. Approval by the Borough Council shall, in all cases where
applicable, be subject to agreement by the subdivider/applicant to
execute the proposed development agreement required in Article VIII.
When a final plan is approved subject to conditions or other actions to
be taken by the subdivider, the Borough Council shall specify a time
limit for compliance by the subdivider.
I. The official action and decision of the Borough Council shall be in
writing and shall be forwarded to the subdivider personally or to his last
known address not later than 15 days following such action. A copy of
said notification shall be sent to both the Borough Planning Commission
and Joint Planning Commission. In the case of a rejection or disapproval
of the plan, the Borough Council shall specify the defects of the plan
and the requirements of this chapter which have not been complied
with.
J. When the Borough Council has approved the final plan and when all
other approvals, conditions and agreements required herein, including
the provisions of §§ 153-52 through 153-54 as required herein, have
been satisfied, the President of Borough Council and/or the Borough
§ 153-17 WILSON CODE § 153-17
1:266
§ 153-18. Conditional approvals.
If the preliminary or final plan is approved, subject to conditions, then the
subdivider shall either accept or reject such conditions, in writing, within a
period of 15 days of the receipt of such conditions. Any conditional approval
shall be rescinded automatically if the subdivider fails to accept or reject
such conditions within the fifteen-day time period established above.
§ 153-19. Recording of final plan.
§ 153-20. Plans exempted from standard review procedures.
A simplified procedure for the submission and approval of subdivision and
land development plans may be utilized when the following conditions exist:
Manager and the Borough Secretary shall endorse four copies of the
final plan to that effect. One copy of the endorsed final plan shall be
kept in the Borough files, one copy shall be transmitted to the Joint
Planning Commission and the other two returned to the subdivider.
Additional copies may be endorsed to meet the needs of the subdivider
and other agencies.
K. The effective date of final plan approval shall be the date when the final
plan is endorsed as set forth in Subsection J above.
A. The subdivider shall record the final record plan in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County within 90 days after the
effective date of approval by the Borough Council. The copy of the final
plan filed for recording shall be known as the "record plan." It shall be a
clear and legible document in a form as required by the County
Recorder of Deeds, bearing all required endorsements. Failure to
record the final plan as required herein shall render all approvals null
and void.
B. The Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County shall not accept any
such plan for recording unless it is the record plan, as defined herein,
which shall contain the official original endorsements of approval of the
Borough Council, including evidence that the requirements of
Pennsylvania Acts 247 and 537, as amended, have been complied with
and of the review by the Borough Planning Commission and Joint
Planning Commission.
C. The Borough Council may extend said ninety-day limit, if requested in
writing and if compliance with any condition for approval as set forth by
the Borough Council shall require a greater time limit for recording.
A. Minor subdivisions.
(1) The subdivider of a small subdivision, defined herein as a "minor
subdivision," which is less than 10 acres in size, which contains no
more than five lots and does not involve the provision of any new
streets, easements of access or other required improvements, may
§ 153-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-20
1:267
elect to omit the preliminary plan application review set forth
above. The Borough Council may, for subdivisions exceeding 10
acres in size where large lots are proposed, waive the ten-acre
maximum requirements set forth above, provided that such a
subdivision shall not be the first stage of a larger development or
tract.
(2) In such a case, the subdivider shall submit the final plan application
which shall be processed by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 153-15 through 153-18.
Said final plan application, if it does not require any alteration or
modification, may be reviewed and approved in accordance with
the procedures set forth in § 153-17. However, in the event that a
modification or condition for approval is required, then the plan
shall be considered to be a preliminary plan and a new final plan
application incorporating the required conditions or modifications
shall be submitted.
(3) Any subdivider desirous of following this procedure may also
submit a sketch plan as set forth in § 153-15 in order to expedite
the preparation of the final plan.
B. Agricultural parcels. The division of land, by lease, for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres and not involving any new
street or easement access is exempted from the provisions of this
chapter, except that this shall not apply to agricultural subdivisions
which are also used for other purposes such as for recreation, seasonal
or year-round residential, commercial, industrial or other
nonagricultural activities.
C. Other exemptions. Certain land developments, as set forth in the
definition of land development included herein, have been exempted
from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 153-20 WILSON CODE § 153-20
1:268
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 153-21. Applicability.
This article sets forth certain minimum design standards which shall apply
to all subdivisions and land developments and which shall govern the layout
and location of physical features included in any plan.
§ 153-22. Incorporation of design standards.
The design standards listed below shall be incorporated in all proposed
plans.
§ 153-23. Compliance with other requirements.
§ 153-24. Design standards and requirements.
A. All subdivisions and land developments shall comply fully with all
federal, state, county, Borough and other applicable laws and
regulations. Evidence of the receipt of any permits or approvals
required by such laws and regulations shall be submitted by the
subdivider and shall be a condition of the approval of any plan
submitted under this chapter.
B. Where such other laws and regulations are more restrictive than those
contained herein, such other regulations shall be observed unless
specifically stated otherwise herein.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
Land which is unsafe or unsuited for development due to flooding,
wetlands, subsidence, underground fires, open quarries,
unconsolidated fill, steep slopes or other hazardous conditions shall not
be subdivided unless proper safeguards are provided by the developer
and approved by the Borough Council.
B. Consideration shall be given in the design of all land developments and
subdivisions to the future development needs of the Borough and to any
objectives established in any Borough Comprehensive or Master Plan
for land use, streets and thoroughfares, public utilities and facilities
and to other governmental plans affecting the subdivision and land
development.
C. All subdivision and land development plans shall conform with the
requirements of any zoning ordinance or Official Map adopted by the
Borough.61
D. No subdivision or land development plan shall create a nuisance for any
abutting property, the neighborhood in which the plan is proposed or
for the Borough as a whole. The Council shall determine if a nuisance is
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 153-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-24
1:269
§ 153-25. Environmental protection requirements and standards.
being created by the plan, as defined by applicable federal, state,
county and Borough laws and regulations.
E. In reviewing subdivision and land development plans, the Borough will
consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to
serve the additional dwellings or uses proposed by the subdivision.
F. Areas may be required to be provided or reserved for such community
facilities and these should be adequate to provide for building sites,
landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
G. The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in general conformity
with the features or developments proposed in any officially adopted
plan of the Borough.
H. All plan proposals shall be coordinated with existing and proposed
development on adjoining or adjacent land.
I. Unless specifically set forth herein, design standards for streets and
driveways shall be as set forth in the latest edition of the PennDOT
publication entitled "Guidelines For Design of Local Roads and Streets
— Publication 70."
A. In the design of any subdivision and land development, the Borough
shall require that maximum consideration be given to the preservation
and protection of the natural environment so as to safeguard the public
health, safety and welfare of all residents of the Borough and to
minimize any adverse effects resulting from the proposed development.
B. Where the development may create an environmental problem which
affects the public health, safety or welfare, the Borough may require
and the subdivider shall present a plan indicating the specific manner
in which the problem will be minimized or eliminated, as further set
forth in Subsection D below.
C. No preliminary or final plan application shall be considered for approval
until such a required environmental plan has been submitted. The
Borough may refer such a plan to any appropriate governmental or
other agency or authority qualified to review and/or determine if the
plan meets the requirements and objectives of this chapter and the
requirements of any other federal, state, county, Borough or other
applicable law or regulation.
D. Environmental factors, problems and areas for which the Borough
Council may require a plan include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Erosion and sedimentation control for which a plan is required as
set forth in § 153-37.
(2) Soil conservation and topsoil protection.
§ 153-24 WILSON CODE § 153-25
1:270
(3) Identification and preservation of wetland areas.
(4) Groundwater aquifers and recharge areas.
(5) Steep slope areas.
(6) Avoidance of drainage problems and provisions of stormwater
runoff control.
(7) Bushkill Creek Watershed Area. The portion of the Borough of
Wilson which is located within the Bushkill Creek Watershed Area
shall require compliance with all applicable provisions of the
stormwater management plan for the Bushkill Creek Watershed
prepared and adopted by the Joint Planning Commission in
accordance with the provisions of Act 167, the Pennsylvania Storm
Water Management Act,62 and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources (DER), including
compliance with the implementing ordinance recommended in that
plan.63
(8) Natural and historic feature preservation.
(9) Adequate provision of utilities in accordance with §§ 153-35 and
153-36.
(10) Sewage system for which a plan may be required in accordance
with § 153-35.
(11) Protection of floodplain areas and avoidance of future flooding
problems.
(12) Protection of rivers, streams, ponds, lakes and river frontage
preservation.
(13) Tree preservation, removal and planting.
(14) Topographic and geologic factors.
(15) Areas of carbonate geology which are subject to subsidence and
sinkhole formation reviewed in accordance with the publication of
the Joint Planning Commission dated November 1988, and as it
may be further amended, entitled "Minimizing Sinkhole
Occurrences."
(16) Preservation of prime agricultural land.
(17) Control of excessive noise.
(18) Control of excess traffic created by the proposed subdivision.
62.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Stormwater Management.
§ 153-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-25
1:271
§ 153-26. Street system.
(19) Earthmoving activities. Where applicable, as determined by the
Borough, a reclamation and a reseeding plan may be required for
mining or earthmoving activities or for any use which substantially
modifies the nature of the existing terrain or environment or which
is of a type identified in Subsections E, F and G below.
E. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved if it creates
any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive, radioactivity, chemical storage, environmental or other
hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air, solid
waste or water pollution; electrical, glare, traffic congestion or other
disturbance of a permanent or recurring nature which will adversely
affect the surrounding area or premises, or be dangerous to public
health and safety. The Borough may determine compliance with this
section based on the following:
(1) Data and information submitted by the subdivider. Where such data
and information is not sufficient to reach a determination, the
Borough may require additional information from the subdivider.
(2) Detailed expert review of all such plans to determine compliance in
accordance with established standards or with regulations of
applicable governmental agencies. The Borough may consider the
qualifications of all experts as a factor in evaluating conflicting
evidence or testimony. Fees to be incurred by the Borough in such
reviews shall be paid by the subdivider as set forth in § 153-14 and
Appendix B.64
F. No subdivision or land development shall create any environmental or
nuisance problems which adversely affect areas which are
predominantly used for residential purposes. Such problems shall
consist of the keeping of livestock in or near residential areas or
buildings or the conversion of a barn, shed or other building for a use
involving the keeping of livestock near or in residential areas,
operations resulting in excessive noise, odors, pollution, dangerous
chemical storage conditions or other operations or uses resulting in
unsafe, dangerous, toxic or other conditions adversely affecting the
health and welfare of nearby residents.
G. Timber foresting, harvesting and logging operations shall be subject to
all applicable DER, County Conservation District or other existing state
or federal regulations.
A. Street dimensions and design standards shall be in accordance with the
PennDOT publication entitled "Guidelines for Design of Local Roads
and Streets — Publication 70," as it pertains to urban areas, or to any
64.Editor's Note: Said Appendix B, Subdivision and Land Development Review Fees, is on file
in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-25 WILSON CODE § 153-26
1:272
other standard officially adopted by the Borough Council and to the
additional requirements set forth in this chapter and in Appendix A
attached hereto.65
B. Proposed streets shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access
to all parcels and to create a functional street system, and each street
contained in a subdivision or land development plan shall be classified
as either a "major street," "collector street," "local or minor street" or
"nonresidential street," as defined herein. Such streets shall be
designed to minimize street intersections and pedestrian-vehicular
conflicts and in accordance with the standards for the appropriate class
of street as defined in PennDOT Publication 70.
C. Minimum street width requirements for new street construction are set
forth in Table I below:
Table I
Minimum Street Width Requirementsa, d for New Street Construction
Minimum Width
(feet)
Street
Requirement
Major or
Arterial
Streets
Collector
and
Nonresidential
Streets
Local or
Minor
Streets
Marginal Access
Street
(One-Way)
Right-ofway
b 55 50 30
Pavement b 36 34 18
Curbs b c c c
NOTES:
a This table applies to new construction and to reconstruction where space
permits.
b Major or arterial streets are dependent on the number of lanes of traffic to
be designed in accordance with PennDOT Standards.
c Curbs shall be required on both sides of all street pavements.
d Other street design requirements are set forth in Article IV and in Appendix
A of this chapter.
D. The location of all major streets in the proposed subdivision and land
development shall conform in general alignment to any official
approved Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof adopted by the
Borough.
65.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A, Specifications for Required Subdivision and Land
Development Improvements, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-26
1:273
E. Where a proposed subdivision abuts an existing street which has a
narrow width, improper alignment or other deficiency, the Borough may
require dedication, reservation or easement for additional right-of-way
within the property limits of said proposed subdivision to correct the
existing deficiency in accordance with Borough requirements.
F. The street system layout shall make adequate provision for any possible
resubdivision or new additional subdivision of the area being
subdivided.
G. All streets shall be public streets suitable for dedication to the Borough.
H. The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation or
projection of existing streets in the surrounding area, unless the
Borough deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons of
topography or design.
I. Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce usable
lots or development parcels and reasonable grades.
J. Local streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, but
provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas will
generally be required.
K. Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts but may be included
in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading and
unloading or access purposes.
L. Proposed streets shall be extended to provide access to adjoining
property where necessary to preserve the public health, safety or
welfare.
M. Where lots in the proposal are large enough to permit resubdivisions or
if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, the Borough may require
adequate street rights-of-way to be reserved for future use.
N. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Borough may require marginal access streets, rear service
alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other treatment as will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with the major street and separation of local and through
traffic. Where residential reverse frontage lots are utilized, they shall
have a rear yard with a minimum depth of 75 feet to the ultimate rightof-
way of the major street on which they abut, and they shall have a
planting screen easement at least 10 feet wide, across which there shall
be no right of access.
O. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards contained herein and where satisfactory
assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be
secured.
§ 153-26 WILSON CODE § 153-26
1:274
§ 153-27. Street intersections.
P. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
Q. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as cul-de-sac
streets.
R. New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall
be avoided.
S. Names for all new subdivisions, streets, playgrounds and parks shall be
shown on all plans and approved by the Borough. No name shall be
approved which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an
existing subdivision, street, playground or park. Existing street names
shall be continued whenever possible.
A. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60°.
B. Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets shall
be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be
designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
C. Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections within
which no obstruction to vision shall be permitted between a height of
two feet to 10 feet above the center-line grade of each street. Such
clear sight triangles shall be established from the point of intersection
of the center lines of the intersecting streets for a distance of 75 feet
where both streets are local streets, 100 feet where one or both streets
are collector streets or nonresidential streets and 150 feet where one or
both streets are major streets.
D. To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major streets shall be
located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to
center line.
E. Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall be laid
out directly opposite one another or with a minimum center-line offset
of 125 feet when all streets are local streets, or with a minimum centerline
offset of 300 feet when one or more of the streets is a collector
street, a nonresidential street or a major street.
F. Minimum pavement, cartways or curb radii at street intersections shall
be 15 feet for intersections involving only local streets, 35 feet for
intersections involving collector streets or nonresidential streets and
50 feet for intersections involving major streets.
G. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a
§ 153-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-27
1:275
§ 153-28. Cul-de-sac streets.
§ 153-29. Lots.
§ 153-30. Blocks.
five-percent grade for a distance of 35 feet measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
A. Dead-end streets serving more than four dwelling units shall be
designed as cul-de-sac streets with an improved turnaround.
B. Cul-de-sac streets or any system of interconnected culs-de-sac served
by only one access point to a collector road, permanently designed as
such, shall be considered to be local streets, and they shall not exceed
800 feet in length and shall generally furnish access to a total of not
more than 20 dwelling units.
C. Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a paved
turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer improved edge or
curbline of 40 feet and a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet.
D. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, a right-ofway
of the same width as the street shall be carried to the property line
from the end of the cul-de-sac in such a way as to permit future
extension of the street into the adjoining tract.
A. Area and other dimensions of lots and parcels shall conform to the
requirements of any zoning ordinance adopted by the Borough.66
B. All lots shall front on a public street.
C. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
D. If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated
into existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use if acceptable to
the Borough.
E. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to major traffic streets.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Zoning requirements.
(3) Topography.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 153-27 WILSON CODE § 153-30
1:276
§ 153-31. Off-street parking and loading.
§ 153-32. Driveways.
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Blocks shall normally have a minimum length of 750 feet or maximum
length of 1,200 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet,
special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory
fire protection and pedestrian travel.
C. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering a major traffic
street are used; where special superblock, cluster design, planned unit
developments or other large-scale, commercial or industrial
developments are proposed or where topographic or other conditions
prevent such a design.
D. Pedestrian interior crosswalks may be required where necessary to
assist circulation or to provide access to community facilities. Such
crosswalks shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 10 feet and a
paved walk of not less than four feet.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as required by Chapter 170,
Zoning.
B. Depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential use
shall be sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-street parking
and unloading for the intended use.
A. Driveway widths shall be designed to properly and safely serve the
function for which they are intended. Such driveways shall not be less
than 10 feet wide or greater than 30 feet wide.
B. Driveway entrances shall be clearly defined and shall provide a
minimum turning radii at the street intersection of 10 feet when serving
a residential area and 30 feet when serving a nonresidential
development. Such turning radii shall be properly constructed in
relation to the type of pavement or curb provided.
C. The number of driveways and driveway intersections on a major street
shall be minimized and avoided where possible. Permits for driveways
intersecting with state roads or highways shall be secured from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Such driveway
intersections shall generally not be located closer than 70 feet from any
street intersection right-of-way line.
D. Driveway grades shall not exceed 10% when access is to a collector or
local street or 7% when access is with a major street, except where
such excess grade is required to provide adequate access to the parcel,
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-32
1:277
§ 153-33. Storm drainage.
§ 153-34. Easements.
and in such cases, a seven-percent leveling area shall be provided
within 20 feet of the street right-of-way line.
A. All parcels shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage
away from buildings.
B. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided for
the following purposes:
(1) To permit unimpeded flow or natural watercourses.
(2) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
(3) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonable related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
C. In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from
concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
D. Stormwater management shall conform with the design standards for
drainage and stormwater management set forth in Section 10 of
Appendix A67 and with the requirements of any applicable ordinance
adopted by the Borough of Wilson pursuant to the provisions of Act 167,
the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act.68
E. Storm drainage systems shall be designed separately from any sanitary
sewer systems, and such storm systems shall be installed in accordance
with sound and established engineering practices as determined by the
Borough. Such storm systems shall be designed to accommodate any
storm discharges from the property being subdivided and additional
runoff which may occur from higher elevations within the same
watershed when it is fully developed. Such storm systems shall not
overload existing storm drainage systems or create flooding hazards.
F. Facilities such as bridges, culverts, dams and other drainage facilities
affecting the flow of water in a watershed shall meet the requirements
and be approved by any state agency having jurisdiction over such
facilities. The necessary permits under Chapter 105 for any obstruction
or dam must be obtained from the DER.
A. Easements with a minimum width of 15 feet plus the width of any
physical improvement or with the minimum width of any natural swale
67.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A, Specification for Required Subdivision and Land
Development Improvements, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
68.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 153-32 WILSON CODE § 153-34
1:278
§ 153-35. Water supply and sewerage facilities.
shall be provided as necessary for all utilities and drainage facilities,
including installation of private utility services.
B. Aboveground utilities shall be placed along the rear or side lot lines,
unless they are existing along the street prior to the submission of the
preliminary plan to the Borough.
C. Easements for installation of underground conduits for electric power,
telephone and television cable lines shall be provided so that each lot or
leased unit can be practically served.
D. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
E. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve natural drainage.
A. All subdivisions and land developments located within the Borough
shall be served with an adequate public or central water supply and
sewer system.
B. The sewer system shall meet the requirements of the Act 537 official
sewage facilities plan for sewage systems adopted by the Borough as
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,69 and
by the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources. Such facilities shall be designed in accordance with
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, the Borough and any Authority having jurisdiction over such
facilities, subject to the review and approval of the Borough.
C. Any supplement or plan revision of the official plan for sewage systems,
as required by Pennsylvania DER requirements, shall be prepared by
the subdivider, and approval by DER shall be a condition for the final
approval of any subdivision or land development. It is recommended
that an application for such required supplements or plan revisions be
initiated by the subdivider during the preliminary plan phase and prior
to submission of the final plan.
D. All water supply systems and sanitary sewer systems located in any
designated floodplain district shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory
flood elevation.
E. Where a subdivider proposes to provide a central water supply system,
which is to be owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots
within the subdivision, then the subdivider shall present evidence to the
Borough that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a
69.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 153-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-35
1:279
§ 153-36. Other utilities.
§ 153-37. Erosion and sedimentation control.
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners
or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate
of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
A. A plan for providing all necessary utility services to the proposed
subdivision and land development shall be prepared by the subdivider
in cooperation with the appropriate public utility companies and
governmental agencies. Wherever possible, utilities shall not be placed
under the paved or improved portion of a street, and easements should
be provided to facilitate utility locations in areas which will facilitate
easy access to and repair of utility lines.
B. Fire hydrants shall be required in all areas, as required by the Wilson
Borough Fire Department. Spacing of hydrants shall be such that no
residential structure shall be farther than 600 feet, and no
nonresidential structure shall be farther than 400 feet from a hydrant.
Additional standards published by the Insurance Services Office of
Pennsylvania may also be applied by the Borough.
C. All electric utility distribution lines, telephone, cable television and
other similar lines shall be installed underground in subdivisions or
land developments of five or more dwelling units.
D. Wherever practicable, in accordance with good engineering practice,
utility easements and trenches shall be occupied jointly by compatible
utilities.
E. All public and/or private utilities and facilities, including gas and
electric, shall be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood
elevation.
A. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, under the
authority of the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act,70 requires that all
subdividers proposing subdivisions and land developments requiring
the movement of earth shall prepare an erosion and sedimentation
control plan. Said plan shall be prepared in accordance with Title 25,
Rules and Regulations of the Clean Streams Law (P.L. 1987), and shall
be submitted to the Borough as a part of the final plan submission.
B. The following NPDES permits for construction shall also be required as
a condition for final approval of any subdivision or land development
70.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 153-35 WILSON CODE § 153-37
1:280
§ 153-38. Additional nonresidential requirements.
§ 153-39. Solar orientation and energy conservation.
plan. These permits shall be obtained from PADER, after consultation
with the Northampton County Conservation District:
Parcel Size
(acres) Type of Permit Required
0 to 4.9 No NPDES permit required
5 to 24.9 NPDES general permit
25 or more NPDES individual permit
A. Wherever possible, commercial and industrial parcels should include
enough land to provide for a group of commercial establishments to be
planned, developed and operated as a unit. Such a development shall be
planned with coordinated driveways, parking areas and other common
facilities. Narrow, highway ribbon developments fronting directly on a
major street should be discouraged, whenever possible.
B. Traffic movements in and out of commercial and/or industrial areas
should not interfere with external traffic, nor should it create hazards
for adjacent residential areas.
C. The design of streets, service drives and pedestrianways should provide
for safe and hazard-free internal circulation.
D. Block layout and design shall give due consideration to site conditions,
to the best possible service to customers, traffic and parking circulation
and pickup and delivery services.
E. The total area shall be sufficient to provide adequate space for off-street
parking and loading, landscaping and other facilities required to
properly serve the intended use.
A. All developers are encouraged to use recognized solar design principles
and features which will maximize the use of individual building sites for
passive solar building construction.
B. Such solar principles include the following:
(1) Layout of streets to provide a maximum number of sites with a
southern orientation to maximize solar heat gain.
(2) Minimum use of north-facing building exposures.
(3) Protection of solar access.
(4) Landscaping to complement solar use and to promote cooling in the
summer.
§ 153-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-39
1:281
§ 153-40. Large-scale or planned unit developments.
Where planned unit, residential clusters or large-scale developments are
permitted by any zoning ordinance adopted by the Borough,71 modification
of the design standards in Article IV to accommodate such uses may be
approved as set forth in § 153-63A(3).
(5) Protection of trees.
(6) Shading for summer solar exposures.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 153-39 WILSON CODE § 153-40
1:282
ARTICLE V
Mobile Home Parks
§ 153-41. Design standards.
All subdivisions and land developments designed as a mobile home park
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 170, Zoning, and the State of
Pennsylvania for such mobile home parks. All such parks shall be subject to
the following requirements and to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.
A. Zoning requirements. All individual mobile homes located in a mobile
home park shall comply with the minimum lot size, setback, area,
density and other requirements of any zoning ordinance adopted by the
Borough.
B. Landscaped buffer areas. Except where affected by access roads or
other functional design reasons, the subdivider of all mobile home
parks shall provide for the development and maintenance of a
landscaped buffer area at least 10 feet in width (in addition to any
required yards) along all property boundary lines consisting of fences
and/or appropriate trees and/or other suitable natural plant materials.
The construction of any buildings or accessory structures shall not be
permitted within this buffer area. A planting plan specifying the type,
size and location of existing and proposed plant and fence material shall
be required.
C. Size and location of mobile home parks.
(1) All mobile home parks shall have a minimum overall tract area of
10 acres.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual
mobile home and the adjoining mobile home. There shall be a
fifteen-foot minimum setback distance between any part of a
mobile home and the adjoining pavement of any other mobile
home, park street or other common area.
D. Foundation anchors and enclosures.
(1) An adequate number of foundation anchors for the placement and
tie-down of each mobile home shall be provided for the purpose of
stabilizing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and
overturning. Foundation anchors shall be adequately designed and
installed to provide adequate tie-down as required above. Anchors
shall be positioned at random distances as required for tie-down
purposes.
(2) All mobile home parks shall provide for the enclosure of the
foundation area on which the mobile home unit is situated.
Enclosures shall be installed within a minimum of 180 days after
placement of a mobile home unit.
§ 153-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-41
1:283
E. Off-street parking. At least two off-street parking places shall be
provided for each mobile home.
F. Required improvements. All mobile home parks shall comply with the
required improvements set forth in Article VI and shall conform to the
design standards set forth in Article IV. All mobile home parks shall be
served with adequate streets, sewer, water and other facilities and shall
meet all the requirements of this chapter for residential subdivisions
and land developments.
G. Other utility requirements.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a suitable method for
connecting the mobile home sewage drain outlet to the sewer line.
Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall be
encased in a waterproof catch basin.
(2) Each mobile home lot shall have a water riser pipe which connects
the mobile home water system to the central water system.
(3) All fuel storage tanks shall be constructed in accordance with
appropriate state agency and fire code regulations.
H. Special design features. The Borough will give special consideration to
any unique design features required or provided by the mobile home
park, which improves the function, safety, appearance, landscaping and
usability of the park for its residents, including such factors as:
(1) Lots laid out at an angle to streets to facilitate the movement of
mobile homes.
(2) One-way streets.
(3) Design to facilitate vehicular circulation and vehicular access to
each lot.
(4) Common vehicle parking areas.
(5) Provision of common recreation, open space or service facilities
required to meet the needs of the mobile home park.
(6) Provision of adequate and secure storage space and buildings to
service the mobile home park.
§ 153-41 WILSON CODE § 153-41
1:284
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 153-42. General provisions.
The minimum improvements required for all subdivisions and land
developments which shall be provided and installed by the subdivider as
a condition for final approval of any plan shall be set forth in this article.
Alternate improvement standards may be permitted if the Borough Council
deem them equal or superior in performance characteristics to any
specified improvements. All improvements are subject to the review and
inspection by the Borough. Additional or higher-type improvements may
be required in specific cases where the Borough Council finds them to be
necessary to create conditions essential to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 153-43. Minimum required.
Minimum improvements to be required of the subdivider, where applicable,
are set forth in Table II below. Additional improvements may be required in
accordance with other adopted ordinances or regulations or where required
by the specific plan submitted by the subdivider.
Table II
Required Improvements to be Provided
Type of Improvement Required In All Areas
Improved streets X
Adequate drainage, curbs and/or storm
sewers
X
Sidewalks X
Monuments and markers X
Street name signs X
Streetlighting X
Fire hydrants X
Electric and telephone X
Central water and sewer X
NOTE: "X" indicates that the improvement is required.
§ 153-44. Required improvements details.
A. All required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and with Appendix A attached to this
chapter.72 Said Appendix A is entitled "Specifications For Required
72.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A, Specification for Required Subdivision and Land
Development Improvements, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-44
1:285
§ 153-45. Environmentally sensitive areas.
The Borough Council may require conformance with various environmental
standards and regulations which are set forth in § 153-25 of this chapter,
and in the requirements of § 170-86 of Chapter 170, Zoning.
Subdivision and Land Development Improvements." Said Appendix A
may be amended from time to time by ordinance or by a separate
resolution adopted at a legally convened meeting of the Borough
Council after publication of a notice of intent to adopt such an
amendment.
B. The design of all required improvements shall be reviewed by qualified
Borough staff and/or the Borough Engineer, and said review shall
include a determination that all improvements have been designed in
accordance with the design standards set forth in Article IV and with
Appendix A and with other applicable Borough requirements and shall
be consistent with sound engineering and construction practices.
§ 153-44 WILSON CODE § 153-45
1:286
ARTICLE VII
Plan Requirements
§ 153-46. General provisions.
All sketch, preliminary and final plans submitted for approval or review
shall meet the requirements outlined in the following sections.
§ 153-47. Plan requirements.
All plans submitted shall comply with the following:
A. Plan information. All plans shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the record owner.
(2) The name of the subdivider or developer if different than owner.
(3) The name of the proposed subdivision.
(4) Tract boundaries.
(5) The name of the municipality(ies) in which subdivision is located.
(6) The municipal boundary lines, if appropriate.
(7) The proposed and existing street and lot layout.
(8) North point.
(9) Graphic scale.
(10) Date of submission.
(11) The name of the designer, registered engineer, surveyor or planner
responsible for the plan. All plans must be sealed by a professional
engineer and/or surveyor in accordance with state law
requirements (optional for sketch plan).
(12) The names of adjoining owners or subdivisions of all properties
abutting the proposed subdivision.
(13) All existing watercourses, streams, ponds, lakes, etc.
(14) Existing development, including streets and buildings and natural
features within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision.
B. Plan presentation. All plans shall be presented as follows:
(1) Clear, legible, white print.
(2) On sheets 18 inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches (on as
many sheets as necessary).
(3) Free from any data or graphics along the edges of each sheet to
provide a border of at least two inches along one short edge, either
§ 153-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-47
1:287
§ 153-48. Sketch plan.
§ 153-49. Preliminary plan.
the top or the left side, and a border of at least one inch along the
remaining three sides.
(4) Drawn to scale.
(5) Scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, except for sketch
plans.
A. Purpose of sketch plan. A subdivision sketch plan shall be submitted by
the developer as a basis for informal discussion with the Planning
Commission and the Borough Council. Submission of sketch plans are
optional and do not require formal approval by the Borough.
B. Plan information. Data furnished in a sketch plan shall include the
following information in addition to that required in § 153-47:
(1) Wetlands, swampy areas, springs, areas subject to annual flooding
and the boundary of any one-hundred-year floodplain.
(2) Areas of rock outcropping.
(3) Areas of stone fields.
(4) Other significant topographical and physical features.
(5) Topographic information transferred from United States Geological
Survey maps.
(6) The use to which various areas will be put (e.g., residential,
commercial, industrial, recreation).
C. Other sketch plan requirements. A subdivision sketch plan must be to
scale but precise dimensions are not required. A sketch to an
appropriate scale, on one sheet, shall be submitted covering the entire
tract within which the subdivision is situated, showing that adequate
and well-designed road extensions can be provided throughout the
entire tract and to adjoining tracts, considering the various design
standards listed in Article VI.
A. Purpose of preliminary plan. A preliminary plan is a tentative plan, in
lesser detail than a final plan, showing proposed streets and street
grades and lot layouts and the information required below for the
purpose of securing Borough approval on which the preparation of the
final plan can be based.
B. Plan information. The preliminary plan shall show or to be accompanied
by following information in addition to that required in § 153-47 and
shall also include the information required for the sketch plan in
§ 153-48B:
§ 153-47 WILSON CODE § 153-49
1:288
(1) Total acreage of the tract and subdivision.
(2) Number of lots proposed.
(3) Length of new street proposed.
(4) Type of public or central water supply and sewage disposal
facilities proposed.
(5) Zoning requirements and proof of any variance, special exception
or conditional use which may have been granted.
(6) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
at a scale of not less than one inch to 2,000 feet, showing the
relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets, roads
and municipal boundaries existing within 4,000 feet of any part of
the property proposed to be subdivided.
(7) Contours at vertical intervals not more than five feet. The Borough
may waive this requirement if the nature of the subdivision
proposal does not require contours at greater accuracy than those
transferred from the United States Geological Survey maps.
(8) Tract boundaries showing bearings and distances.
(9) All contours and elevation points within the subdivision tract
established and run direct from United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey bench marks with said datum fixed on permanent
monuments in the subdivision. The preliminary and final plans shall
contain a full and complete description of all such bench marks and
their elevations above mean sea level. In the event that United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey bench marks are not readily
available, a beginning bench mark will be established from United
States Geological Survey Map Quadrangles and noted on the plan.
(10) The location and dimension of any street or easement which abuts
the land to be subdivided.
(11) All existing tree masses and other significant natural features, such
as rock outcroppings, springs, swampy areas, wetlands and areas
subject to annual flooding and the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(12) All existing building, sewer systems, water systems, bridges,
petroleum products lines, gas lines, electric power lines and other
significant man-made features within 500 feet of the tract.
(13) All existing streets on, adjacent to or within 500 feet of any part of
the tract, including name, right-of-way width and cartway width.
(14) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
§ 153-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-49
1:289
(15) The location and width of any streets or other public ways or places
shown upon any adopted or official Borough, county or Joint
Planning Commission Plan, if applicable.
(16) The full plan of the development, showing the location and width of
all proposed streets, roads, alleys, utility rights-of-way and
easements, parks, playgrounds, lakes, ponds or other bodies of
water and other public buildings and areas; suggested street
names; proposed lot lines and approximate dimensions of lots; lot
numbers in consecutive order; driveway access points on corner lot
where proposed; proposed minimum setback for each street; and
all streets and other areas designated for appurtenant facilities,
public use or proposed to be dedicated or reserved for future public
use, together with conditions of such dedications or reservations.
(17) A preliminary plan for surface drainage of the tract to be
subdivided as required by Article VI and Appendix A,73 to include
all existing or proposed watercourses, lakes, swampy areas subject
to periodic floodings; the location and results of percolation tests;
rock outcroppings and stone fields. Plans for dams, lakes or
alteration of watercourses shall meet the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (DER).
(18) Typical cross sections and other center-line profiles for proposed
streets as shown on the preliminary plan. These plans may be
submitted as separate sheets.
(19) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required and which shall meet the requirements of DER. These
designs may be submitted as separate sheets.
(20) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of a subdivider's
entire holding, a sketch of the new prospective street layout for the
remainder. Such sketch shall be used to determine the feasibility of
future street extensions and shall not be binding until a final
subdivision plan for the remainder is approved.
(21) Preliminary layout of utilities prepared in cooperation with the
utility company to show how service can be made. A letter should
accompany the plan indicating that the utility plan has been
reviewed by the various utility companies involved and is
considered feasible.
(22) Proposed landscaping indicated on the preliminary plan showing
the locations for trees, if any, and any required buffer strips.
(23) Copies of any proposed deed restrictions and protective and
restricted covenants.
73.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A, Specifications for Required Subdivision and Land
Development Improvements, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-49 WILSON CODE § 153-49
1:290
§ 153-50. Final plans.
(24) The latest current appropriate United States Geological Survey
Quadrangle Map, or portion thereof, with the boundaries of the
entire tract containing the subdivision clearly outlined to
approximate scale. This map may also be used to satisfy the
requirements of the location map [see Subsection B(6) above].
A. The final plan shall include all of the information required herein and
shall satisfy all the requirements and conditions of any preliminary plan
approved for the subdivision or land development. The final plan shall
consist of the following:
(1) The original drawing shall be in a form suitable for final approval
and subsequent recording. It shall be a clear, legible and
reproducible document prepared on Mylar or equivalent
permanent material, with all drawings, writings and signatures
thereon prepared in permanent black opaque ink. The plan shall
contain the original seals of the registered professional surveyor,
engineer and/or other qualified professional responsible for the
plan. The form of any required endorsement of any notary,
Borough, county or other governmental bodies or otherwise to
whom the plan has been submitted for review and/or approval shall
also be included in the plan so that these endorsements may be
executed at the appropriate time after the review or approval of
each agency has occurred.
(2) The final plan shall be prepared on sheets not larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches overall. Where necessary to avoid larger than the
maximum size prescribed above, the final plan shall be drawn in
two or more sections, accompanied by a key diagram showing the
relative location of each section.
(3) Duplicate copies of the final plan shall be submitted as required in
§ 153-17.
(4) After the plan has received final approval from the Borough and
after the Borough signature(s) denoting final approval are affixed
on the plan, the applicant shall secure the signature(s) of the Joint
Planning Commission (JPC) of Lehigh-Northampton Counties
denoting completion of the JPC review.
B. The final plan shall then be recorded by the subdivider/applicant in
accordance with the requirements of § 153-19.
C. Plan information. The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title; the name of the
municipality(ies) within which it is situated.
§ 153-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-50
1:291
(2) The name and address of the owner and subdivider and the name,
license number and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor.
(3) Date, North point and graphic scale.
(4) Total acreage and total number of lots.
(5) The names of adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the book and page
where recorded and the names of all owners of all adjacent
unplotted land.
(6) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
at a scale not less than 2,000 feet to one inch showing the relation
of the property to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
municipal boundaries within 4,000 feet of any part of the property
proposed to be subdivided. (United States Geological Survey
Quadrangle Map may be used for this purpose.)
(7) The full plan of development, including tract boundaries, street
lines, lot lines, pedestrianways, easements and open spaces. Any
limitations of the easements shall be noted on the plan.
(8) Any existing public lands, all open spaces for which offers of
dedication are included and all those other areas to which title is
reserved by the owner.
(9) Sufficient data acceptable to the Borough Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of every boundary line [a
field survey to be closed with an error not to exceed one in 5,000
and balanced], street line and lot line and to reproduce such lines
upon the ground. All dimensions shall be shown in feet or
hundredths of a foot and bearings shown to 10 seconds of an arc.
(10) Lots numbered in consecutive order and names of streets.
(11) Permanent reference monuments shown on the plan and shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications of Appendix A.74
(12) A typical lot grading plan, if any, shall accompany the final plan and
be part of it.
(13) A landscaping plan, if any, also will be submitted, which shall show
the location of street trees and the treatment of buffer strips.
(14) A utility plan will also be submitted showing how the utilities will
be installed.
(15) A drainage and stormwater drainage plan with standard
construction details shall accompany the final plan and be part of
it.
74.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A, Specifications for Required Subdivision and Land
Development Improvements, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 153-50 WILSON CODE § 153-50
1:292
(16) Complete street profile plans with existing ground elevations and
proposed finished center-line grades indicated at fifty-foot stations,
together with all vertical curve data, shall accompany the final plan
and be part of it.
(17) A plan of recommended areas for locating individual wells, septic
tanks and subsurface disposal areas for the entire area to be
subdivided or a plan of centralized water and sewer facilities.
(18) All construction improvement standards, such as typical road
sections, typical channel sections, special designs of structures,
bridges and headwalls and street index listings, shall appear on the
appropriate drawings.
(19) Copies of any proposed deed restrictions and protective and
restrictive covenants.
(20) All plan sheets comprising the set of final plans shall be
consecutively numbered as Sheet 1 of 2, etc.
(21) The set of plans shall be neatly bound on the left or top to make the
book of drawings.
(22) Appropriate signature statements and blocks suitable for required
endorsements shall appear on the first sheet of the set of plans. The
responsible officials will sign a sheet of reproducible drawings on
Mylar or comparable material.
D. The final plan shall allow for the proper sequence of development of the
preliminary plan by requiring that any public improvements be
developed simultaneously with the lots they serve in order to provide
adequate traffic circulation, fire protection and Borough services.
E. The Borough will not grant final approval until comments and
recommendations have been obtained from all agencies of federal, state
and county government concerned with the proposed development.
§ 153-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-50
1:293

ARTICLE VIII
Installation of Required Improvements
§ 153-51. Responsibility to install.
In all cases, the subdivider shall be responsible to pay for the cost of
installation of all required improvements under supervision of the Borough
and in the manner specified by the Borough and in accordance with
Sections 509 and 510 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
No. 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as further amended.75
§ 153-52. Methods of providing improvements.
No final plan shall be approved by the Borough Council until provision
has been made by the subdivider for the proper installation of required
improvements in either of the following ways, in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.76
A. Construction of improvements.
(1) The subdivider may elect to physically install, prior to final plan
approval, all of the required improvements in accordance with the
standards and specifications contained in this article and with the
final plan submitted to the Borough Council, provided that such
final plan has been conditionally approved by the Borough Council
subject to the construction of improvements as required herein and
subject to the execution of the development agreement set forth in
§ 153-54.
(2) Upon completion of all improvements, the Borough Engineer shall
be authorized by the Borough Council to inspect said
improvements and shall certify if all improvements have been
installed in accordance with this chapter. Upon receipt of such a
certification, the Borough Council may then proceed to final
approval of the final plan. No lots shall be sold or buildings
occupied on any such development until all improvements are
satisfactorily completed and final approval granted by the Borough
and the final record plan has been recorded as required herein.
B. Financial security.
(1) In lieu of Subsection A above, the subdivider shall deposit with the
Borough sufficient financial security to secure to the public the
completion of all of the required improvements within one year of
the proposed completion date which is set forth in the subdivision
plan and in the development agreement referred to below in
accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 and 10510.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-52
1:295
§ 153-53. Financial security for maintenance.
§ 153-54. Development agreement.
(2) Said financial security shall be provided by posting a bond with a
bonding company or with a federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution. The amount of said financial security shall be
equal to 110% of the cost of completion of the required
improvements estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled
for completion by the subdivider. Said estimate shall be prepared
and may be revised annually as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.77
(3) Said amount of security may be increased by an additional 10% for
each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date for the
initial posting of the financial security.
(4) Notwithstanding the submission of said financial security as
required herein, no occupied structure within the proposed
subdivision and land development shall be without suitable street
access improved with at least the required base, curbs, gutters and
utilities for a period of time longer than six months.
(5) The provision of such financial security may be made available by
the subdivider in accordance with any staging plans approved by
the Borough Council.
A. Where the Borough accepts dedication of any required improvements,
the Borough Council may require the posting of financial security to
secure the structural integrity and functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications approved in the final
plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication.
B. Financial security for maintenance shall be posted as required by
§ 153-52B, and the amount shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of
the installation of said improvements.
C. Financial security for maintenance of improvements installed under the
jurisdiction and rules of a public utility or a municipal authority shall be
posted in accordance with the requirements of said public utility or
municipal authority or other appropriate agency and shall not be
included in the financial security posted with the Borough.
A. All subdividers proposing any subdivision or land development
requiring the installation of improvements as required herein shall be
required to enter into a legally binding development agreement with
the Borough guaranteeing the installation of said improvements in
accordance with this chapter. The development agreement shall be in
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-52 WILSON CODE § 153-54
1:296
form suitable for execution by the Borough and it shall consist of the
following where applicable:
(1) The construction authorized by the approved final plan, or in the
case where § 153-52A applies, in accordance with the conditionally
approved final plan.
(2) Construction and installation of streets, utility lines and any other
required improvements.
(3) Identification of any private improvements approved as part of the
final plan, including suitable and permanent measures for ensuring
continuing maintenance of said improvements as required herein.
(4) Installation of underground streetlighting, cable and streetlighting
poles.
(5) Offer of dedication of streets, transfer of water and sewer lines and
easements and other improvements which are so approved in the
final plan.
(6) Prevention of erosion and water damage to adjacent property.
(7) Subdivider's responsibilities for damage to other property.
(8) The responsibility for providing necessary inspections to ensure
compliance with this chapter, clearly identified.
(9) A work schedule, beginning and ending date, for improvements
proposed in the final plan.
(10) All planning, engineering, inspection and legal service costs
incurred or to be incurred by the Borough, including cost of
preparing this development agreement, shall be identified and that
amount agreed upon for payment by the subdivider on a regular
basis.
(11) Posting of the required financial security to ensure completion of
all of the required improvements in accordance with § 153-52B, if
applicable.
(12) Financial security. Where the Borough agrees to accept dedication
of any required improvement, posting of the required financial
security may be required by the Borough to secure the structural
integrity and the functioning of said improvement in accordance
§ 153-53.
(13) Two sets of reproducible as-built plans, including all improvements
which are properly referenced to identify specific locations,
provided to the Borough by the developer.
(14) Provisions for violation of the development agreement.
(15) A save harmless clause.
§ 153-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-54
1:297
§ 153-55. Release from financial security for improvements.
The financial security provided by the subdivider shall be released as
follows:
(16) Liability of subdivider during warranty period.
B. The subdivider shall secure or maintain public liability insurance.
C. No improvements shall be commenced or work begun prior to the
execution of this agreement and the delivery of the required financial
security in compliance with § 153-52B, if applicable.
D. The Borough Council may impose additional requirements to assure
compliance with this chapter and to reflect specific subdivision plan
conditions.
A. When the subdivider has completed all of the necessary and approved
improvements, he shall so notify the Borough, in writing, by certified or
registered mail and send a copy to the Borough's Engineer.
B. Within 10 days of receipt of such notice, the Borough shall direct and
authorize the Borough's Engineer to inspect all of the improvements.
C. The Borough's Engineer shall then file a written report with the
Borough Council and shall mail a copy to the subdivider by certified or
registered mail within 30 days after his receipt of authorization to
inspect all improvements from the Borough. Said reports shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements,
either in whole or in part, with a statement of reasons for any
nonapproval or rejection.
D. The Borough shall notify the subdivider, in writing, by certified or
registered mail of its action in relation to the improvements provided.
E. If the Borough Council or the Borough's Engineer fails to comply with
the above time limits, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved and the subdivider shall be released from all liability pursuant
to its financial security.
F. Any improvements not approved or rejected by the Borough shall be
expeditiously completed by the subdivider, and upon completion, the
same notification procedure as above shall be followed.
G. If any required improvement has not been installed as required by this
chapter, by the approved final plan or by the executed development
agreement, then the Borough shall enforce the financial security posted
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such
financial security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to the required improvements, the Borough may,
at its option, install part of such improvements and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary
to complete the remainder.
§ 153-54 WILSON CODE § 153-56
1:298
§ 153-56. Release from financial security for maintenance.
The financial security for maintenance shall remain in effect for a period
of 18 months after acceptance of dedication by the Borough or other
appropriate agency. Said release shall be effected utilizing the same
notification procedures set forth in § 153-55.
§ 153-57. Exemption for small subdivisions.
The provisions of this article may be waived by the Borough Council only
for the following types of subdivisions if the Borough Council determines
and makes a finding, in writing with the appropriate reasons set forth,
that conformance with said sections are not required to ensure the proper
completion of the subdivision in accordance with the intent and objective of
this chapter.
A. Small subdivisions and/or land developments less than 10 acres in size
and containing no more than five lots and not involving the provision of
any new streets, easements of access or other required public or
private improvements. The Borough Council may waive the ten-acre
maximum requirements set forth above, provided that all of the other
conditions exist.
B. A subdivision or large development which requires the installation of a
private street or other improvement, as approved by the Borough,
which improvement is not subject to future extension and where such
private improvement serves fewer than six dwelling units.
§ 153-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-57
1:299

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 153-58. Subdivision Officer.
§ 153-59. Planning Commission.
A. The Subdivision Officer of the Borough shall act as the officer of the
Borough responsible for administration of this chapter. The Subdivision
Officer shall receive and examine all subdivisions and land
developments in the name of the Borough and shall refer copies of all
such plans and applications to appropriate agencies or officials
involved.
B. The Subdivision Officer shall also receive information from such
agencies or officials and shall transmit these comments to the Planning
Commission and the Borough Council. The Subdivision Officer shall
keep records of all applications and plans and of actions taken by the
Borough on such applications and plans. The Borough's Engineer or
other designated Borough staff, at the request of the Subdivision
Officer, shall make all required inspections called for in this chapter.
The Subdivision Officer shall also inform the subdivider and the
Borough of any violations of this chapter which shall become known to
him.
C. The Borough Council shall designate the specific person or any member
of the Borough Planning Commission to serve as the Subdivision
Officer. Said Subdivision Officer may be any person qualified to carry
out the duties set forth herein.
A. The Borough Planning Commission shall be the responsible agency of
the Borough to review all plans to identify compliance and
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter in accordance
with the plan submission procedures set forth in Article III.
B. The Commission shall also classify all plans as minor subdivisions, as
major subdivisions or land developments, as defined herein.
C. Upon completion of its review, the Commission shall prepare a letter or
report for submittal to the Borough Council setting forth its findings
and recommendations for approval, approval with conditions or
disapproval of the plan, together with reasons explaining the
recommended action. Said report shall only be advisory, and final action
shall be the responsibility of the Borough Council.
D. The Commission may make all necessary contacts to secure information
on any plan and make inspections of the proposed area to be
subdivided, keep records of all actions taken, attend public hearings
scheduled by the Borough Council and assist the Borough Council in all
plan reviews.
§ 153-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-60
1:301
§ 153-60. Borough Council.
§ 153-61. Endorsement of record plan.
Upon approval of any final plan by Borough Council, the President of the
Borough Council or the Borough Manager and the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission and the Borough Secretary shall endorse the required
number of copies of the record plan, as required in § 153-19. The Joint
Planning Commission may then endorse the record plan indicating the
completion of its review of the plan.
§ 153-62. Subdivision records.
The Subdivision Officer shall keep a record of the findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision plans and applications filed for
approval. Such records shall be open to the public for review.
§ 153-63. Modifications, appeals and amendments.
A. The Borough Council, with the assistance of the Subdivision Officer and
the Borough Planning Commission as set forth above and in Article III,
and any other agency or professional designated by the Borough
Council shall review all subdivision plans and land developments to
determine conformity with this chapter, may hold necessary public
hearings and shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove all
plans for subdivisions and land developments after receiving the
findings and/or recommendations of the Planning Commission.
B. The Borough Council also shall grant any necessary modifications,
variances or waivers as set forth in § 153-63 and shall perform all other
duties required under this chapter.
C. After approval of any final plan, the Borough Council shall direct the
Subdivision Officer to take any necessary action relative to the making
of arrangements for acceptance of dedication by the Borough of any
public right-of-way area(s) shown on the plan and also action relative to
the execution of the development agreement with the subdivider.
A. Modifications. The Borough Council may grant the following
modifications and variances subject to such conditions which will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements which are so varied or modified.
(1) Modification due to exceptional conditions. The Borough Council
may grant a modification to the provisions contained herein for
reason of the size or exceptional shape of a specific piece of
property or of exceptional topographic conditions or when the
strict application of this chapter would result in extreme practical
difficulties and undue hardship upon the owner of such property;
provided, however, that such relief may only be granted without
§ 153-60 WILSON CODE § 153-63
1:302
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(2) Modification of required improvements. The Borough Council may,
subject to appropriate conditions, waive the provisions of any or all
of the required improvements specified in Article VI to ensure the
proper completion of the subdivision in accordance with the intent
and objectives of this chapter, which are not required in the
interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or which
are inappropriate because of the inadequacy of connecting
facilities.
(3) Modification to permit large-scale or planned unit developments.
The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by
the Borough Council in the case of plans for complete communities
or neighborhood units or other large-scale developments or
planned residential or unit developments which comply with any
zoning ordinance adopted by the Borough and which, in the
judgment of the Borough Council, achieve substantially the
objectives of the regulations contained herein and which are
further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as
will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
(4) Requests for modifications. All requests for modifications shall be
in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for
development. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts
of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary. The Borough Council shall keep a written
record of all action on all requests for modifications.
B. Reconsideration and appeals to the Borough Council. Any subdivider/
applicant aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of any
Borough official or of the Borough Planning Commission may request
and receive opportunity to appear before the Borough Council, present
additional relevant information and request reconsideration and/or
appeal of the original finding, decision or recommendation.
C. Procedure for applying. Applications for modification, variances and
appeals to the Borough Council shall be submitted in writing. The
application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied upon by
the applicant. The Borough Council shall act upon such application
within a period of 45 days.
D. Appeals to court. The decisions of the Borough Council with respect to
the approval or disapproval of plans may be appealed directly to court
as provided for in Pennsylvania Act 247, as amended, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.78
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-63
1:303
§ 153-64. Preventative remedies.
E. Revision and amendment. The Borough Council may, from time to time,
amend this chapter by appropriate action taken after a public hearing
on said proposed revisions. Public notice shall be given of the date, time
and place of such public hearings together with a brief summary setting
forth the principal provisions of such amendments and indicating the
place and time where copies of the proposed amendments may be
examined. All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Borough
Planning Commission and to the Joint Planning Commission for review
at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such
amendment.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter.
This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of
the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 153-63 WILSON CODE § 153-65
1:304
§ 153-65. Violations and penalties.
§ 153-66. Hold harmless clause.
Any approval granted by the Borough Council under this chapter does
not relieve the subdivider of the legal responsibility for meeting all other
legal requirements under local, commonwealth and federal law, and said
subdivider shall be responsible for providing a safe, environmentally sound
and properly constructed subdivision which does not adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare. All aggrieved persons, firms or corporations
may take appropriate legal remedies against the subdivider in the event
of any failure on the part of the subdivider. The Borough of Wilson, the
Borough Council and all officials of the Borough, including all employees or
consultants of the Borough are hereby held harmless in the event of any
failure on the part of the subdivider.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinance enacted
under this chapter or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the municipality as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 153-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-66
1:305
Chapter 157
TAXATION
§ 153-66 WILSON CODE § 153-66
1:306
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-30-1959 by Ord. No. 377, approved 11-30-1959;
amended in its entirety 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 755, approved
6-13-2011]
§ 157-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act,
53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth therein, except
as modified below. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future, including any regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
thereunder.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAX OFFICER — The person or entity appointed as Tax Officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax in the TCD.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Tax Officer, and approved by the
TCC, for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or required
to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this article or the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article or the Local
Tax Enabling Act to file a return of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — The Northampton Tax Collection District, or any future tax collection
district, to which the Borough or any part of the Borough is assigned under
the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 157-2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Borough hereby imposes a tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the Borough.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Borough also imposes
a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits derived by an individual nonresident from any work,
business, profession, or activity of any kind engaged in within the
boundaries of the Borough.
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:307
§ 157-3. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 157-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act and the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the TCC
and Tax Officer. A taxpayer is required to file a return even if no tax payment
is due and owing.
§ 157-5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
§ 157-6. Tax Officer.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local tax enabling act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the Tax Officer in conformity with the Local Tax Enabling
Act. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
A. Collection of tax. The tax will be collected from individuals and
employers by the Tax Officer. The Tax Officer is authorized to file an
action in the name of the Borough for the recovery of income taxes due
to the Borough and unpaid. Nothing in this section shall affect the
authority of the Borough to file an action in its own name for collection
of income taxes under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
B. Criminal complaints for violations. The Tax Officer is authorized to file
criminal complaints on behalf of the Borough for violation of this article
§ 157-2 WILSON CODE § 157-6
1:308
§ 157-7. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs of collection
imposed by the Tax Officer in accordance with authorization by the TCC.
The Tax Officer may retain reasonable costs of collection in accordance with
Local Tax Enabling Act and as approved by the TCC.
§ 157-8. Purpose; repealer.
The primary purpose of this article is to confirm the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior ordinance or part of any prior ordinance conflicting with
the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To
the extent the same as any ordinance in force immediately prior to adoption
of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a continuation of
such prior ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this article is declared
invalid, any prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall remain in full force
and effect and shall not be affected in any manner by adoption of this
article. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall such provision affect any suit or prosecution pending or
to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish offense under the
authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this article. Subject
to the foregoing provisions of this section, this article shall supersede and
repeal on the effective date any ordinance levying a tax on earned income
or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 157-9. Construction.
This article is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling Act,
and to include all necessary authorizations to permit the Tax Officer to take
such tax collection, administration, disbursement, enforcement and other
activities as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, subject to the policies
and procedures of the TCC.
§ 157-10. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income received or earned and net profits earned or
made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter
without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance imposing such change.
or the Local Tax Enabling Act. Nothing in this section shall affect the
authority of the Borough to file a criminal complaint on its own behalf
for violation of this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 157-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-10
1:309

ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 73979, approved 12-19-2007]
§ 157-11. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Wilson
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 157-12. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF WILSON or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Wilson.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Wilson to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 113
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.80
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Wilson.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 113 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.81
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Wilson for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Emergency Municipal Service
Tax, adopted 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 727, approved 12-12-2005.
80.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 6913 was repealed by 2008, Act. 32, effective 6-30-2012.
81.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 6913 was repealed by 2008, Act. 32, effective 6-30-2012.
§ 157-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-12
1:311
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed herein.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 157-13. Levy of tax.
§ 157-14. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Wilson during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Borough Council from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F82 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Borough of Wilson.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivision within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
82.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 157-12 WILSON CODE § 157-14
1:312
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purpose of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
shall annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall
have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Borough that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to
or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax
from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for a given
calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year
under Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of the calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
§ 157-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-14
1:313
§ 157-15. Duty of employers to collect.
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person under this subsection,
plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In the event the employment of a person subject
to withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough may pursue
collection under this article.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
(NOTE: With respect to refunds, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425; with respect
to interest, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426.) Refunds made within 75 days of a
refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to
remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is
later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for
amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for
refunds to exempt persons and provide refunds.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Wilson, as well as those
employers situated outside the Borough of Wilson but who engage in
business within the Borough of Wilson, is hereby charged with the duty
of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Wilson and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough of
Wilson.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
§ 157-14 WILSON CODE § 157-15
1:314
§ 157-16. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 157-17. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 157-14 above and remits the amount so withheld in accordance
therewith.
G. Employees shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 157-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-18
1:315
§ 157-18. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Wilson shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 157-19. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 157-20. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Wilson but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Wilson do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents
of the Borough of Wilson. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Wilson and employee of a nonresidential employer
may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event his tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 157-21. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
§ 157-18 WILSON CODE § 157-21
1:316
§ 157-22. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for nonpayment.
§ 157-23. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton
County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is authorized to examine the books and payroll records of
any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an
employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each
employer is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 157-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-24
1:317
§ 157-24. Interpretation; validity.
A. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to empower the Borough
of Wilson to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the Borough under the Constitution of
the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 157-24 WILSON CODE § 157-24
1:318
ARTICLE III
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1976 by Ord. No. 532, approved 12-30-1976]
§ 157-25. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby levied an annual per capita tax in the amount of $5 upon all
inhabitants of the Borough of Wilson above the age of 18 years, under the
provisions of Act No. 511, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," approved
December 31, 1965, and amendments thereto.83
§ 157-26. Collection of tax. [Amended 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 534,
approved 3-14-1977]
Said per capita tax shall be collected by the Secretary of the Borough of
Wilson.
§ 157-27. Discount for early payment.
Said tax shall be subject to a discount of 2% from the amount thereof if
payment thereof shall be made within two months after the date of the
notice of such tax.
§ 157-28. Penalty for late payment. [Amended 12-29-1977 by Ord.
No. 541, approved 12-29-1977]
A penalty of 10% shall be added to the amount of said tax in the event
payment of the same is not made within four months after the date of the
notice of said tax.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 157-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-28
1:319

ARTICLE IV
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 6-13-1977 by Ord. No. 537, approved 6-14-1977]
§ 157-29. Title; statutory authority.
This article shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance," and
the business privilege tax it imposes is enacted under the authority of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, Act No. 511 of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53
P.S. § 6901, and amendments thereto.84 This article shall go into effect 30
days after enactment, as provided by said Act.
§ 157-30. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson.
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
Borough of Wilson, including but not limited to the sale of merchandise or
other tangible personalty or the performance of services.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is due.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Borough of Wilson.
WHOLESALE DEALER OR WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and no other
persons.
§ 157-31. Imposition of tax; rate. [Amended 12-27-1979 by Ord. No.
554, approved 12-27-1979; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 710, approved
3-8-2004]
There is hereby levied for the calendar year 2004, and annually thereafter,
a tax for general revenue purposes on all persons for the privilege of doing
84.Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax
Enabling Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered.
See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 157-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-31
1:321
business as herein defined in the Borough, and the rate of the tax on each
and every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business transacted within
the territorial limits of the Borough shall be 1 1/2 mills, (1 1/2 mills shall
mean $1.50 per $1,000 of gross volume of business), except that the rate of
the tax on each and every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business
transacted by wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors within the territorial
limits of the Borough shall be one mill. (One mill shall mean $1 per $1,000
of gross volume of business). All nonwholesale business of such wholesale
dealers or wholesale vendors shall be taxed at the general rate of 1 1/2
mills. The tax shall be payable by April 15, 2004, and annually thereafter
on April 15th based upon gross business volume for the preceding tax year
computed according to § 157-31 of this article.
§ 157-32. Computation of volume of business. [Amended 3-8-2004
by Ord. No. 710, approved 3-8-2004]
§ 157-33. Exemptions.
A. Every person subject to this article shall compute his gross volume of
business upon the actual gross volume of business transacted by him
during the person's tax year immediately proceeding the annual due
date as set forth in § 157-31.
B. The License Officer is hereby authorized to accept payment under
protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by the Borough
in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the
Borough's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction that the Borough has been overpaid, the
amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. The
provisions of this section shall be applicable to cases in which the facts
are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. Persons and businesses. Persons employed for wage or salary, agencies
of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the business of any political subdivision, or of any
authority created or organized under and pursuant to any act of
assembly are exempt from the provisions of this article. Nonprofit
corporations or associations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes which meet the criteria for "institutions of purely
public charity" as set forth in the Institutions of Purely Public Charity
Act, 1997, P.L. 508, No. 55 (10 P.S. § 371 et seq.), are also exempt.
However, the exemption for such purely public charities is limited to
activities connected to the organization's charitable purpose, and does
not apply to exempt the gross volume of business derived from
"unrelated trade or business," as defined in 26 U.S.C.A. § 513, from
taxation. [Amended 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 779, approved
11-14-2016]
§ 157-31 WILSON CODE § 157-33
1:322
§ 157-34. Deductions.
The gross volume of business upon which the tax is computed shall include
the gross consideration credited or received for or on account of sales made
or services rendered, or both, subject only to the following deductions:
B. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege, transaction,
subject or occupation which is subject to a state tax or license fee.
C. Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates of
service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
D. State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on the privilege of employing such tangible property as is
subject to a state tax except on sales of admission to places of
amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of
property.
E. Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products or on by-products of
manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm
products, manufactured, produced or grown in the Borough of Wilson,
or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or market, or on any
privilege, act or transaction related to the business of manufacturing,
the production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber and
natural resources or farm products by manufacturers, by producers and
by farmers with respect to the goods, articles and products of their own
manufacture, production or growth, or any privilege, act or transaction
relating to the business of processing by-products of their own
manufacture, or on the transportation, loading, unloading or dumping
or storage of such goods, articles, products or by-products.
A. Gross moneys derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise to the extent that the resale price does not exceed the
trade-in allowance.
B. Refunds, credits or allowances given on account of defects in goods,
wares or merchandise sold or on account of goods, wares or
merchandise returned.
C. Any commissions paid by a person to another similar person on account
of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such
other person.
D. Bad debts where the deduction is also taken in the same year for federal
income taxation purposes.
§ 157-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-34
1:323
§ 157-35. Partial exemptions.
Where the gross or whole volume of business in its entirety cannot be
subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the Constitution
of the United States or any other provision of law, the License Officer shall
establish rules and methods of allocation so that only that part of the gross
volume of business which is taxable shall be taxed. If any person is liable
for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax Enabling
Act to the Borough and one or more political subdivisions of the state, the
tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by such
political subdivisions, but the combined taxes of both subdivisions shall not
exceed the maximum rate of tax.
§ 157-36. Records.
The taxpayer shall keep books and records of his business so as to show
clearly, accurately and separately the amounts of sales and services as are
subject to the tax and the amounts of such sales and services which he is
entitled to deduct from the gross volume of business.
§ 157-37. Returns; penalty for late payment. [Amended 1-22-1996
by Ord. No. 654, approved 1-22-1996; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 710,
approved 3-8-2004]
§ 157-38. License and fee.
After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct or
continuing to conduct, or to continue to conduct, any business within the
Borough shall file with the License Officer an application for a business
privilege license and shall pay a fee of $5 for the initial license and $5 for
each renewal thereof. The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in
E. Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or Borough of Wilson.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the License
Officer. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness
thereof as provided on the form.
B. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven
days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the
actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such person
during that tax year in which said person ceased doing business, and
pay the tax due as computed thereof at the rate herein provided for at
the time of filing said return.
C. The business privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due
and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a
return as set forth above, and if the same is not paid on such date, 5%
shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional
part of a month until paid.
§ 157-34 WILSON CODE § 157-38
1:324
the place of business for which such license is issued and shall remain in
effect one year from the date of issue. In cases where more than place of
business is conducted, a separate license shall be issued for each place of
business. Any taxpayer who is in default in payment of tax due hereunder
shall be refused a license until such tax is paid in full. Licenses may be
revoked for Borough ordinance violations.
§ 157-39. Duties of License Officer and Treasurer.
§ 157-40. Collection; suit and penalty.
The License Officer or his duly appointed deputies shall have the power,
in the name of the Borough, to institute proceedings against any and all
A. The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The License Officer and his duly appointed deputies, under the
direction of the Borough Council, are hereby empowered, with the
approval of the Council, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination
and correction of returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of this article and
any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
C. In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then the License Officer or his duly appointed deputies shall
assess said person or persons on such an amount of the whole or gross
volume of business as the said License Officer or his deputies deem
reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the License
Officer and his duly appointed deputies shall give the parties assessed a
notice in which shall be stated the trade, business, occupation or class
and the amount of the business privilege tax imposed or levied.
D. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to
enable the License Officer or his deputies to verify all transactions. The
License Officer or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to the tax
imposed by this article in order to verify the accuracy of the return
made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. All returns
shall be confidential, unless subject to court proceedings.
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the License Officer shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as in other cases.
§ 157-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-40
1:325
persons who violate the provisions of this article. If for any reason the tax is
not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection
and interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 157-41. Savings clause.
§ 157-42. Violations and penalties.
Any person who conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses
subject to the tax imposed by this article without having first secured a
business privilege license for the year, or any person who fails to file a
tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person who
willfully files a false return, shall, upon summary conviction before any
District Justice in the County of Northampton, be fined not more than $300
for any one offense, recoverable with costs, or undergo imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days if the amount of the fine and costs is not paid. Each day
on which any person violates any provision of this article may be considered
as a separate offense and punishable as such.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Borough under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provisions of the
law, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair the right to
impose the taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other
persons as herein provided.
§ 157-40 WILSON CODE § 157-42
1:326
ARTICLE V
Tax on Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-29-1982 by Ord. No. 574, approved 12-29-1982]
§ 157-43. Statutory authority.
This article and the tax it imposes is enacted under the authority of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.
§ 6901, and amendments thereto.85 This article shall go into effect 30 days
after enactment as provided by said Act.
§ 157-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALENDAR YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug or token, may be operated for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, including
but not limited to all video games, pinball machines, jukeboxes and pool
tables.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
§ 157-45. Exemption. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654,
approved 1-22-1996]
This article shall not apply to any coin-operated amusement device used at
the time of the adoption of this article for home entertainment within any
residence located in the Borough.
§ 157-46. Imposition of tax; display of receipt.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 157-45 hereof, there is hereby
assessed, levied and imposed for general revenue purposes, for the
calendar year of 1983 and for each calendar year thereafter or any
portion thereof, a tax of $25 upon each coin-operated amusement
device within the Borough of Wilson, which said tax shall be payable to
the Borough Treasurer on the first day of May of each year or within
five days after the installation of such coin-operated amusement device,
as the case may be; provided, however, that any person who pays a tax
upon a coin-operated amusement device or devices shall not be
required to pay an additional tax in the same calendar year upon any
coin-operated amusement device which is merely a replacement
thereof.
85.Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax
Enabling Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered.
See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 157-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-46
1:327
§ 157-47. Report to License Officer.
Every person subject to a tax imposed by this article shall, at the time
of payment, transmit a written report to the License Officer which shall
set forth the name of the person, the address at which the coin-operated
amusement device is to be located and the number and character of coinoperated
amusement devices to be installed at such address as of the time
of such payment. Such information shall be furnished over the signature of
the person and shall be made under oath or affirmation.
§ 157-48. Right of access.
The License Officer of the Borough or a Borough employee designated by
the Borough License Officer shall have access to the records and premises
of each person subject to a tax imposed under the provisions of this article,
at any reasonable time or times, for ascertaining the number of coinoperated
amusement devices operated by such person.
§ 157-49. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this article shall be in any way construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any machine or mechanism
that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way
contrary to law or that may be contrary to any future law.
§ 157-50. Penalty for late payment.
If any tax levied pursuant to this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto,
plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of a month until paid.
§ 157-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to carry out any of the provisions or
requirements of this article, or who shall neglect, fail or refuse to furnish
complete and correct reports or to pay over any tax levied by this article
at the time required, or who shall knowingly make any incomplete, false
or fraudulent reports, or who attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid
the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article,
shall, upon summary conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300 for each and every offense and the costs
of prosecution thereof, and in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day on which any person violates
any provision of this article may be considered as a separate offense and
B. Upon payment of the tax imposed in this section, the Borough License
Officer shall furnish to the person paying such tax a receipt showing the
number of coin-operated amusement devices upon which said person
has paid a tax, which said receipt shall be prominently displayed by
such person on or adjacent to the coin-operated amusement device or
replacements thereof upon which such tax has been paid.
§ 157-46 WILSON CODE § 157-51
1:328
punishable as such, provided that such fine or penalty shall be in addition
to any other imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 157-52. Suits for collection; costs.
The License Officer or his duly appointed deputies shall have the power,
in the name of the Borough, to institute proceedings against any and all
persons who violate the provisions of this article. If for any reason the tax is
not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection
and interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 157-53. Saving clause.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Borough under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States
or the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other
provisions of the law, the decisions of the court shall not affect or impair
the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed
upon other persons as herein provided.
§ 157-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-53
1:329

ARTICLE VI
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 594, approved 12-30-1985]
§ 157-54. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, for the purpose of
this article, shall have the meaning herein indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson.
COLLECTOR — Refers to the person elected or designated by the Borough
Council to collect or to receive the taxes imposed by this article.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person who resides in or inhabits the Borough of Wilson.
TAX ON OCCUPATION — A flat rate tax of $5 per year levied on each
resident.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay an occupation tax.
§ 157-55. Imposition of tax.
In addition to other taxes imposed by the Borough, there is hereby imposed
for general revenue purposes an annual tax on occupation of $5 upon every
resident of the Borough of Wilson who shall have attained the age of 18
years on or before January 1 of the fiscal year for which the tax is levied.
§ 157-56. Tax notice.
The Tax Collector shall give notice of the amount of the tax on occupation
hereby levied and assessed to every taxable person whose name appears on
the tax duplicate. Failure to receive such notice shall not relieve a taxpayer
from the payment of the tax hereby levied and assessed, and such taxpayer
shall be charged with the said tax as though he had received notice.
§ 157-57. Addition of names to tax duplicate.
In case the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the Borough any
resident or inhabitant above the age of 18 years whose name does not
appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the name of such person
forthwith to the Assessor, who shall thereupon certify the same unto the
Borough Council, which shall promptly certify the same to the Tax Collector
reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector shall add such name
and the assessment of this tax on occupation against such person to the
duplicate of the Borough of Wilson and shall proceed to collect the same.
Any person who shall become a resident of the Borough after the first day
of January of any calendar year shall be liable for the tax on occupation for
that year. Any person who shall cease to be a resident at any time after the
first day of January of any calendar year shall be liable for the full amount
of the tax on occupation for such year.
§ 157-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-58
1:331
§ 157-58. Exemptions.
Any person who is less than 18 years of age as of January 1 of the tax year
shall not be subject to and shall be excluded from the payment of the tax
provided herein.
§ 157-59. Tax Collector.
Said tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector
of Borough Taxes for the Borough of Wilson in the same manner as other
Borough taxes are collected.86
§ 157-60. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection
and payment of such tax as provided by law for other Borough taxes.
§ 157-61. Duplicate constitutes warrant for collection.
The entry of the tax on occupation in the tax duplicate and the issuance
of the duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the
collection of the tax on occupation hereby levied and assessed.
§ 157-62. Expense of collection.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be the
same as shall be fixed from time to time for the collection of other Borough
taxes.
§ 157-63. Discounts and penalties.
Said tax on occupation shall be payable on February 1 of the tax year.
All taxpayers subject to the tax shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from
the amount of said tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof
prior to April 1 of the tax year. All taxpayers subject to the tax who shall
fail to make payment of said tax on or before June 1 of the tax year shall
be considered delinquent and shall be charged a penalty of 10% of the
amount of said tax, which penalty shall be added to the tax by the Collector
and collected by him. The Collector shall furnish a receipt to every person
paying such tax.
§ 157-64. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers as above set forth, shall
have the power to collect said tax on occupation by distress, shall have the
power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of
any person owing any tax on occupation or whose wife owes any tax on
occupation, shall remit said taxes to the Borough by a separate statement
as other taxes are remitted, shall allow discounts and add penalties and
86.Editor's Note: The Borough Secretary acts as the collection officer for this tax.
§ 157-58 WILSON CODE § 157-64
1:332
shall generally be subject to all the duties and possessed of all the rights
conferred upon the Borough Tax Collector by the Local Tax Enabling Act of
1965 and its supplements and amendments.87 It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Borough Council in enacting this article to confer upon the Tax
Collector, in the collection of this tax on occupation, all the powers, duties
and obligations of the Borough Tax Collector as provided for in the Local
Tax Enabling Act of 1965 and its supplements and amendments, and it is
further declared to be the intent to confer upon the Tax Collector all the
powers and rights, together with all the duties and obligations, conferred
upon or granted the Borough Tax Collector by any other law or laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 157-65. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
654, approved 1-22-1996]
Any person who shall be convicted of violating or failing to carry out any
of the provisions of this article, or failing, neglecting or refusing to pay
any taxes or penalties, or attempting to do anything whatsoever to avoid
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall
be liable to a fine or penalty not to exceed $300 for each and every offense
and the costs of prosecution thereof, and in default of payment thereof,
to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for not more than 30 days,
provided that such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 157-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-65
1:333

ARTICLE VII
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 603, approved 12-29-1986]
§ 157-66. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Wilson Borough Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance."
§ 157-67. Statutory authority.
This realty transfer tax is levied under authority of Article XI-D, entitled
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, which is a new Article added by Act 77-1986 (Act of July 2, 1986,
No. 77, P.L. 318) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act
14-1981 (Act of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36), as amended. The Pennsylvania
Real Estate Transfer Tax Act is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., and
Article XI-D is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 157-68. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. The following words, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more
persons.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby appointed Collector of the tax levied by this
article.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise
of title to real estate within the governing body, but does not include
wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like character
given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor,
land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until
the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period
of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest
or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 157-74 of this article.
§ 157-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-68
1:335
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough of Wilson, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors or lineal descendants of any
of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any
of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption
shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, corporation or entity
of any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing
a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as applied to the
associations shall include the responsible members or general partners
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
(2)
(3) Fur farming.
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments, including without
limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas,
quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial
plant. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 654, approved
1-22-1996]
(1)
(2) A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
(3)
§ 157-68 WILSON CODE § 157-68
1:336
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering,
accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
(2)
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
(1)
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, by reason of either the length of the term or the grant of
a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of
a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a
leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or
occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity. In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that
a right or option to renew or extend the lease will be exercised if
the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating
the rental charge is established.
(2)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefor paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents or a commensurate part thereof where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against other real estate, provided that where the
document shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value"
thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale.
(1)
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgement or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions
without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy
agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of
(2)
§ 157-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-68
1:337
§ 157-69. Imposition of tax.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed for general revenue purposes on every
real estate transaction, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
properties or the real estate of an acquired company, "value" shall
be the actual monetary worth of the real estate within the
governing body, determined by adjusting the assessed value of the
real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level
ratio of assessed values to market values of the taxing district in
which the governing body is located as established by the State
Tax Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment
where the assessment includes other real estate.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection A(1) or (2) above,
the actual monetary worth of such interest.
(3)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby, or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor or a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(4)
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is
presented for recording, that is, within 30 days of acceptance of the
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
territorial limits of the governing body, the tax shall be calculated on
the value of the portion within the territorial limits of the governing
body.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the Collector, as
a joint and several liability, by every person who makes, executes,
delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or in whose
behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording. In the case of an acquired company, the
company shall also have liability for payment of the tax. All such
persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under this article.
D. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on a real estate transaction by the governing body and other political
subdivisions shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in Section 8 of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political
§ 157-68 WILSON CODE § 157-69
1:338
§ 157-70. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidenced by the
Collector's affixing on the document an official stamp or writing setting
forth the date of payment of the tax and the amount of tax paid.
§ 157-71. Exemptions.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a real
estate transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 157-72. Excluded transactions.
subdivision imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this
article, the provisions of said Section 8 shall apply.88
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance
by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner
of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance
is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the governing body is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or County
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or County of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife but who have since been divorced,
88.Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax
Enabling Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered.
See now 53 P.S. § 6924.311.
§ 157-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-72
1:339
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister; and brother or sister or the spouse of
a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by
the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Collector is presented with a copy of the trust
instrument that clearly identifies that grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a successor trustee.
(11) A transfer:
(a) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or
(b) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a
grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the
property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual
capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the governing body reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
§ 157-72 WILSON CODE § 157-72
1:340
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership
of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conservation, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure, or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferrer for
commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided for in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement
§ 157-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-72
1:341
§ 157-73. Documents relating to other than individuals.
Except as otherwise provided in § 157-72, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 157-74. Acquired company.
§ 157-75. Credits against tax.
of value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement
of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document
is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation, or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the Collector for recording and
for the affixation of the official stamp or writing evidencing payment of
the tax. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in the territorial limits of the governing body.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of tax due upon
the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 157-72 WILSON CODE § 157-75
1:342
§ 157-76. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Collector for recording
shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction, showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship, provided that the relationship is specified in the deed,
instrument or writing. Documents which are not to be recorded shall be
presented to the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article. Evidence of payment shall
be affixed to the original document and the certified copy. The certified copy
and statement of value shall be filed with the Collector.
§ 157-77. Unlawful acts.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
to the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given to the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this
section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than
the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be allowed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording, or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording,
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid.
(2) Fail to record a declaration of acquisition as required by this
article.
(3) Fraudulently affix to any document any forged evidence of
payment.
(4) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
governing body under this article, or any rules and regulations of
§ 157-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-77
1:343
§ 157-78. Civil penalties.
§ 157-79. Tax lien.
The tax imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be a lien
against the real estate to which the document relates and, in the case of an
acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The lien
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to the extent applicable
to the tax levied hereunder.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a summary offense.
C. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
A. If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when
due, 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected and an
initial penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
B. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month, from the due
date until the amount of the tax is paid in full.
C. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition as required by this article, unless it is shown
to the satisfaction of the governing body that such failure is due to
reasonable cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid
tax at the rate of 5% per month or fractional part of a month, from the
due date until the amount of the tax is paid in full. This penalty shall be
in addition to all other penalties but shall not in the aggregate exceed
50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
D. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax is due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
E. In addition, if the governing body files suit in order to collect the
amount of any tax not paid when due under this article, at the discretion
of the court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable
for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the governing body in
prosecution of the suit.
F. No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds of
any county of this commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder
shall have been paid in full and evidence of payment shall have been
affixed thereto by the Collector.
§ 157-77 WILSON CODE § 157-79
1:344
shall date from the time when the tax is due and payble and shall continue
until discharged by payment in full of the tax, together with all penalties.
In order to enforce the lien, the governing body may proceed under the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any
other appropriate manner.
§ 157-80. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax imposed under this article shall be fully paid and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 157-81. Enforcement.
§ 157-82. Collector.
A. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the governing body, the governing
body shall have the right to review all documents or records relating to
any real estate transaction or any related transactions and to take such
other steps as the governing body shall deem necessary or appropriate,
including a review or audit of any documents or records of any party to
a real estate transaction, to determine the fair market value of the real
estate or any other relevant matter as determined by the governing
body. Upon request of the governing body and at such place and time as
specified by the governing body, any party shall make available to the
governing body any documents or records requested by the governing
body.
B. In the event any tax is not paid when due, the governing body may
enforce payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in
assumpsit or any other appropriate means.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the
collection agent for this tax, without compensation from the governing
body.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each political
subdivision.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the Collector shall pay over to
the governing body all taxes collected under this article, less 2% for use
of the County, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
§ 157-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-82
1:345
§ 157-83. Regulations.
The governing body may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 157-84. Interpretation and effect.
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the County.
D. In accordance with Act 77-1986, any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which tax is imposed under this article
without payment of the tax as required under this article, as is indicated
in the document or accompanying statement of value, shall, upon
summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of
prosecution.
A. To the extent this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77-1986 and to the extent not inconsistent herewith
or with rules or regulations adopted by the governing body, this article
shall be interpreted in the same manner as Act 77-1986 and in
accordance with regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those
ordinances in force immediately prior to adoption of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments.
C. This article is intended to supplement the realty transfer tax in effect
prior to adoption of this article by imposing a tax on real estate
transactions not covered by prior ordinances and now taxable under
Act 77-1986. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions taxable
under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force immediately
prior to adoption of this article, and also on all transactions which the
governing body is permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest
extent permissible.
D. To the extent the provisions of this article tax real estate transactions
taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force
immediately prior to adoption of this article, this article shall supersede
said prior ordinances.
E. In the event this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the governing body levying a realty transfer tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way by
adoption of this article.
F. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense,
§ 157-82 WILSON CODE § 157-84
1:346
§ 157-85. Continuing effect.
This article shall become effective immediately and shall continue in force
hereafter without annual reenactment.
under the authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this
article.
§ 157-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-85
1:347

ARTICLE VIII
Payment of Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 782, approved 1-18-2017]
§ 157-86. Installment schedule.
Borough real estate taxes may be paid in three Installments, due on or
before the following dates:
§ 157-87. Early payment discount.
Should the full amount of real estate taxes due to the Borough for the entire
tax year be paid on or before the first installment date, the amount due shall
be entitled to a discount of 2%.
§ 157-88. Violations and penalties.
A. First. Thirty-three percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before March 31 of each specific tax year, or the following Monday
should that date fall on a weekend;
B. Second. Thirty-three percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before May 31 of each specific tax year, or the following Monday should
that date fall on a weekend; and
C. Third. The remaining balance of taxes due shall be due and payable on
or before July 31 of each specific tax year, or the following Monday
should that date fall on a weekend.
A. Installment penalty. Should a party elect to participate in the
installment payment system by timely making the first installment
payment, but fail to pay the second installment on time, the amount that
is unpaid of the second installment shall be charged a penalty of 10%.
Said party shall still be permitted to pay the third installment on or
before the date for the third installment. Should said party fail to pay
the third installment on time, the amount due and owing shall be
charged a penalty of 10%.
B. Noninstallment penalty. Should a party elect not to participate in the
installment payment system, by failing to timely make the first
installment payment, all borough real estate taxes are due to the
Borough on or before the second installment date of May 31, or the
following Monday should that date fall on a weekend. All taxes due and
owing to the Borough after the second installment date of May 31, or
the following Monday should that date fall on a weekend, of those not
participating in the installment payment system shall be charged a
penalty of 10%.
§ 157-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-89
1:349
§ 157-89. Participation in installment payment system optional.
Payment of Borough real estate taxes through the installment payment
system is optional. Those owing real estate taxes to the Borough may still
elect to pay their real estate taxes in a lump sum on or before May 31, or
the following Monday should that date fall on a weekend, of each specific
tax year.
§ 157-89 WILSON CODE § 157-89
1:350
Chapter 159
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
§ 159-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Shade Tree
Ordinance of the Borough of Wilson, County of Northampton."
§ 159-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson, County of Northampton,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Wilson,
County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST — (Also may be referred to as: Forester or Tree
Warden.) The qualified and designated official of the Borough of Wilson that
may be assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter by the Shade
Tree Commission, who shall be an ISA Certified Arborist licensed in the
Borough.
LARGE TREES — A species of tree attaining a height of 45 feet or more at
maturity.
MEDIUM TREES — A species of tree attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet at
maturity.
PARK — All public parks. (The Shade Tree Commission and Borough Council
shall direct who will maintain trees and public property other than along
streets, such as adjacent to municipal buildings, within public parks, etc.)
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRINCIPAL THOROUGHFARE — Any street upon which trucks are not
prohibited.
PROPERTY LINE — The outer right-of-way and any limbs that hang over the
right-of-way.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning such property as recorded on the
County Assessor's Plat of Northampton County.
§ 157-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-2
1:351
PUBLIC PLACE — All other grounds owned by the Borough, county,
commonwealth or federal governments.
PUBLIC TREES — All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing
on any street or public areas where otherwise indicated.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The body under whose jurisdiction all
public trees fall.
SMALL TREES — A species of tree attaining a height of less than 30 feet at
maturity.
STREET (or HIGHWAY) — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREE LAWN — The part of the street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREE TOPPING — The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure a tree.
§ 159-3. Shade Tree Commission.
A. Establishment. There shall be created a commission to be known as the
"Shade Tree Commission." The Commission shall consist of three
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Borough of Wilson. All
will serve without compensation.
(1) One member shall serve for three years, one for four years, and one
for five years.
(2) On expiration of the term of any Commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the Borough council to serve for a term of five years.
(3) Vacancies in the Office of Commissioner shall be filled by the
Borough Council for the unexpired term.
B. Duties and authority.
(1) The Commission shall have custody and control of the public shade
trees in the Borough, and is authorized to set policies, with the
approval of Borough Council, concerning the planting, removal,
maintenance, and protection of shade trees on the public street and
property within the Borough.
(2) The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority and it shall be
their duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit
issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority and
responsibility to formulate a Master Shade Tree Plan with the
recommendation and approval of Borough Council. The Master
Shade Tree Plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on
§ 159-2 WILSON CODE § 159-3
1:352
§ 159-4. Certified Arborist.
The Borough Council authorizes and designates the Shade Tree Commission
and any ISA Certified Arborist licensed in the Borough to carry out
enforcement of this chapter, execute and submit any required permits to the
Borough pursuant to this chapter.
§ 159-5. Permit requirements; fees.
each of the streets or other public sites of the Borough. From and
after the effective date of the Master Shade Tree Plan, or any
amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto.
(a) The Shade Tree Commission shall consider all existing and
future utility and environmental, factors when recommending
a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites
in the Borough.
(b) The Shade Tree Commission shall, upon the approval of
Borough Council, have the authority to amend or add to the
Master Shade Tree Plan at any time that circumstances make it
advisable.
(c) The Shade Tree Commission shall provide technical assistance
for specific horticultural projects. The free technical advice
shall have an educational emphasis to assist property owners
with their questions and problems.
C. Organization. Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the
Commission and the approval of the members thereof, upon call of the
Borough Council, the Commission shall meet and organize by the
election of a chairperson. The Commission shall then provide for the
adoption of such rules and procedures and for the holding of such
regular and special meeting as it shall deem advisable and necessary in
order to perform the duties set forth.
A. Planting, maintenance, or removal.
(1) No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut,
or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned
property without first filing an application and procuring a permit
from the Shade Tree Commission. The person receiving the permit
shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice adopted by the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Application for permits must be made at the Office of the Borough
Secretary not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is
to be done.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission shall issue the permit provided for
herein if, in their or his judgment, the proposed work is desirable
and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-5
1:353
satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite
date or expiration and the work shall be completed in the time
allowed on the permits and in the manner as therein described. Any
permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
(4) Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the Shade
Tree Commission for their inspection.
B. Planting.
(1) Application data. The application required herein shall state the
number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar
or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other
information as the Shade Tree Commission (or a Certified Arborist)
shall find reasonable necessary to a fair determination of whether a
permit should be issued.
(2) Improper planting. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in
conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the
Shade Tree Commission to remove or cause removal of the same,
and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as
provided by law in the case of special assessments.
C. Maintenance. Application data. The application required herein shall
state the number of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise
preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of
the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the
Shade Tree Commission (or a Certified Arborist) may find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
D. Removal, replanting, and replacement.
(1) Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a tree lawn
in connection with the paving of sidewalk or the paving or widening
of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the
municipality shall replant such trees or replace them. Provided that
conditions prevent planting on tree lawns, this requirement will be
satisfied if any equivalent number of trees of an appropriate size
and species as provided for in the Arboricultural Specifications are
planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property as
approved by the Commission.
(2) No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the tree
lawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason,
without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the
Shade Tree Commission, and without replacing the removed tree
or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural
specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size,
species, and placement as provided for in a permit. The person or
property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of
all trees removed.
§ 159-5 WILSON CODE § 159-5
1:354
§ 159-6. Obstruction; pruning of trees.
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which there may be trees, to prune
such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street
lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision
of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be 10 feet over
sidewalks, and 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares which
shall have a clearance of 16 feet.
§ 159-7. Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
Unless specifically authorized by the Shade Tree Commission, no person
shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree;
attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or others contrivance to
any tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to
such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to
burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
§ 159-8. Interference with Shade Tree Commission.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Shade Tree
Commission or any of his or their assistants while engaged in carrying
out the execution of enforcement of this chapter; provided however, that
nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of
any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction of
the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the
municipality.
(3) Any tree stump must be completely and properly removed.
E. Permit fees. The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be $25, which fee shall be paid at the time application is made at
the Code Office and shall be nonrefundable.
A. Notice to prune. Should any person owning real property bordering on
any street fail to prune trees as herein above provided, the Shade Tree
Commission shall order such person or persons, within three days after
receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees.
B. Order required. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a
copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by
certified mail.
C. Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail
to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the
municipality to prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be
assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special
assessments.
§ 159-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-9
1:355
§ 159-9. Protection of trees.
§ 159-10. Placing materials on public property.
No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place
of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials
which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots
of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 159-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offence and upon
conviction thereon shall be subject to a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs.
§ 159-12. Requirement for trees.
Street trees shall be required wherever a proposed subdivision shall
average three or more lots per gross acre, or where the proposed
subdivision is adjacent to any existing or recorded development having
street trees.
§ 159-13. Shade Tree Commission review.
The Shade Tree Commission shall review all development and
redevelopment plans meeting the above criteria to assure the planting of
the proper trees.
§ 159-14. Installation and completion of improvements.
Before starting any construction or installation of improvements, the
developer shall notify the municipality of his intention to initiate such
work. The municipality shall either authorize the Shade Tree Commission
to monitor and inspect the installation of improvements during their
construction or authorize it (or him) to assist an engineer in the
performance of this task.
A. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work,
shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less
than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from
the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H., whichever
is greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept
outside the barrier.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any
drive within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree without first
obtaining a written permit from the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 159-9 WILSON CODE § 159-15
1:356
§ 159-15. Description.
Street trees to be provided pursuant to the provision of the Wilson Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance89 shall be in accordance with
these specifications and approved plans.
§ 159-16. Materials.
A. Preferred tree species.
(1) All planting material used shall be selected from the following plant
list. If the developer is confronted with an unforeseen problem
pertaining to tree species, the Shade Tree Commission shall be
consulted for advice and recommendations.
(2) Street trees within the same block shall be of the same species
except to achieve a special effect, as approved by the Shade Tree
Commission.
(3) Tree list.
(a) Small trees - under 30 feet.
[1] Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry.
[2] Syringa reticulata - Japanese lilac.
[3] Acer campestre - hedge maple.
[4] Crataegus crusgalli - thornless cockspur hawthorn.
[5] Malus floribunda - flowering crabapple.
(b) Medium trees - 30 to 45 feet.
[1] Carpinus betulus - European hornbeam (columnar).
[2] Pyrus calleryana - flowering pear.
[3] Prunus x yedoensis - Yoshino cherry.
[4] Cladrastis kentukea - American yellow wood.
[5] Koelreuteria paniculata - golden rain tree.
(c) Large trees - over 45 feet.
[1] Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova.
[2] Nyssa sylvatica - black gum.
[3] Sophora japonica - Japanese scholar tree.
[4] Gleditsia triacanthos - honey locust.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 159-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-16
1:357
§ 159-17. Construction methods.
[5] Acer rubrum - red maple.
(4) The use of any tree other than those listed above requires the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
(5) Not all trees on this list are suitable for all situations. Suitability
shall be determined by the Shade Tree Commission. Additionally, as
new varieties are developed and existing ones improved, this list
should be amended.
B. Acquisition of trees. Only plant material grown in nurseries shall be
procured for shade tree planting. Trees should be true to form and
typical of the species.
C. Tree specifications.
(1) Each tree shall be at least eight feet in height and have a diameter
of at least 1 1/2 inches measured at a height of six inches above the
finished ground level.
(2) Plant material shall be balled and burlapped with native soil in
which the material had been growing (no manufactured balls).
(3) The relationship between tree caliper, tree height, and diameter of
the root ball shall be as follows:
Caliper Height Range
Minimum Ball
Diameter
1 1/2 to 1 3/4 inches 8 to 10 feet 20 inches
1 3/4 to 2 inches 10 to 12 feet 22 inches
2 to 2 1/2 inches 12 to 14 feet 24 inches
D. Soil amendments. As different trees require different soil conditions, it
may be necessary to add materials such as fertilizers, sand, etc., to the
existing soil prior to planting.
A. Planting locations.
(1) The actual location of each individual tree shall be determined
considering views, proximity of utility poles, overhead and guy
wires, driveways and subsurface utility installations.
(2) Trees shall be planted at least 30 feet from street intersections, at
least 15 feet from driveways and alleys, and at least 10 feet from
utility poles.
(3) Spacing of trees should be determined by the Shade Tree
Commission according to local conditions, the species, cultivars, or
varieties used, their mature height, spread, and form. Generally, all
large trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet on center; all medium-
§ 159-16 WILSON CODE § 159-17
1:358
§ 159-18. Period of establishment.
sized trees shall be planted a minimum of 35 feet on center; and
all small trees shall be planted a minimum of 25 feet on center.
Whenever possible shade trees shall be planted alternately along
each side of all streets of the development. Trees shall be spaced
without regard to property lines.
B. Planting specification.
(1) Tree pits shall be at least 10 inches wider in diameter than the
diameter of the root ball. Unless building debris is encountered, the
hole shall be excavated to a depth no greater than to permit the top
of the ball to be level with the rim of the hole. All encountered
debris should be removed to a minimum depth of 30 inches.
(2) Planting time. Except where waived by the Shade Tree
Commission, trees within the same block shall be planted at the
same time. Balled and burlapped material may be planted during
any period of the year when the soil is frost-free and friable.
(3) The burlap and twine covering the upper half of the ball shall be
rolled back or cut away after the plant has been set.
(4) Trees shall be staked with no less than two-inch-by-two-inch stakes
driven 2 1/2 to three feet into the ground. Two stakes shall be
required for trees less than two inches in caliper and three for trees
greater than two inches in caliper. The trunk shall be protected by
placing a short piece of three-quarter-inch diameter, two-ply
reinforced hose around the guy wire where it comes in contact with
the tree. All stakes shall be of the same height for uniform
appearance and support.
(5) The planting hole shall be backfilled to 3/4 full with soil, followed by
10 gallons of water. When the water has been absorbed, the hole
shall be filled with topsoil and tamped lightly to finish grade.
(6) Upon completion of the transplanting operation, a wood chip or
bark mulch two inches deep shall be placed over the planting area.
(7) All unused soil or debris resulting from the planting or plan
material shall be removed from the project area.
A. Maintenance.
(1) Plant maintenance shall begin immediately after each plant is
satisfactorily installed and shall continue until final inspection by
the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Plant maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to,
replacing mulch that has been displaced by erosion or other means,
maintaining stakes and guys as originally installed, watering when
needed or directed, and performing any other work required to
§ 159-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-18
1:359
Chapter 161
UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIALS
§ 161-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
FRONT DOOR — The street-facing entrance(s) to a principal structure.
In the event no door faces the street, then any other door of a principal
structure nearest the street shall be considered a front door for purposes of
this chapter.
PORCH — An exterior appendage to a principal structure leading to a
doorway, including any stairway attached thereto.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures,
driveways, or other impervious surfaces thereon.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure or combination of structures of
primary importance on the premises, and that contains the primary use
associated with the premises. The primary use is characterized by
identifying the main activity taking place on the premises.
UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIALS — Any written materials which are
delivered to any premises without the express invitation or permission, in
writing or otherwise, by the owner, occupant, or lessee of such premises.
§ 161-2. Delivery of unsolicited written materials.
keep the plants in a healthy condition. An adequate moisture
supply is estimated to be the equivalent of one inch of water
per week, delivered at weekly intervals in the form of rain, or
augmented as required by periodic watering.
(3) The developer shall remove and replace all dead, defective, and
rejected plants as occur during period.
B. Guarantee. In addition to other standard provisions, the developer's
improvement bond shall also provide for the following:
(1) Maintenance in kind, or with a substitute acceptable to the Shade
Tree Commission, of all planted material which is not in a healthy
growing condition, which has died back, or is beyond normal
pruning limits.
A. Unsolicited written materials delivered to a premises shall be placed:
(1) Where permitted, in a distribution box located on or adjacent to the
premises; or
(2) On a porch, if one exists, nearest the front door; or
(3) So such materials are securely attached to the front door; or
§ 159-18 WILSON CODE § 161-2
1:360
§ 161-3. Violations and penalties.
Any placement of unsolicited written materials in areas on or adjacent to
premises other than as set forth in § 161-2A above shall be a violation of
this chapter. Any person, firm, business, corporation, or any other entity
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $100 for a first offense and $200 for each offense
thereafter.
Chapter 162
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
[The ordinances regulating traffic and parking in the Borough of
Wilson are not codified. Consult municipal records for information
regarding the traffic and parking regulations.]
Chapter 170
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Air pollution — See Ch. 73.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 86A.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 91.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Noise — See Ch. 130.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 149.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
(4) Through a mail slot on the front door or principal structure, if
existent, as permitted by the United States Postal Service Domestic
Mail Manual, Section 508, Recipient Services; or
(5) Between the exterior front door, if existent and unlocked, and the
interior front door; or
(6) Personally with the owner, occupant and/or lessee of the premises.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, an owner, lessee or occupant
maintains the right to restrict entry to his or her premises.
C. Unsolicited written materials placed at the premises create a
rebuttable presumption that the materials were placed at the premises
by the owner, agent, manager, and/or authorized distributor of the
business, product, good, service, message, or idea which is being
advertised, promoted, endorsed or conveyed in such materials.
D. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the United States Postal
Service.
§ 161-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-3
1:361

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-1. Title.
An ordinance regulating the location, height, bulk, erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, razing, removal and size of structures; the
percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other
open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the intensity of use
of land or bodies of water for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public
activities or other purposes, in all portions of the Borough of Wilson.
§ 170-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "2011 Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Wilson, Pennsylvania."
§ 170-3. Applicability.
No building, sign or other structure or land shall be used or occupied
and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. However, this chapter shall not require
any change to any building, structure or use legally existing at the effective
date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto; or to any building, structure
or use planned and construction started in compliance with existing laws
prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, and
completed within a one-year period after the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment thereto, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 170-4. Jurisdiction.
The regulations and provisions of this chapter shall apply to and affect
the incorporated limits of the Borough of Wilson, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 170-5. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to implement the objectives for the Comprehensive
Plan for the Borough of Wilson in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,90
as reenacted and amended for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety, morals,
general welfare, coordinated and practical development of the
Borough, the proper density of population, emergency management
preparedness and operations, the provision of adequate light and air,
access to incident solar energy, protection of persons and property, the
maintenance and improvement of the aesthetic qualities of the
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:363
§ 170-6. Statement of community development objectives.
This chapter and Zoning Map are intended to promote the following
community development objectives for the Comprehensive Plan of the
Borough of Wilson as set forth below:
Borough, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements and the
protection of the environment.
B. To prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood,
panic or other dangers and to give consideration to the character of the
Borough, its various parts and the suitability of the various parts for
particular uses and structures.
C. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types and to accommodate reasonable
overall community growth, including population and employment
growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential
dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
A. To maintain and enhance the Borough of Wilson's image as a desirable
residential community suited to enhance and foster family growth and
development and to serve all age groups.
B. To encourage residential growth and the related development of
desirable commercial and industrial developments to stabilize the
Borough's tax base and overall economy.
C. To provide for appropriate residential densities and housing types,
satisfying many age groups, income levels, family sizes and individual
preferences.
D. To provide adequate recreational areas to serve residents and to
establish a park-like environment throughout the Borough.
E. To provide necessary and desirable services and community facilities
and schools to satisfy the needs and demands of present and future
residents of the Borough.
F. To reduce traffic congestion in the Borough and to provide adequate
parking space to serve all residential and other uses in the Borough.
G. To encourage neighborhood conservation and rehabilitation and
preservation of historic structures.
H. To eliminate undesirable, uneconomical and unattractive mixtures of
land uses.
I. To promote sound standards of development, to maximize stability of
property values and to encourage desirable economic activities.
§ 170-5 WILSON CODE § 170-6
1:364
§ 170-7. Interpretation and validity.
§ 170-8. Repealer.
The Borough of Wilson Zoning Ordinance No. 645, adopted on March
28, 1994, and all amendments thereto, are hereby completely repealed
and replaced by this chapter. All other existing ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this chapter, to the extent of such conflict and no
further, are hereby repealed.
§ 170-9. Severability.
J. To provide a street system capable of circulating people and goods
within and through the Borough safely and efficiently.
A. In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this
chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations
or ordinances, provided that where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height or
bulk of a building or requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail.
B. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid,
such decision shall not affect its remaining portions. The Council of the
Borough of Wilson hereby declares it would have passed this chapter
and each section and subsection thereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more of its sections, subsections, clauses or phrases may be
found by a court to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
C. No provision contained in this chapter is intended to discriminate
against persons protected under federal or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania laws pertaining to equal opportunity, civil rights, the
elderly or persons with disabilities.
A. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body that if a
court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this chapter
to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision
shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the
decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of this
chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building or other structure, or
tract of land to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation
immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such
provision to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9
1:365

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 170-10. General procedures.
A. General sequence of steps.
(1) Zoning applicants desiring to undertake any new construction,
structural alteration or changes in the use of a building or lot shall
apply to the Zoning Officer for a zoning permit by filling out the
appropriate application form and by submitting the required fee.
Where required, as set forth in Articles V through XI, a site plan in
accordance with § 170-11 shall also be submitted with and made a
part of the application.
(2) Based on the applicable regulations of this chapter and, if required,
after any required review by other officials, the Zoning Officer will
either issue or refuse the zoning permit, and the Zoning Officer will
indicate, in writing, any conditions attached to the permit or the
reason for any refusal. If refused a permit, the applicant may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for further consideration.
(3) After the zoning permit has been obtained by the applicant, he may
proceed to obtain other necessary permits and undertake the
action permitted by the zoning permit and by the other necessary
permits and, upon completion of such action, shall apply to the
Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit where such a permit is
required. If the Zoning Officer finds that the action of the applicant
has been taken in accordance with the zoning permit, he will then
issue an occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied.
B. Zoning permit types. Under the terms of this chapter, the following
classes of zoning permits may be issued:
(1) Permitted uses. A zoning permit for a permitted use may be issued
by the Zoning Officer on his own authority.
(2) Special exception use. A zoning permit for a special exception use
may be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the order of the Zoning
Hearing Board after a hearing and after any required review by the
Planning Commission subject to § 170-15.
(3) Conditional use. A zoning permit for a conditional use may be
issued by the Zoning Officer upon the approval of the Borough
Council after any required review by the Planning Commission and
subject to § 170-16.
(4) Zoning permit after an appeal or a request for a variance. A zoning
permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the order of the
Zoning Hearing Board and after a hearing held by the Board for the
purpose of deciding upon the appeal or a request for a variance.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-10
1:367
§ 170-11. Site plan review.
(5) Temporary use permits. A zoning permit for a temporary use may
be issued by the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board as
required by any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Purpose and procedure. Site plan review and the submission of a site
plan is required herein for all special exception uses or for any other
use requiring such review in accordance with the requirements of
Articles V through XIII or other provisions of this chapter. The following
site plan procedure shall be followed to ensure the safe and efficient
movement of traffic, adequate drainage and connection to utilities,
compliance with other applicable regulations and to promote the
development of an attractive and well-planned Borough, to enhance
sound site planning and to best serve the interests of public health,
safety and general welfare and with the objectives of this chapter.
B. Sketch plan review procedure.
(1) The applicant may elect to submit a preliminary sketch site plan
containing lesser information for unofficial review by the Planning
Commission. Such sketch site plan shall be for the purpose of
indicating to the Planning Commission the general nature and
intent of the proposal which will enable the Commission to present
its initial considerations for the purpose of guiding the developer in
the preparation of the official site plan in accordance with these
zoning requirements.
(2) The entire purpose of this optional procedure is to facilitate the
proper development of a site plan, as required herein, and to
prevent unnecessary expenses associated with the development of
a site plan. This optional procedure shall be considered to be a
convenience for the applicant and shall not constitute an official
zoning permit application or submission and shall not convey any
benefits or assurances to the applicant which he would not
otherwise have had if such an optional site plan were not submitted
by the applicant. All such optional plans shall be clearly marked
with the words "Sketch Plan."
C. An application for a use requiring site plan review, as required by this
chapter, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer. The applicant shall
submit three complete sets of site plans certified by a design
professional: registered engineer, surveyor, architect or landscape
architect.
D. When a site plan has been officially submitted, it shall be placed on the
Planning Commission agenda for review at its next regular meeting,
provided that the official submission is made 10 days or more before the
regular meeting.
§ 170-10 WILSON CODE § 170-11
1:368
E. Within 45 days after the official submission of a site plan, the Planning
Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Zoning Officer
or the Zoning Hearing Board, depending on whether the zoning permit
requested is for a permitted use or a special exception use, respectively,
on whether the plan should be approved or disapproved. The written
recommendation shall include the underlying findings and reasons
affecting the Planning Commission's recommendation. In making such
a recommendation, the Planning Commission may receive advice and
review comments from the Borough's engineer or planner or any other
competent review authority.
F. The appropriate body (Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board as
required by this chapter) shall take action by approving or disapproving
the plan either within 45 days after receiving the Planning
Commission's written recommendation or within 90 days after the site
plan is officially submitted. The Zoning Officer shall inform the
applicant, in writing, of the action taken by the appropriate body and
shall issue any applicable permit.
G. Site plan approval shall neither relieve the applicant from any other
provisions of this chapter nor constitute a recommendation for a
variance or other relief that the applicant may seek from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
H. Site plan requirements. The official site plan shall include the following
information:
(1) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
(2) A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot, the
location, dimensions and height of proposed buildings, structures,
streets, roads and any existing buildings in relation to property and
street lines. If the application relates to property which is
scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans shall
show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
(3) The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces and
yards, landscaping, fences and buffer yards, including methods and
materials to be employed for screening.
(4) The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used
for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading and provisions to be made for lighting such areas.
(5) The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs and
exterior lighting.
(6) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be
devoted to pedestrian use.
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11
1:369
(7) Sanitary and stormwater facilities and connections. Provisions to
be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes, water supply and storm drainage. Submission of a
stormwater management plan with supporting calculations shall be
required.
(8) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, including information on total land
area, area to be reserved in common open space, density, maximum
building coverage, total area to be covered with impervious
surfaces and other information which will assist the Commission in
determining compliance with this chapter.
(9) A description of any proposed use in sufficient detail to permit the
Commission to determine compliance with the performance and
traffic impact requirements set forth in § 170-85 and the floodprone
area requirements of § 170-86.
(10) Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning
Commission, or Borough Council to enable them to determine the
compliance of the proposed development with the terms of this
chapter.
I. Site design guidelines. In addition to the requirements of § 170-11H,
the following guidelines are presented to assist the applicant in the
preparation of site and building plans and to assist the Planning
Commission in the review of all site plans. These guidelines are divided
into nine categories and are meant to encourage creativity, innovation
and well-designed developments. They not only apply to principal
buildings and structures, but also to all accessory buildings, structures,
freestanding signs and other site features.
(1) Preservation of landscape. Preserve the landscape in its natural
state by minimizing tree and soil removal. Ensure that grade
changes are compatible with the general appearance of
neighboring developed areas.
(2) Relation of proposed buildings to environment. Relate proposed
structure(s) harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings
that have a visual relationship to the proposed structure(s). To
achieve this favorable relationship between existing and proposed
uses, create focal points with respect to avenues of approach,
terrain features or other buildings and relate open space between
all existing and proposed buildings.
(3) Drive, parking and circulation. For vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, give
special attention to the location and number of access points to
public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general
interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
and arrangement of safe and convenient parking areas. Design
these vehicular and pedestrian areas to enhance the appearance of
§ 170-11 WILSON CODE § 170-11
1:370
§ 170-12. Zoning and occupancy permits and certificates.
an access to the proposed buildings and structures and to the
neighboring properties.
(4) Surface water drainage. Give special attention to proper site
surface drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect either neighboring properties or the public storm
drainage system. Remove and efficiently carry away all stormwater
from all roofs, canopies and paved areas. Collect surface water in
all paved areas to permit vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(5) Utility service. Place electric and telephone lines underground
where possible. Locate, paint and undertake any other treatment to
ensure that any utilities which remain above ground will have a
minimal adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(6) Advertising features. Ensure that the size, location, lighting and
materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures
or features will enhance rather than detract from the design of
proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
(7) Special features. Provide needed setbacks, buffer yards and other
screening methods for exposed storage areas, exposed machinery
installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings
and structures and similar accessory areas and structures to help
make them compatible with the existing or contemplated site
design and with neighboring properties.
(8) Performance, traffic impact and flood area requirements.
Adequately address all requirements identified relative to
§§ 170-85 and 170-86.
(9) Subdivision and land development ordinance requirements. Where
the zoning proposal requires approval under Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of
Wilson, the site plan shall also address the requirements of that
chapter.
A. Applications to Zoning Officer.
(1) All applications for zoning permits for permitted or special
exception uses, for occupancy permits, for certificates of
nonconforming use, for variances and for interpretations of any
fact or provision of this chapter shall be made directly to the
Zoning Officer. Such applications shall be in writing and shall
include a plot plan drawn to scale showing the location and
dimensions of the lot area and of the proposed uses of buildings
and/or land and any other information required by this chapter.
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:371
(2) All applications for special exception or other uses subject to site
plan review as set forth in § 170-11H shall also include the
information required therein.
(3) The Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board or the Planning
Commission may require any additional information deemed
necessary to properly evaluate the application for the purpose of
determining its conformity with this chapter.
B. Applications to Zoning Hearing Board. All appeals where it is alleged
that the Zoning Officer has made an error shall be filed directly with the
Secretary and/or Solicitor of the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeals
shall be in writing and shall explain fully the facts and particulars of the
case and shall clearly state the reasons and provisions of this chapter
on which the appeal is based.
C. Zoning permits.
(1) The purpose of the zoning permit is to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, and no person shall erect, alter or
convert any structure, building or part thereof, nor alter the use of
any land, subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, until a zoning
permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer, zoning permits shall
be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on
the premises, and no person shall perform building operations of
any kind unless a zoning permit is being displayed as required by
this chapter.
(2) Permits granted for uses of a temporary or seasonal nature may be
limited to the appropriate length of time (refer to § 170-93). The
Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board may revoke a zoning
permit at any time if it appears that the application is in any respect
false or misleading or that work being done upon the premises
differs materially from that called for in the application.
(3) No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for any
special exception or variance or appeal except on written order of
the Zoning Hearing Board, or for any proposed construction,
alteration or use that would be in violation of any provision of this
chapter.
(4) No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for any
conditional use except on written order of the Borough Council.
(5) Unless there has been substantial progress in the work for which a
zoning permit was issued, as determined by the Zoning Officer, said
permit shall expire one year from the date of issue, except that the
Zoning Officer may grant a request for a reasonable extension of
time, not to exceed one year, if warranted by the nature of the
construction involved.
§ 170-12 WILSON CODE § 170-12
1:372
§ 170-13. Zoning Officer.
D. Occupancy permits. The purpose of an occupancy permit is to certify
that the premises comply with the provisions of this chapter and may be
used for the purposes set forth in the occupancy permit. Prior to the use
or occupancy of any land or building or for any change of use of any
existing building or for any change of use of land, an occupancy permit
shall be secured from the Zoning Officer. A copy of the occupancy
permit shall be kept upon the premises and shall be displayed upon
request made by any officer of the municipality. All applications for
occupancy permits shall be in writing on forms to be furnished by the
Zoning Officer.
E. Certificate of nonconforming use. The registration of an existing
nonconforming use and/or structure may be requested by the owner of
the property where such a use or structure is located. Upon application
by such an owner, the Zoning Officer shall inspect and register the
nonconforming uses and/or nonconforming structures on the property.
The owner of the premises occupied by the lawful nonconforming use or
structure will then be issued a certificate of nonconforming use from
the Zoning Officer. Such certificate shall be for the purpose of certifying
to the owner his right to continue such nonconforming use or structure
in accordance with the requirements of § 170-92.
A. Appointment of Zoning Officer. This chapter shall be enforced by the
Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by the Council. Said Zoning
Officer shall not hold any elective office in the Borough. The Zoning
Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the Borough and
shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough a
working knowledge of municipal zoning.
B. Duties and powers.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with
its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any
construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to
this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting
within the scope of his employment.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall receive and examine all applications
required under the terms of this chapter and shall issue or refuse
permits within 30 days of the receipt of the application or, where
applicable, shall refer said application within 10 days to the Zoning
Hearing Board and/or Planning Commission. The Zoning Officer
shall issue a written notice of violation to any person, firm or
corporation violating any provisions of this chapter. He shall keep
records of applications, of permits or certificates issued, of
variances granted, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of
§ 170-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-13
1:373
§ 170-14. Zoning Hearing Board.
notice or orders issued and, where applicable in accordance with
§ 170-12E, shall identify and register nonconforming uses and
structures and shall make all inspections required to determine
conformance with this chapter and perform all other duties as
called for in this chapter.
A. Board is hereby created.
(1) A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby established in accordance with
the provisions of the State Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. The members of the Board shall be residents of the Borough
and shall be appointed by the Council to serve for terms as
prescribed by law. Vacancies occurring in said Board by expiration
of term or otherwise shall be filled in the same manner.
(2) At the date of adoption of this chapter, the members of the existing
Zoning Hearing Board, previously designated in accordance with
the Borough Zoning Ordinance No. 645, enacted March 28, 1994,
as amended, shall continue in office and shall serve as the Zoning
Hearing Board under this chapter.
B. Organization of Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
members and two alternates as appointed by the Borough Council. The
existing terms of office shall continue, with terms of office being three
years, and with the terms being so fixed that the term of office of one
member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect
officers and conduct any hearings and take any actions required by this
chapter and may make rules and forms for its procedure.
C. Board functions.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for the following:
(a) To hear and decide appeals against any alleged errors or
actions of the Zoning Officer.
(b) To hear and decide all requests for the interpretation of any
fact or provision of this chapter.
(c) To hear and decide all requests for variances.
(d) To hear and decide all requests for special exceptions in
accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in this
chapter.
(e) To hear and decide challenges to the validity of this chapter or
Zoning Map or to any procedural questions or defects which
are within its jurisdiction.
§ 170-13 WILSON CODE § 170-14
1:374
§ 170-15. Special exception use process.
(f) The preparation and submission of a report of its activities to
the Council once a year.
(2) All findings and decisions of the Board shall be in writing and shall
be rendered within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning
Hearing Board, and if the Board fails to render such a decision,
then the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of
the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time.
(3) The Board shall perform such other duties as may be provided or
made necessary by this chapter or by State Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247, as reenacted and amended, including the interpretation of
zoning boundaries, the holding of hearings after proper notice or
the referral of any pertinent matter to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendations. The Board shall keep a full public
record and a summary of the facts in cases over which it has
jurisdiction and shall maintain adequate records on its findings and
decisions.
D. Notice of hearings.
(1) Notice of all hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be given to
the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning
Commission, the Council and such other persons who have made a
timely request for such notice. Such notice shall be given in
accordance with the definition for public notice set forth in Article
III.
(2) In addition, every property owner located within 100 feet of any
property where a zoning action will be considered by the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be notified of such action by a certified letter
explaining the action to be considered. Said certified letter(s) shall
be postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting and
shall state the time, date and place where the meeting will be held
and the nature of the action to be considered.
(3) In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
E. The Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions after
the Planning Commission has reviewed and made recommendations on
the site plan in accordance with standards and criteria found in Article
III. In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in
this chapter as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), as may be
amended by state statute in the future, and this chapter.
§ 170-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-15
1:375
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) A site plan shall be submitted, which shall contain the information
required in § 170-11. If a fully engineered subdivision or land
development will be required, it may be submitted separately, such
as after a special exception is approved.
(2) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Zoning Hearing
Board regarding the compliance of the application with this
chapter.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall follow the procedures provided in
§ 170-14.
(4) The Borough staff should offer a special exception application to
the Planning Commission for any advisory review that the
Commission may wish to provide. However, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall meet the time limits of state law for a decision,
regardless of whether the Planning Commission has provided
comments.
C. Consideration of special exception applications. When special
exceptions are allowed by this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with standards established by this chapter, including the following:
(1) The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the
application complies with all applicable requirements of this
chapter. The applicant shall provide the Board with sufficient plans,
studies or other data to demonstrate compliance.
(2) The approval may be conditioned upon the applicant later showing
proof of compliance with other specific applicable Borough, state
and federal laws, regulations and permits. Required permits or
other proof of compliance may be required to be presented to the
Borough prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, building
permit, certification of occupancy and/or recording of an approved
plan.
(3) The applicant shall establish that the traffic from the proposed use
will be accommodated in a safe and efficient manner that will
minimize hazards and congestion, after considering any
improvements proposed to be made by the applicant as a condition
on approval.
(4) The application shall include proper site layout, internal
circulation, parking, buffering, and all other elements of proper
design as specified in this chapter.
§ 170-15 WILSON CODE § 170-15
1:376
§ 170-16. Conditional use process.
(5) The proposed use shall not substantially change the character of
any surrounding residential neighborhood, after considering any
proposed conditions upon approval such as limits upon hours of
operation.
(6) The proposed use shall not create a significant hazard to the public
health and safety, such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(7) The proposed use shall be suitable for the site, considering the
disturbance of steep slopes, mature woodland, wetlands,
floodplains, and other important natural features.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board
may require such reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to
those expressed in this chapter) as it determines are necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter. Conditions imposed by the
Zoning Hearing Board shall automatically become conditions of the
building permit issued pursuant thereto, and any failure to comply with
said conditions shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The conditional use approval process is designed to allow the
Borough Council to review and approve certain uses that could have
significant impacts upon the community and the environment.
B. Procedure. The Borough Council shall consider the conditional use
application and render its decision in accordance with the requirements
of the MPC.
(1) A site plan shall be submitted which shall contain the information
required in § 170-11. Detailed site engineering, such as stormwater
calculations and profiles, are not required at the conditional use
stage. If a fully engineered subdivision or land development plan
will be required, it may be submitted separately, such as after a
conditional use is approved, or, an applicant may voluntarily choose
to submit a subdivision or land development plan for review at the
same time as a conditional use application.
(2) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Borough Council
regarding the compliance of the application with this chapter.
(3) The Borough staff shall submit a conditional use application to the
Planning Commission for any review that the Commission may wish
to provide. However, the Borough Council shall meet the time limits
of state law for a decision, regardless of whether the Planning
Commission has provided comments.
(4) The only uses that shall be approved as conditional uses shall be
those listed as conditional uses in § 170-82.
§ 170-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:377
§ 170-17. Variances.
C. Consideration of conditional use application. The Borough Council shall
determine whether the proposed use would meet the applicable
requirements of this chapter. The same standards shall apply to a
conditional use as are listed in § 170-15 for a special exception use.
D. Conditions. In approving a conditional use application, the Borough
Council may attach conditions they consider necessary to protect the
public welfare and meet the standards of this chapter. These conditions
shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with
such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be
subject to the penalties described in this chapter.
A. Board may authorize variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this
chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board
may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare; and
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter. Violations of any condition or safeguards
imposed by the Board are subject to the appeals, violations and
penalties set forth in § 170-21.
§ 170-16 WILSON CODE § 170-18
1:378
§ 170-18. Borough Council.
A. Function of Borough Council.
(1) The Council will be responsible for the following:
(a) To review and/or initiate any requests for amendments
submitted or recommended by the Planning Commission and/
or the Zoning Hearing Board or any curative amendments
prepared by a landowner.
(b) To hear and decide all requests for recommendations for
amendments submitted to the Borough by the Planning
Commission or any other applicant for an amendment as set
forth herein and as may be provided for in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code State Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.
(2) All findings and decisions of the Council shall be in writing and
shall be rendered within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Council, and if the Council fails to render such a decision, then the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time.
(3) The Council shall perform such other duties as may be provided or
made necessary by this chapter or by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, including the holding of
hearings after proper notice and the referral of any pertinent
matter to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendations. The Council shall keep a full public record and a
summary of the facts in cases over which it has jurisdiction and
shall maintain adequate records on its findings and decisions.
B. Notice of hearings.
(1) Notice of all hearings of the Borough Council shall be given to the
public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning Commission,
the Zoning Hearing Board and such other persons who have made
a timely request for such notice. Such notice shall be given in
accordance with the term "public notice," as defined in Article III.
(2) In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
C. Referral to Planning Commission. The Council shall refer to the
Planning Commission all applications or appeals which, in the opinion
of the Council, require review by the Planning Commission. In its
review, the Planning Commission shall determine compliance with the
standards and criteria set forth in this chapter and in all cases may
§ 170-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18
1:379
§ 170-19. Hearings.
report, in writing, its findings and recommendations to the Council
within 14 days.
A. Public notice. Public notice required for any hearings to be held by the
Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council shall be given as
described in §§ 170-14D and 170-18B above.
B. Date of hearing. The first hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer
shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or
Hearing Officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant, in writing, or on the record. An
applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100
days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board
or Hearing Officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least
seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant
may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by
the applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to
complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is
granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
C. Conduct of hearings. All hearings shall be conducted in accordance
with the following:
(1) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board or by Borough
Council.
(2) The Board or Borough Council shall have power to administer oaths
and to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(3) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(4) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
§ 170-18 WILSON CODE § 170-19
1:380
§ 170-20. Amendment procedure.
(5) The Board, Borough Council or the Hearing Officer, as the case may
be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings.
(6) The Board, Borough Council or the Hearing Officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall
not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
(7) The Board, Borough Council or the Hearing Officer, as the case may
be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,
make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Board, Council or Hearing Officer. Where
the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this chapter or of any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found. Where the Board, Council or the Hearing Officer,
as the case may be, fails to render the decision within the period
required by this subsection or fails to hold the required hearing
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a
hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, or
on the record to an extension of time.
(8) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him no later than the day following the date of the decision. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the
Board or Council not later than the last day of the hearing, a brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at
which the full decision or findings may be examined shall be
mailed.
A. The Council may, on its own motion or by petition, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map. Before
voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Council shall hold a
public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice as required by State
Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
B. Any landowner or the Borough itself may propose and prepare a
curative amendment, as defined in Article III, to this chapter for
§ 170-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20
1:381
§ 170-21. Appeals; violations and penalties.
consideration by the Council in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Council shall submit each amendment to the Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment. In all cases, the Council shall also submit any proposed
amendment to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on such proposed amendment. Said
submittals shall provide each planning agency an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised or further revised to include land previously not
affected by it, the Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment. At all
public hearings, full opportunity to be heard shall be given to any
citizen and all parties in interest.
E. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
A. Appeals. Appeals may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board not later
than 30 days after the date of the action which is being appealed has
been made, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.
B. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this chapter.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel and to any other person requested, in writing, by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-20 WILSON CODE § 170-21
1:382
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
C. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is
or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Borough
Council or, with the approval of Council, an officer of the Borough or
any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of
that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior to
the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
D. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that
there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter, each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 170-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-21
1:383
§ 170-22. Filing fees.
The following fees shall be paid at the office of the Zoning Officer.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this chapter.
(4) At the time of adoption of this new chapter, there may be existing
violations of the Borough of Wilson Zoning Ordinance No. 645 of
1994. It is not the intent of this chapter to cure or satisfy such prior
violations, and the Borough reserves the right to enforce such prior
violations under § 170-21C and D of this chapter.
A. Zoning permits and applications. Applicants for zoning permits or other
actions shall be required to pay the following fees:
(1) Zoning permit for a permitted use: $25.
(2) Zoning application requiring one special Zoning Board or Borough
Council meeting and/or a public hearing and action by either body.
The zoning application may include appeals for alleged errors,
interpretations, variances, special or conditional uses or requests
for zoning amendments. Such fees are necessary to pay for the cost
of advertisements, recordation and minutes, administration by
Zoning Officer and legal fees: $300.
(3) Occupancy permits: $25.
(4) Certificate and registration of nonconforming uses: $30.
B. Special review fees.
(1) In the event that any applications of the type listed under
§ 170-22A(2) above require more than one meeting and/or public
hearing by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, then
additional reasonable fees may be prescribed by the Borough for
the necessary compensation for the Secretary and members of the
Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overheads connected with the hearing, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 908 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.91
(2) Fees for a required stenographic record of the proceedings and for
the cost of transcripts shall be shared by the Borough and the
applicant as also set forth in Section 908 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 170-21 WILSON CODE § 170-22
1:384
ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 170-23. Definitions.
Except where specified in the following definitions, all words used in this
chapter shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present
tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and
the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word
"structure"; and the word "occupied" or "used" shall include "arranged,"
"designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or
"intended" to be used; and the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory,
and the word "may" is permissive; the word "abut" shall include the words
"directly across from"; and the word "lot" includes "parcel," "tract" or "plot."
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to
and located on the same lot as the principal use or building and serving a
purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal use or building.
The term "accessory structure" includes but is not limited to a private
garage, shed or barn, private playhouse, private greenhouse, private
swimming pool and private parking area. Where any part of the wall of
an accessory building is part of the wall of a main building or where the
accessory building is attached to the main building by a roof, including
carports however covered, such accessory building shall be deemed part of
the main building.
ADULT BOOK, VIDEO STORE OR ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
having a portion of its stock-in-trade, including but not limited to books,
magazines, photographs, videotapes, computer disks or other materials
which are distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to adult materials, as defined herein.
ADULT MATERIALS OR ACTIVITIES — The exhibition or dissemination by
sale, loan or otherwise of explicit sexual materials or the conduct of live
activities or uses of an obscene nature if such use comprises more than 20%
of the stock-in-trade of the premises or constitutes, from time to time, the
primary or major attraction to the premises.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIALS — As used herein, means:
Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film
or other similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse; or
(1)
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, videotape,
computer disk or other device, however reproduced, or sound
recording which contains any matter enumerated above, or explicit
and detailed verbal excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse.
(2)
A.
B. ADULT NATURE — As used herein, means that:
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:385
ADULT PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or outdoor theater
used for presenting motion pictures, slides, videotapes, disks or other
reproduced images or for live activities or uses distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
obscene materials, as defined herein.
ALLEY — A public or private way affording only secondary means of access
to abutting property. Alleys may also be known as "courts," "places" or
"lanes" and may encompass areas described as "paper alleys."
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — As applied to a building or structure, a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a structure, including
the walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling; or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height;
or the moving from one location or position to another; but not including
normal maintenance or minor repairs or improvements.
AMUSEMENT GAMES OR MACHINES —
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
(1)
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
materials of the type described hereinabove; and
(2)
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
(3)
Words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings given to them
under 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903 and any amendments, from time to time,
thereto.
C.
AMUSEMENT GAME MACHINES — A coin-operated machine or device
which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for
play by the insertion of a coin or other deposit with a monetary value,
and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment
or amusement, the object of which is to achieve either a high or low
score, which, by comparison to the score of other players, whether
playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill or competence
or indicates in any other way competitive advantage of one player or
team over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include
devices such as pinball machines or any device which utilizes video or
computer equipment to reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended
to be representative of real or other games or activities.
A.
AMUSEMENT MACHINES, OTHER — A coin-operated machine or
device, not including amusement games, which provides a ride,
sensation, electronic reading or weight, photograph, lamination or item
of merchandising provided at random among other items of
merchandise, for use by and to the amusement of the public.
B.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:386
ANIMAL SHELTER OR RESCUE — A facility which is used to house or
contain animals and which is owned, operated or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals or other not-for-profit organization devoted
to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of such animals.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for approval of a subdivision or approval
of a development plan.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A building containing dwelling units and
twenty-four-hour staff services to provide assistance and care for elderly
residents capable of independent or semi-independent living, each of whom
are primarily (at least 65%) at least 62 years of age or handicapped (or the
spouse of an otherwise qualified resident), but not requiring nursing home
care.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business where gasoline
and automobile accessories are dispensed directly to the motor vehicle
trade, and where automotive repair services may be rendered.
AUTO WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of used motor
vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
AUTO, TRAILER, OR BOAT SALES AREA — An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles,
trailers, or boats in operable condition and where repair work is done.
AUTOMOTIVE JUNKYARD — A place where two or more motor driven
vehicles which do not bear a current state inspection sticker and/or license
plate and/or their related parts are stored or disassembled.
BASEMENT — A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement
shall be considered a story if more than 1/3 of the perimeter walls are
five feet or more above the finished grade level of the ground immediately
adjacent to the walls.
BOARD — See "Zoning Hearing Board."
BOARDINGHOUSE — See "Rooming house or boardinghouse."
BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson, located in Northampton County (also
see "Municipality or Borough").
AMUSEMENT MACHINE COMPLEX — A group of more than two
amusement games or other amusement machines in the same place,
location or premises.
C.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:387
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, poles,
piers, cables or walls, used for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or property, including tents or structures on wheels or porches,
as defined herein. Structures divided by unpierced masonry division walls
extending from the ground to the roof shall be deemed to be separate
buildings.
BUILDING COVERAGE, MAXIMUM — The maximum ratio obtained by
dividing the ground floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on
a lot (including covered porches, carports and breezeways, but excluding
open patios, parking areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and other
structures which are open to the sky) by the total area of the lot upon
which the buildings are located. Said ground floor area shall be computed
by using the maximum outside building dimensions, including cantilevered
areas measured on a horizontal plane.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance derived from the average of
the finished grade at the foundation corners of the building or structure to
the highest point of the building or structure, excluding a chimney or other
similar structure listed in § 170-88F(2).
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — A line that designates the minimum
distance between any building and/or use and the adjacent road right-ofway
or property line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from
the front, side or rear street right-of-way or property lines which abut the
property upon which said building and/or use is or is to be located and
parallel to said right-of-way or property line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BULK — The size and shape of building uses and the exterior relationship
of their exterior walls, or their location, to lot lines and other buildings or
other walls of the same building; and all open spaces required in connection
with a building. Bulk regulations include, but are not limited to, regulations
dealing with lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width and depth, building
height, required yards, building coverage, courts, usable open space, floor
area ratio, spacing between buildings on a single lot and the length of
buildings in a row.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official Code Enforcement Officer
designated by the municipality to administer certain codes and/or
ordinances adopted by the municipality, who may also be designated as the
Zoning Officer charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. That person shall be a UCC licensed Building
Code Officer.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is required by law
to bear any license plate other than that issued for passenger car use.
Also, any motor vehicle, including passenger cars, which, by reason of a
characteristic coloring or marking exceeding one square foot in area, is
identified or commonly associated with any business, industry or public
agency shall be considered a commercial vehicle within the terms of this
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:388
chapter. Other passenger cars used in business by a resident shall not be
considered a commercial vehicle.
COMMISSION — See "Planning Commission."
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official Comprehensive or Land Use Plan
of the Borough of Wilson as may be adopted by the Council.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use or occupancy of a structure, or a use of land,
permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the
limitations and conditions specified therein.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "nursing home."
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A proposed amendment to this chapter
prepared by a landowner who desires to challenge, on substantive grounds,
the validity of this chapter or Zoning Map or any provision thereof, in
accordance with Section 609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.92
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility operated for the purpose of providing
care, protection and guidance to individuals during only part of a twentyfour-
hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day-care
centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and
private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a
full twenty-four-hour period.
DECK — See "patio" and "porch."
DENSITY, GROSS PROJECT — The gross project density of a residential
subdivision, land development, planned residential development or
residential cluster development, measured in residential dwelling units
per acre, shall be equal to the total number of residential dwelling units
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility providing care for the elderly
and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion
of a twenty-four-hour day.
A.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A type of day care use that provides care
for seven or more children at any one time who are not relatives of
the primary caregiver, does not occur within a dwelling unit, and is
registered with the applicable state agency (Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare).
B.
FAMILY DAY CARE, HOME — A type of day care use that is accessory
to and occurs within a dwelling unit and provides care for four to six
children at one time who are not relatives of the primary caregiver.
C.
GROUP DAY CARE, HOME — A type of day care use that provides care
for between seven and twelve children at one time who are not relatives
of the primary caregiver, provides care within a dwelling unit, and is
registered with the applicable state agency (Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare).
D.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:389
in the project divided by the permanent gross total project area of the
development, including private drives, parking areas, recreation and
common open space and other related uses permitted in the development.
DENSITY, NET PROJECT — The net project density of a residential
subdivision, land development, planned residential development or
residential cluster development, measured in residential units per acre,
shall be equal to the total number of residential dwelling units divided
by the total net residential land in acres. The total net residential land is
equal to the land in the project which is used only for residential purposes
or for related residential yard areas or which is directly associated with
each residential dwelling unit, such as parking areas to serve residents or
permitted accessory uses. The net residential land does not include public
or private street rights-of-way, recreation and common open space and
other uses, which are not directly associated with each residential dwelling
unit.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or a tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DISTRICT or ZONE — A portion of the territory of the Borough within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DUMP — A site used primarily for the disposal by abandonment, dumping,
burial, burning or other means and for whatever purpose of garbage, trash,
junk, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — Any building, vehicle or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons
and as defined further below. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed
to include automobile court, rooming house, tourist home, hotel, motel,
hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity, sorority house or family care
or group care facility, as defined herein.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or
kitchenette) and sanitary facilities, in a dwelling structure designed as
a unit for occupancy by not more than one family (as defined herein) for
living and sleeping purposes, and having a separate and independent
entrance.
A.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A configuration for a dwelling unit within
a multifamily or apartment building where a separate bedroom is not
provided and the sleeping quarters are located in the same room as the
living quarters.
B.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building on
a permanent foundation, designed for or occupied exclusively as a
residence by one family, except for an accessory dwelling unit, as
defined below, including a mobile home dwelling, as defined below,
except that such mobile home must be located on a permanent
foundation.
C.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:390
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication,
water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains,
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A building on a
permanent foundation, designed for use as a single dwelling unit to be
occupied exclusively as a residence by one family, which has only one
side yard and vertical wall in common with another building.
D.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED ("STACKED") — A detached
building on a permanent foundation in which not more than two
individual family or dwelling units are entirely separated by horizontal
floors, and where each dwelling unit has a completely separate entry
and exit.
E.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling structure
constructed on a permanent foundation, intended for permanent
occupancy for use by one family, contained in one unit or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking
and assembly operations; except for a travel trailer, as defined herein;
and excluding such mobile home dwellings or prefabricated homes or
sections thereof which when assembled or combined into a single unit
are more than 19 feet in width and no longer readily capable of being
separated for repeated towing.
F.
DWELLING STRUCTURES, MULTIFAMILY — Structures which contain
three or more dwelling units, including dwelling units commonly
referred to as "townhouses," "row houses," "garden apartments,"
"quadruplex units," "high-rise units for the elderly" or other
designations. Each dwelling unit in such a structure shall be designed
for occupancy of families living independently of each other.
G.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A separate second dwelling unit
which may be located within a structure in which the principal use is
for a single-family dwelling, provided that such accessory dwelling shall
be permitted only if it conforms with the following conditions:
It shall not exceed three rooms or 800 square feet in total livable
area or 40% of the total residential floor area (excluding basement
and attic floor space), whichever is less.
(1)
(2) It is not intended for occupancy by more than two persons.
The entire dwelling structure, including both the principal and the
accessory dwelling unit, shall remain in the same ownership at all
times, and the principal unit shall be occupied by the owner of
the structure at all times. In the event that this condition ceases
to exist, then the use of the accessory dwelling unit shall be
terminated in the structure.
(3)
H.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:391
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants and other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety
or general welfare, but not including buildings, except telephone booths,
fire houses, pump stations, treatment plants and similar facilities which
shall also be considered as essential service facilities hereunder.
FAMILY — Any group of individuals living together as the functional
equivalent of a family where the residents may share living expenses,
chores, eat meals together and are a close group with social, economic and
psychological commitments to each other. A family includes, for example,
the residents of residential care facilities and group homes for people
with disabilities. A family does not include larger institutional group living
situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or
nunneries.
FENCE — Any outdoor barrier of either natural living vegetation or
composed of fabricated materials, as defined below, which is placed or
arranged as a line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or a part
of a lot. The height of any fence shall be the distance measured from the
existing grade of the natural surface to the top of the fence.
FLOOD FRINGE — The portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A standard adopted by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to identify areas where there exists a onepercent
annual chance of a flood occurring.
FLOODPLAIN — The land area susceptible to inundation by water as a
result of a flood.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — An area subject to flooding as defined in any
Floodplain Management Ordinance93 adopted by the Borough of Wilson and
as it may be amended thereafter.
FLOODWAY — The channel of watercourse and those portions of adjoining
floodplains which are required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year
flood with no significant increase in the base flood elevation.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross areas of the floors of every story of
a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the
NATURAL LIVING FENCE — A barrier of natural living vegetation,
including shrubs, hedges, trees or other plant materials, shall only be
considered to be a fence if 50% or more of the horizontal length of such
materials or growth within six feet of the ground surface provides a
visual screen or obstruction to vision.
A.
FABRICATED MATERIALS FENCE — Any structure or wall, regardless
of composition of material, except for a natural living fence, which is
constructed and installed to act as a visual or physical outdoor barrier.
B.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Floodplain Management.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:392
center lines of common or party walls separating two buildings. Regardless
of the internal arrangements of a building, it shall be deemed to have at
least one story for each 20 feet of height or fraction thereof.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total floor area of a building divided by the area
of the lot on which it is located.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A building or group of buildings used exclusively
for the storage and parking of automobiles and not used for making repairs
thereto.
GARAGE OR PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An accessory parking area or
building or part of a principal building used only for the storage of private
motor vehicles and other personal effects of the occupant of the principal
structure.
GARAGE, SERVICE — A building or part thereof used for the repair of
motor vehicles for remuneration and not used for dismantling or scrapping
of motor vehicles.
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs beneath the land surface, also called
"subsurface water" or "subterranean water." Groundwater includes water in
the zone of saturation of a water-bearing formation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA — Land or water areas through which
groundwater is replenished.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides resident services, for
a fee or charge, for individuals who are being cared for by an appropriate
residential supervisory staff. These individuals may be handicapped, aged
or disabled or in need of medical and/or adult supervision and are
undergoing rehabilitation and are provided service and supervision in
accordance with their individual needs. This category includes uses licensed
or supervised by any federal, state or county health/welfare agency (all
ages), halfway houses, resident schools, resident facilities and foster care
homes or boardinghomes for children or adults, but does not include group
homes, nursing homes or detention centers, as defined herein.
GROUP HOME — Includes a group of persons, some or all of whom are
not related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or foster placement, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a residential dwelling unit, but not
including group care facilities, as defined herein.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or activity which is clearly incidental
and secondary to use of the premises as a dwelling and which is carried on
wholly or in part within a main building or accessory building by a member
of the family who resides on the premises. Also refer to definition for "noimpact
home-based business."
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:393
HOSPITAL — A building or part thereof used for the medical, psychiatric,
obstetrical or surgical care, on a twenty-four-hour basis, of seven or more
inpatients. Hospitals shall include general hospitals, mental hospitals,
tuberculosis hospitals, children's hospitals and any such facilities providing
medical inpatient care and related outpatient service.
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings designed to serve the public,
with one or more outside entrances, which contains six or more permanent
bedrooms and which is designed, arranged and used for the overnight
lodging of travelers or for temporary occupancy of transients and which
may include a public dining room and kitchen.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT, SINGLE — One person or two or more individuals
living together sharing household responsibilities and activities which may
include sharing expenses, chores, eating evening meals together and
participating in recreational activities and having close social, economic
and psychological commitments to each other.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub to which the blade is
attached.
INFLATABLE DEVICE — Any air- or gas-filled device located, attached, or
tethered to the ground, site, merchandise, building, or roof and used for the
purposes of signage, advertising, or attention-getting.
JUNK — Includes scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap
lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys and bones,
rags, used cloth, used rubber, used machinery, used tools, used appliances,
used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates, used pipe or
pipe fittings, used tires and other manufactured goods, any of which are so
worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing
condition but are subject to being dismantled or processed for reclamation,
salvage or recycling.
JUNKYARD — Consists of an outdoor storage yard or premises where junk,
waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including automobile wrecking
yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment yards.
KENNEL — The keeping of more than three dogs, cats, ferrets or other
animals customarily kept as household pets that are more than four months
old for breeding, training, selling or boarding.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group
of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
regardless of the number of occupants or tenants; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features. A subdivision of land.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:394
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise, as permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — See "social hall, club or lodge."
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building that contains at least one floor
devoted to permitted nonresidential uses and at least one devoted to
permitted residential uses.
MOBILE HOME — See definition of "mobile home" under "dwelling."
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land at least 10 acres in size, under
single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement
of two or more mobile homes for nontransient use.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings designated to serve the public,
whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or
dwelling units, designed primarily for overnight lodging and transient
travelers and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities, and
which may include a public dining room or restaurant. The term "motel"
includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor lodges, auto courts and
other similar uses.
MUNICIPALITY or BOROUGH — The Borough of Wilson, located in
Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup or delivery or
removal functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally
associated with residential uses. The business or commercial activity must
satisfy the following requirements:
A. LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two
streets.
B.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front and the rear lot
lines.
C.
D. LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the principal
street right-of-way on which the lot has frontage.
E.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
F.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.
G.
LOT WIDTH — The width of the lot between side lot lines at the front
building line as prescribed by the front yard regulations.
H.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:395
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot, legally existing at the date of passage
of this chapter, which does not conform with either one or more of the
following: the minimum width, depth and area dimensions specified for the
district where such a lot is situated.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or structure or part thereof
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions in this chapter, or amendment thereto or hereafter enacted,
where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or building or structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter,
or amendment thereto or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NURSING HOME — An institutional use licensed under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for lodging, boarding and nursing care,
including any premises containing sleeping rooms or beds to be used by
seven or more persons who are lodged and furnished with meals, related
facilities and professional staff and nursing care on a twenty-four-hour
basis. Nursing homes shall also include convalescent homes, skilled nursing
facilities, intermediate care facilities and infirmaries located within homes
for the aged, but shall exclude residential care facilities for the elderly and
residential retirement complex, as defined herein.
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity shall not use any equipment which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference,
including interference with radio or television reception, which is
detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:396
OBSTRUCTION TO VISION — Any structure, fence, sign, plant material or
other obstruction which obstructs vision between a height of two to 10 feet
above the center-line grade of the adjoining streets or driveways within the
triangle formed by the street or driveway intersection, created by the rightof-
way line of each street or driveway extended to a point, and a line drawn
between two points on the right-of-way line of each street or driveway,
each located 15 feet from the street or driveway intersection for local and
collector streets, and 30 feet for major state and federal traffic routes. All
plant materials shall be kept trimmed to ensure uninterrupted vision for
motor vehicle traffic.
PAPER ALLEY — A public or private way providing access to abutting
property not maintained by the Borough.
PATIO — A surfaced area or courtyard or a deck less than one foot above
ground elevation designed for outdoor living purposes as an accessory use
to a structure, which shall be completely unenclosed except for any side
which may adjoin a structure or for any fences or walls less than four feet
in height, shrubs or hedges. Outdoor areas which are screened or enclosed
by a roof or awning shall be considered to be a structure. (See "porch.")
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper authority of the municipality
authorizing an applicant to undertake certain activities, as further defined
below:
PERMITTED USE — Any use which does not require special action by the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board before a zoning permit
is granted by the Zoning Officer.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit issued indicating that a proposed use,
building or structure is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or with an order of the Zoning Hearing Board and authorizing
an applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure.
A.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is in
accordance with the construction provisions of any building code which
may be adopted by the Borough which authorizes an applicant to
commence with said construction, alteration or reconstruction. Such a
permit shall not be confused with a zoning permit or with an occupancy
permit as may be required under the terms of this chapter.
B.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a structure or change in use of structure or parcel of
land indicating that the premises comply with the provisions of this
chapter and may be used for the purposes set forth in the occupancy
permit.
C.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit which may be granted under
the provisions of this chapter and which when granted authorizes a
particular use to be made of a particular premises, subject to
compliance with all the terms and conditions contained in the permit.
D.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:397
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Wilson.
PORCH — A structure or part of a structure which is enclosed on one or
more sides by a fence or wall which is four feet high or higher or covered
by a roof or awning; or a structure which would otherwise be classified as a
patio or deck except that it is one foot or more above the ground elevation.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or main use of a lot, parcel or structure.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Includes the office of a physician, dentist,
optometrist, architect, landscape architect, engineer, planner, insurance
broker, realtor, accountant, lawyer, author or other member of a recognized
profession.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice for a public hearing published once each week
for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication shall
not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. (Also see § 170-19.)
ROOMING HOUSE or BOARDINGHOUSE — A building containing one or
more dwelling accommodations in which at least two rooms are offered
for rent to adults ages 18 years or older, payable in money or other
consideration, whether or not meals are furnished to occupants, and in
which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is
maintained. A school or college dormitory, fraternity or sorority house,
membership club with residents and other similar uses is not deemed to be
a boardinghouse or rooming house.
SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS — A dish-shaped antenna designed to
receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth
orbiting communications satellites.
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating turbine blades
cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing the repeating
pattern of light and shadow.
SHED — An accessory detached structure to a residential dwelling unit
constructed on a permanent foundation, which is used primarily for the
storage of household goods or garden equipment or other storage related
to the residential dwelling unit.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (also referred to as a "billboard") — Any graphic or
visual display which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:398
entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BANNER — A temporary sign that is otherwise not allowed as a
freestanding sign and shall be limited to cloth, flexible plastic, vinyl, or
similar material (i.e., no cardboard, rigid plastics, wood, etc.).
SIGN, BUSINESS — Any graphic or visual display which directs attention
to a business or profession or to a commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or
to which it is affixed.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign permanently supported by an upright
pole(s) which is permanently anchored into the ground below the frost line
with a footing. A billboard is not considered a freestanding sign for purposes
of ordinance regulations.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF — The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign or structure
or display and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements
of the same, but not including any structural or framing elements located
outside the limits of the display of such sign.
SIGN, INFLATABLE — See definition of "inflatable device."
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, paper, corrugated cardboard or plastic, plywood, or other light
material, and/or designed or intended to be displayed, either on premises of
off premises, for a short period of time.
SOCIAL HALL, CLUB OR LODGE — A building, structure, lot or land area or
portion thereof used as a private club or social organization or for activities
or services not generally extended to the general public and not conducted
for individual profit or gain.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device or combination of devices, structure(s),
or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes significantly to
a structure's energy supply.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and/or reflected)
received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Any solar collector or other solar energy
device, or any structural design feature, mounted on a building or on the
ground, and whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage,
and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, for water
heating or for electricity.
SOLAR PANEL — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy,
heat water, or produce hot air or perform any other similar function by way
of a solar energy system.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which may be granted or denied pursuant
to express standards and criteria established in this chapter. Requests for
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:399
such special exceptions shall be decided by the Zoning Hearing Board after
a review and recommendation from the Planning Commission and after a
hearing to determine compliance with said standards and criteria.
STEEP SLOPE — Areas with a slope greater than 15%, i.e., a rise or fall of
more than 15 feet in a horizontal distance of 100 feet.
STORY and HALF-STORY — That portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor, but excluding the basement or cellar, and the ceiling
next above it and having a vertical distance of not less than seven feet. Any
such portion of a building having a distance of less than seven feet shall be
considered to be a half-story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare, having a right-of-way width
greater than 24 feet, which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property, including avenue, way, drive, boulevard, highway, road and any
other thoroughfare except an alley.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, including a building, the use of
which requires permanent or fixed location on the ground or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground. The term structure
shall include signs, fences, walls, stationary and portable carports, porches,
swimming pools, garages and other construction of all types.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any other means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water having a
depth at any point greater than two feet used or intended to be used for
swimming or bathing and constructed, installed or maintained in or above
the ground outside any building.
TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL OCCUPANCY — The use of any premises or
structure for living and/or sleeping purposes for 100 or fewer days in any
calendar year.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle less than 400 square feet in floor area
which can be moved over the highway and be used for temporary living or
PUBLIC STREET — A street, as defined hereinabove, which is dedicated
to and accepted by the municipality and legally open to the general
public for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
A.
FRONTAGE ON PUBLIC STREETS — No use shall be created nor any
building occupied unless the lot or tract on which it is situated has
frontage on a public street or a street improved to municipal standards
without traversing through or around another use and/or building;
provided, however, that planned multiple-dwelling-unit structures,
including apartment development complexes, may abut private streets
that are connected to a public street if approved by the Borough
Council.
B.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:400
sleeping purposes and standing on wheels and containing not more than
one dwelling unit.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
TURBINE ROTOR — A structure which contains the blades and hub that are
used to capture wind for purposes of energy conversion. The wind rotor is
usually located on a tower and, along with other generating and electrical
storage equipment, forms the wind energy facility.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — A portion of a lot or tract used for residential
purposes exclusive of required front and side yard areas, which is not
covered by buildings or parking areas and is suitable for use as outdoor
open space for the residents thereon.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or
intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
VARIANCE — The Zoning Hearing Board's authorized departure from the
provisions of this chapter where the Board finds that such provisions inflict
unnecessary hardship upon an applicant, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An electric generating system whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad transformer, if any.
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, on the same lot
with a building or a group of buildings, which open space lies between the
principal building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line, as defined
below, and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as may be permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the principal building and the front lot line.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the principal building and the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the principal building and the nearest side lot line.
C.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:401
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The officially designated Zoning Hearing
Board of the municipality.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-23 WILSON CODE § 170-23
1:402
ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 170-24. Establishment of zoning districts.
The Borough of Wilson is hereby divided into districts of different types,
each type being of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such common
unity of purpose and adaptability of use, that are deemed most suitable to
carry out the objectives of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 170-25. Classes of zoning districts.
The Borough of Wilson is hereby divided into the following seven districts:
R-1 Low-Density Residential District
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
H-1 Hospital-Medical District
TC Town Center District
C-1 Local Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
I-1 General Industrial District
§ 170-26. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of these districts are established as shown on
the attached Zoning Map of the Borough of Wilson dated December 27,
2012, as amended.94 The Zoning Map is hereby made a part of this chapter.
§ 170-27. Interpretation of boundaries.
If uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district shown on the Zoning
Map, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the location of such
boundary.
94.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27
1:403

ARTICLE V
R-1 Low-Density Residential District
§ 170-28. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1 District shall be:
§ 170-29. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the R-1 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-30. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the R-1
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
A. To provide for the orderly expansion of areas that offer neighborhoods
of single-family detached houses at a low density.
B. To carefully protect these areas from uses that may not be fully
compatible.
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. B-1 Single-family detached dwelling.
C. B-6 Group home.
D. C-5 Recreational facility.
E. F-1 Utility operating facility.
F. H-2 No-impact home-based business.
G. H-3 Residential accessory structure.
H. H-6 Swimming pool.
I. H-7 Recreational vehicles.
J. H-8 Garage/yard sales.
K. H-11 Solar energy system.
A. C-1 Place of worship.
B. C-2 School.
C. C-4 Library or museum.
D. C-7 Private organization or community center.
E. H-1 Home-based business.
§ 170-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30
1:405
§ 170-31. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the R-1 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-32. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the R-1 District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
F. H-4 Outside storage.
G. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
H. H-9 In-law suite.
A. C-6 Athletic facility.
B. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
C. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
D. H-10 Wind energy system.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area square (feet): 6,000.
(2) Width (feet): 60.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet): 6,000.
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 25.
(2) Rear yard: 25.
(3) One side yard: eight.
(4) Both side yards combined: 20.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building:
(1) Number of stories: 2.5.
(2) Height in feet: 35.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 35%.
§ 170-30 WILSON CODE § 170-32
1:406
ARTICLE VI
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District.
§ 170-33. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-2 District shall be:
§ 170-34. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the R-2 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-35. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the R-2
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
A. To provide for a variety of carefully designed housing types at medium
densities.
B. To make sure that varied housing types are compatible with any
existing single-family detached houses.
C. To make sure that the street system of the Borough and other
community facilities and services are fully able to handle medium dense
growth in an area.
D. To work to encourage affordable housing, especially for young families
and senior citizens.
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. B-1 Single-family detached dwelling.
C. B-2 Two-family dwelling.
D. B-6 Group home.
E. C-5 Recreational facility.
F. F-1 Utility operating facility.
G. H-2 No-impact home-based business.
H. H-3 Residential accessory structure.
I. H-6 Swimming pool.
J. H-7 Recreational vehicles.
K. H-8 Garage/yard sales.
L. H-11 Solar energy system.
§ 170-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35
1:407
§ 170-36. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the R-2 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-37. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations for the R-2 District are listed according to the
three divisions of the R-2 District permitted uses and apply to all parcels of
that use, unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for
a particular use:
A. B-3 Multifamily dwelling.
B. B-4 Mobile home parks.
C. C-1 Place of worship.
D. C-2 School.
E. C-4 Library or museum.
F. C-7 Private organization or community center.
G. H-1 Home-based business.
H. H-4 Outside storage.
I. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
J. H-9 In-law suite.
A. C-6 Athletic facility.
B. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
C. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
D. H-10 Wind energy system.
A. Single-family detached.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area square (feet): 5,000.
(b) Width (feet): 50.
(2) Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet): 5,000.
(3) Minimum yards (feet).
(a) Front yard: 25.
(b) Rear yard: 25.
(c) One side yard: eight.
§ 170-35 WILSON CODE § 170-37
1:408
(d) Both side yards combined: 20.
(4) Maximum building height for the principal building.
(a) Number of stories: 2.5.
(b) Height in feet: 35.
(5) Maximum building coverage (%): 40%.
B. Single-family semidetached.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area square (feet): 3,000.
(b) Width (feet): 30.
(c) Depth (feet): 100.
(2) Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet): 3,000.
(3) Minimum yards (feet).
(a) Front yard: 25.
(b) Rear yard: 25.
(c) One side yard: eight.
(d) Both side yards combined: NA.
(4) Maximum building height for the principal building.
(a) Number of stories: 2.5.
(b) Height in feet: 35.
(5) Maximum building coverage (%): 45%.
C. Two-family.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area square (feet): 5,000.
(b) Width (feet): 50.
(c) Depth (feet): 100.
(2) Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet): 2,500.
(3) Minimum yards (feet).
(a) Front yard: 25.
(b) Rear yard: 25.
§ 170-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37
1:409
(c) One side yard: eight.
(d) Both side yards combined: 16.
(4) Maximum building height for the principal building.
(a) Number of stories: 2.5.
(b) Height in feet: 35.
(5) Maximum building coverage (%): 45%.
D. All other uses.
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Area (square feet): 8,000.
(b) Width (feet): 80.
(c) Depth (feet): 100.
(2) Minimum yards (feet).
(a) Front yard: 30.
(b) Rear yard: 30.
(c) Side yard (each): 15.
(3) Maximum building height for the principal building.
(a) Number of stories: 2.5.
(b) Height in feet: 35.
(4) Maximum building coverage (%): 40%.
§ 170-37 WILSON CODE § 170-37
1:410
ARTICLE VII
H-1 Hospital-Medical District
§ 170-38. Purpose.
The purpose of the H-1 District shall be to provide for the continued
operation and development of Easton Hospital and other medical and
associated offices and facilities in a manner compatible with the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
§ 170-39. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the H-1 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-40. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the H-1
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. C-5 Recreational facility.
C. C-11 Nursing home.
D. C-12 Hospital.
E. C-16 Assisted living facility.
F. D-2 Medical office.
G. E-15 Funeral home.
H. F-1 Utility operating facility.
I. H-11 Solar energy system.
A. C-1 Place of worship.
B. C-2 School.
C. C-3 Commercial school.
D. C-7 Private organization or community center.
E. C-8 Day-care center.
F. C-9 Adult day-care center.
G. C-10 Group care facility.
H. E-4 Financial establishment.
I. E-5 Eating place.
§ 170-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40
1:411
§ 170-41. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the H-1 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-42. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the H-1 District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
J. F-2 Emergency services.
K. G-2 Research.
L. H-4 Outside storage.
M. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
A. C-14 Municipal/government building or use.
B. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
C. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
D. H-10 Wind energy system.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area square (feet): 7,500.
(2) Width (feet): 65.
(3) Depth (feet): 100.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 15.
(2) Rear yard: 20.
(3) One side yard: 15.
(4) Both side yards combined: 25.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building:
(1) Number of stories: six.
(2) Height in feet: 75.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 50%.
§ 170-40 WILSON CODE § 170-42
1:412
ARTICLE VIII
TC Town Center District
§ 170-43. Purpose.
The purpose of the TC District shall be to provide for medical facilities and
associated offices primarily, but also to provide an area which may include
a variety in types of establishments.
§ 170-44. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the TC District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. B-6 Group home.
C. C-5 Recreational facility.
D. C-6 Athletic facility.
E. C-7 Private organization or community center.
F. C-8 Day-care center.
G. C-9 Adult day-care center.
H. C-14 Municipal/government building or use.
I. D-1 Office.
J. D-2 Medical office.
K. E-1 Retail shop.
L. E-3 Service business.
M. E-4 Financial establishment.
N. E-5 Eating place.
O. E-7 Repair shop.
P. E-8 Motel, hotel or inn.
Q. F-1 Utility operating facility.
R. H-2 No-impact home-based business.
S. H-3 Residential accessory structure.
T. H-6 Swimming pool.
U. H-8 Garage/yard sales.
V. H-11 Solar energy system.
§ 170-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-45
1:413
§ 170-45. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the TC
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
§ 170-46. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the TC District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
§ 170-47. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the TC District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
A. B-3 Multifamily dwelling.
B. C-1 Place of worship.
C. C-2 School.
D. C-3 Commercial school.
E. C-4 Library or museum.
F. C-10 Group care facility.
G. C-11 Nursing home.
H. C-16 Assisted living facility.
I. E-15 Funeral home.
J. E-16 Veterinary office or clinic.
K. E-20 Kennel.
L. F-2 Emergency services.
M. H-4 Outside storage.
N. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
O. H-9 In-law suite.
A. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
B. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
C. H-10 Wind energy system.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area (square feet): 5,000.
§ 170-45 WILSON CODE § 170-47
1:414
(2) Width (feet): 50.
(3) Depth (feet): 100.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 20.
(2) Rear yard: 10.
(3) One side yard: 10.
(4) Both side yards combined: 20.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building:
(1) Number of stories: three.
(2) Height in feet: 35.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 50%.
§ 170-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-47
1:415

ARTICLE IX
C-1 Local Commercial District
§ 170-48. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-1 District shall be to provide for localized commercial
markets throughout the Borough. The District is intended to group such
commercial establishments and not intended to apply to major or largescale
commercial establishments.
§ 170-49. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the C-1 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. C-4 Library or museum.
C. C-5 Recreational facility.
D. C-6 Athletic facility.
E. C-7 Private organization or community center.
F. C-8 Day-care center.
G. C-9 Adult day-care center.
H. C-14 Municipal/government building or use.
I. D-1 Office.
J. D-2 Medical office.
K. E-1 Retail shop.
L. E-3 Service business.
M. E-4 Financial establishment.
N. E-5 Eating place.
O. E-6 Eating place, drive-through.
P. E-7 Repair Shop.
Q. E-8 Motel, hotel or inn.
R. E-9 Commercial recreation and entertainment.
S. E-17 Banquet facility.
T. E-19 Mixed-use building.
U. F-1 Utility operating facility.
§ 170-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-49
1:417
§ 170-50. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the C-1
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
§ 170-51. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the C-1 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
V. F-2 Emergency services.
W. H-2 No-impact home-based business.
X. H-3 Residential accessory structure.
Y. H-6 Swimming pool.
Z. H-8 Garage/yard sales.
AA. H-11 Solar energy system.
A. B-3 Multifamily dwelling.
B. C-2 School.
C. C-3 Commercial school.
D. C-10 Group care facility.
E. C-11 Nursing Home.
F. C-16 Assisted living facility.
G. E-11 Automotive sales.
H. E-15 Funeral home.
I. E-16 Veterinary office or clinic.
J. E-20 Kennel.
K. E-21 Animal shelter or rescue.
L. G-6 Trades.
M. H-4 Outside storage.
N. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
A. B-5 Rooming house or boardinghouse.
B. E-12 Automotive body repair and paint shop.
C. E-14 Shopping center.
§ 170-49 WILSON CODE § 170-51
1:418
§ 170-52. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the C-1 District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
D. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
E. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
F. H-10 Wind energy system.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area (square feet): 5,000.
(2) Width (feet): 50.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 20.
(2) Rear yard: 20.
(3) Side yard (each): 10.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building.
(1) Number of stories: three.
(2) Height in feet: 35.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 60%.
§ 170-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-52
1:419

ARTICLE X
C-2 General Commercial District
§ 170-53. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-2 District shall be to provide for a market area
containing both localized commercial establishments as well as major or
large-scale commercial establishments.
§ 170-54. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the C-2 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. C-4 Library or museum.
C. C-5 Recreational facility.
D. C-6 Athletic facility.
E. C-7 Private organization or community center.
F. C-14 Municipal/government building or use.
G. D-1 Office.
H. D-2 Medical office.
I. E-1 Retail shop.
J. E-2 Large retail store.
K. E-3 Service business.
L. E-4 Financial establishment.
M. E-5 Eating place.
N. E-6 Eating place, drive-through.
O. E-7 Repair shop.
P. E-8 Motel, hotel or inn.
Q. E-9 Commercial recreation and entertainment.
R. E-10 Service station.
S. E-13 Car wash.
T. E-17 Banquet facility.
U. F-1 Utility operating facility.
V. F-2 Emergency services.
§ 170-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-54
1:421
§ 170-55. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the C-2
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
§ 170-56. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the C-2 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
W. F-3 Terminal.
X. G-5 Contract services.
Y. H-11 Solar energy system.
A. C-2 School.
B. C-3 Commercial school.
C. C-10 Group care facility.
D. C-11 Nursing home.
E. C-16 Assisted living facility.
F. E-11 Automotive sales.
G. E-15 Funeral home.
H. E-16 Veterinary office or clinic.
I. E-18 Adult-oriented use.
J. E-19 Mixed-use building.
K. E-20 Kennel.
L. E-21 Animal shelter or rescue.
M. G-2 Research.
N. G-6 Trades.
O. H-4 Outside storage.
P. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
A. E-12 Automotive body repair and paint shop.
B. E-14 Shopping center.
C. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
D. H-10 Wind energy system.
§ 170-54 WILSON CODE § 170-56
1:422
§ 170-57. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the C-2 District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
E. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area square (feet): 15,000.
(2) Width (feet): 80.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 10.
(2) Rear yard: 20.
(3) One side yard: 15.
(4) Both side yards combined: 30.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building:
(1) Number of stories: three.
(2) Height in feet: 35.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 60%.
§ 170-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-57
1:423

ARTICLE XI
I-1 General Industrial District
§ 170-58. Purpose.
The purpose of the I-1 District shall be to provide for manufacturing and
other related uses. This district is intended to reserve land for the functions
of industrial activity, wholesaling, warehousing, and distribution.
§ 170-59. Permitted by right uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by right in the I-1 District, provided
that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
A. A-1 Forestry.
B. C-5 Recreational facility.
C. C-14 Municipal/government building or use.
D. D-1 Office.
E. D-2 Medical office.
F. E-7 Repair shop.
G. E-10 Service station.
H. E-11 Automotive sales.
I. E-12 Automotive body repair and paint shop.
J. E-13 Car wash.
K. E-16 Veterinary office or clinic.
L. E-20 Kennel.
M. E-21 Animal shelter or rescue.
N. F-1 Utility operating facility.
O. F-2 Emergency services.
P. F-3 Terminal.
Q. G-1 Manufacturing.
R. G-2 Research.
S. G-3 Mini warehouse, mini storage.
T. G-4 Printing.
U. G-5 Contract services.
V. G-6 Trades.
§ 170-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-59
1:425
§ 170-60. Special exception uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by special exception in the I-1
District, provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are
met:
§ 170-61. Conditional uses.
Only the following uses are permitted by conditional use in the I-1 District,
provided that the requirements for specific uses in Article XIII are met:
W. G-7 Fuel storage and distribution.
X. G-8 Building materials sale.
Y. G-9 Equipment storage yards.
Z. G-10 Truck terminal.
AA. G-11 Food processing.
BB. G-12 Laundry, dry-cleaning or dyeing plant.
CC. G-13 Warehouse.
DD. G-14 Junkyard.
EE. G-15 Mineral extraction.
FF. H-11 Solar energy system.
A. C-2 School.
B. C-3 Commercial school.
C. C-7 Private organization or community center.
D. C-13 Cemetery.
E. C-15 Detention facility.
F. E-4 Financial establishment.
G. E-9 Commercial recreation and entertainment.
H. H-4 Outside storage.
I. H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles.
A. C-6 Athletic facility.
B. E-2 Large retail store.
C. E-3 Service business.
D. F-4 Telecommunications facility.
§ 170-59 WILSON CODE § 170-61
1:426
§ 170-62. Area and dimensional requirements.
The following size regulations shall apply to all uses in the I-1 District,
unless a more restrictive requirement is stated in this chapter for a
particular use:
E. H-10 Wind energy system.
F. G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Area square (feet): 20,000.
(2) Width (feet): 100.
B. Average lot area per dwelling unit (square feet).
C. Minimum yards (feet):
(1) Front yard: 30.
(2) Rear yard: 30.
(3) Side yard (each): 15.
D. Maximum building height for the principal building:
(1) Number of stories: three.
(2) Height in feet: 40.
E. Maximum building coverage (%): 50%.
§ 170-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-62
1:427

ARTICLE XII
Planned Residential Development Overlay District
§ 170-63. Definition and statement of purpose.
A "planned residential development" (PRD) is defined as an area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number
of dwelling units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the general goals listed in
the statement of purpose, the provisions of this article are intended to serve
the purposes of a PRD stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, including but not limited to the following:
§ 170-64. Applicability.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a PRD, except where specific
provisions of this article differ from specific provisions of other sections of
this chapter, in which case the provisions of this article shall control.
§ 170-65. Eligibility.
§ 170-66. Use regulations.
A. Provide for the adaptive reuse of industrial properties and to recognize
unique development opportunities;
B. Provide for higher residential densities and a variety of housing types;
C. Provide for a range of service-oriented establishments designed to
serve local needs;
D. Provide for commercial development that is compatible with the
character of the Borough and can offer additional employment
opportunities and an increased tax base; and
E. To encourage innovation in residential and nonresidential development;
provide greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings; and to
encourage more efficient land use.
A. The proposed PRD shall consist of one or more contiguous parcels of
land under single ownership and control or under active agreement of
sale, with new development clearly intended to be developed as a single
entity.
B. A PRD shall only be permitted within the General Industrial I-1 Zoning
District. Within this district, a PRD shall be a permitted by right use.
C. The PRD shall consist of a minimum total tract area of three acres.
D. Public water and public sanitary sewer systems shall serve the PRD.
§ 170-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-66
1:429
§ 170-67. Density requirements.
A. Uses by right. Within a PRD, a building or other structure may be
erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following purposes:
(1) Residential uses. A PRD shall include one or more of the following
residential dwelling types:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling (maximum three habitable
floors).
(b) Two-family dwelling (maximum three habitable floors).
(c) Townhouse (maximum three habitable floors).
(d) Garden apartment building (maximum five habitable floors).
(e) Mid-rise apartment building (maximum eight habitable floors).
(2) Nonresidential uses (maximum eight habitable floors). The
following uses shall be permitted in a PRD:
(a) Offices.
(b) Service-based business, not including motor vehicle or fuel
sales.
(c) Restaurant.
(d) Community center, fitness facility, exercise club, or similar
facility.
(e) Accessory uses incidental to any of the principal uses listed
above.
B. Height. Buildings or structures within a PRD shall not be subject to the
height limitations of the underlying zoning district, but rather shall be
limited by the number of habitable floors for each use as listed above.
A. The maximum density shall be determined based upon buildable area.
(1) Buildable area shall be the total lot area of the tract, not including
the following:
(a) Areas within the future rights-of-way of preexisting or
previously approved streets;
(b) Areas with average slopes greater than 25%;
(c) Areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain and wetlands;
and
(d) Areas within riparian and wetland buffers.
§ 170-66 WILSON CODE § 170-67
1:430
(2) Areas of land voluntarily dedicated to and accepted by the Borough
or state for a street improvement that would not otherwise be
required by the Borough or state and that is not necessary for
providing internal access for the development may be included as
buildable area.
(3) Areas of land provided as easements on adjacent parcels may be
included as buildable area.
B. Minimum buildable area per dwelling unit. The following shall apply:
(1) Schedule of minimum buildable area per dwelling unit.
Type of Dwelling Unit
Minimum Average Square
Feet of Buildable Area within
the Tract Per Dwelling Unit
Mid-rise apartment 1,000
Garden apartment 1,000
Townhouse 2,000
Single-family semidetached 2,000
Single-family detached 3,500
(2) The total number of dwelling units within the PRD tract divided by
the total acreage of the PRD tract shall not exceed a maximum of
60 dwelling units per total acre for mid-rise apartments, 20
dwelling units per total acre for garden apartments, and 10
dwelling units per total acre for townhouses. The number of
allowed dwelling units shall be allocated to lot(s) before the PRD
tract is subdivided.
C. Flexibility in placement. The total number of dwelling units allowed on
the tract may be placed at any appropriate locations within the
buildable area of the tract in compliance with other provisions of this
article. A condominium form of ownership is allowed, provided the
applicant shows compliance with applicable state law.
D. In calculating the allowable overall density, land which is capable of
further development or subdivision for additional dwellings shall not be
counted unless the possibility of such development or subdivision is
precluded by a formal permanent deed restriction or conservation
easement restricting the land to use for only common open space and
preventing future development, which the deed restriction duly
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, and with such
restriction noted on the official record plan.
E. The total area covered by all impervious surfaces shall not exceed the
existing total area of impervious surfaces found on the tract, or 80% of
the total tract area of the PRD, whichever is greater. A maximum
impervious coverage shall not apply to individual lots.
§ 170-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-67
1:431
§ 170-68. Design standards.
F. The total area covered by all buildings shall not exceed the existing
total area of buildings found on the tract, or 60% of the total tract area
of the PRD, whichever is greater. A maximum building coverage shall
not apply to individual lots.
G. The percentage of building floor area on the PRD tract devoted to
nonresidential uses shall not exceed 50% of the total building floor
area.
H. Building separation. Principal buildings within a PRD shall have
minimum separation as defined by the Construction Code.95 Where new
construction is proposed that would result in a principal residential
building abutting a principal nonresidential building, then a 20 feet
minimum separation distance shall apply between the two buildings.
I. Building setbacks. Minimum setback from principal buildings to all
existing or proposed lot lines and/or street rights-of-way shall be 30
feet, except that such setback shall not apply where buildings are
lawfully attached. The required minimum setback shall not apply to
structures existing as of the date of this article. No setbacks shall apply
for accessory buildings.
A. Parking. The following parking provisions shall apply in place of Article
XVI, Table 2,96 of this chapter for residential uses. Parking provisions
for nonresidential uses shall comply with the requirements of Article
XVI, Table 2.
(1) Efficiency and one bedroom units: one per one dwelling unit.
(2) Two bedrooms: one and one-half per dwelling unit.
(3) Three or more bedrooms: two per dwelling unit.
B. Open space. The percentage of the PRD site to be devoted to common
open space shall not be less than 25% of the total site area. As an
alternative, the developer may also be permitted to contribute a fee in
lieu of providing open space as determined by the Borough Council.
C. Landscaping, buffering, and tree preservation.
(1) A landscaping plan for the tract shall be submitted to the Borough
with the final plan, and shall be subject to approval by the Borough
Council. Except as otherwise approved by the Borough Council, all
landscaping provisions of this chapter (§ 170-87, Buffer yard
requirements, and § 170-90, Landscaping) shall apply.
(2) A twenty-foot buffer shall be provided around the entire perimeter
of the tract, which shall be landscaped in accordance with the
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86A, Construction Codes, Uniform.
96.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-67 WILSON CODE § 170-68
1:432
§ 170-69. Ownership and maintenance of common areas.
The standards for a planned residential development established by
provisions adopted pursuant to this article may require that the common
areas and/or open space resulting from the application of standards for
density, or intensity of land use, shall be set aside for the use and benefit of
the residents in such development and may include provisions which shall
determine the amount and location of said common areas and/or open space
and secure its improvement and maintenance for common area/open space
use, subject, however, to the following:
requirements of § 170-87A, Softening buffers. A softening buffer is
not required where a screen buffer is to be provided.
(3) Where a commercial area adjoins a residential area within the
planned development or in adjacent land around the perimeter of
the development, a screen buffer shall be provided between the
residential and commercial areas in accordance with the
requirements of § 170-87B, Screen buffers.
(4) Except as otherwise approved by the Borough Council, tree
preservation provisions of this chapter and Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply. Where extensive
natural tree cover and vegetation does not exist and cannot be
preserved on the PRD site, appropriate landscaping shall be
planted to enhance the appearance of the PRD, aid in erosion
control, provide protection from wind and sun, screen streets and
parking areas and enhance the privacy of dwelling units.
(5) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The protection
of trees six inches or more in diameter (measured at a height 3.5
feet above the original grade) shall be a factor in determining the
location of open spaces, structures, underground utilities, walks
and paved areas. Areas in which trees are preserved shall remain
at original grade level and undisturbed wherever possible.
A. The developer shall make provisions to ensure that all common areas
shall be properly maintained. The developer shall provide for and
establish a homeowners' association or other similar organization for
the ownership and maintenance of all common areas and commonly
owned facilities. The legal agreements for such common ownership and
maintenance shall be subject to approval by Borough Council, as a
condition of final PRD approval, prior to recording.
B. The Borough may, at any time and from time to time, accept the
dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and
maintenance, but the Borough need not require, as a condition of the
approval of a planned residential development, that land proposed to be
set aside for common open space be dedicated or made available to
public use. The provisions may require that the landowner provide for
and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the
§ 170-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-69
1:433
common open space, and that such organization shall not be dissolved
nor shall it dispose of the common open space, by sale or otherwise
(except to an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the common open space), without first offering to dedicate the
same to the public.
C. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any time
after establishment of the planned residential development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Borough may serve written
notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the planned
residential development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and
shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing the Borough may modify
the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they shall be corrected.
D. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications
thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days or any extension
thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned residential development and to prevent
the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter
upon said common open space and maintain the same for a period of
one year. Said maintenance by the Borough shall not constitute a taking
of said common open space, nor vest in the public any rights to use the
same.
E. Before the expiration of said year, the Borough shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing upon
notice to such organization, or to the residents of the planned
residential development, to be held by the governing body or its
designated agency, at which hearing such organization or the residents
of the planned residential development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the option of the Borough,
continue for a succeeding year. If the governing body, or its designated
agency, shall determine that such organization is ready and able to
maintain said common open space in reasonable condition, the Borough
shall cease to maintain said common open space at the end of said year.
If the governing body or its designated agency shall determine that
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Borough may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said common open space during the next
succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in
each year thereafter.
§ 170-69 WILSON CODE § 170-69
1:434
§ 170-70. Approval by sections.
In the case of a development plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the development plan delineating all proposed sections
as well as deadlines within which applications for final approval of each
section are intended to be filed. Yearly updating of the schedule shall be
completed by the landowner on or before the anniversary of the tentative
plan approval until final approval of the final section has been granted. Any
modifications in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the
Borough Council.
§ 170-71. Time limitations.
F. The decision of the governing body or its designated agency shall be
subject to appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same time
limitation, as is provided for zoning appeals by this chapter.
G. The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the planned residential development that
have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become
a lien on said properties. The Borough, at the time of entering upon said
common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice
of lien in the office of the prothonotary of the county, upon the
properties affected by the lien within the planned residential
development.
A. Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the tentative plan approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plans, then
the protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final development plan within the said five years
shall apply. For any section or sections, in which the required
improvements have not been substantially completed within the fiveyear
period, the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term
or terms of three years from the date of final plan approval for each
section.
B. Failure to meet schedule. Failure of the landowner to adhere to the
aforesaid schedule of submission of final plans for the various sections
shall subject any such sections to any and all changes in these
regulations, this chapter, planned residential regulations, and any other
ordinances or plans enacted by the Borough subsequent to the date of
the initial planned residential development plan submission, and no
development or further development shall take place on the property
included in the development plan until after the property is reclassified
by enactment of an amendment to this chapter.
§ 170-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-72
1:435
§ 170-72. Development procedures.
Development plans for a planned residential development may be submitted
in phases in accordance with the following:
§ 170-73. Application procedure.
The following procedural steps outline the process for approval of a PRD
application. Requirements for the content of the application documents are
described in subsequent sections of this chapter.
A. Tentative approval. The locations and approximate submittal dates for
each phase shall be clearly set forth on the plan submitted for tentative
approval.
(1) The said phasing plan may be changed at any time prior to the date
of any phase by submitting and receiving an approval from the
Borough Council on a plan setting forth a new phasing schedule.
B. First phase minimum. A minimum of 20% of the total number of
residential lots and/or dwelling units in the planned residential
development shall be included in the first phase.
(1) A lesser percentage may be allowed by the Borough upon
submission of a modification request setting forth proof that the
requested percentage will not affect the development as a whole.
(2) The Borough may set additional specified conditions if they deem
them necessary or advisable.
C. Phase completion. The second and subsequent phases must be
completed consistent with the development phasing plan and must be
of such size and location that they constitute economically sound units
of development.
(1) In no instance shall the second and subsequent phases, except for
the last phase, contain less than 15% of the dwelling units of the
total development plan.
(2) Gross residential density may be varied from phase to phase,
provided that the average gross residential densities of all phases
do not exceed the permitted average gross residential density for
the entire planned residential development as set forth by Wilson
Borough.
A. Application procedure for tentative approval.
(1) Twenty complete copies of an application for tentative approval for
a planned residential development shall be submitted by the
landowner to the Borough. The landowner shall also submit a filing
fee to the Borough in an amount specified on the fee schedule of
the Borough. No plan shall be considered as properly filed until
such time as the filing fee is submitted to the Borough.
§ 170-72 WILSON CODE § 170-73
1:436
(2) The complete application for tentative approval shall consist of the
following:
(a) Application form.
(b) Site plans, architectural plans, site data.
(c) Draft of covenants, easement agreements, conditions and
restrictions.
(d) Supporting information.
(e) Filing fee.
(3) The complete copies of the application for tentative approval will
be distributed by the Borough to the appropriate agencies and
individuals.
(4) Within 60 days after the Borough receives both a complete
application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development and the required filing fee, a public hearing shall be
held by the Borough Council, which shall be advertised and
conducted in the manner prescribed herein.
(5) Public notice shall be published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Wilson Borough.
(a) The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days prior to
the date of the public hearing.
(b) Such notice shall state the time, date and place of the hearing
and the particular location and nature of the proposed
development.
(6) A letter from the Borough with the date of the public hearing along
with a copy of the public notice and a cover letter shall be
forwarded to the applicant by United States certified mail, return
receipt requested, within 30 days of the official submission.
(7) The Zoning Officer shall conspicuously post notice of said public
hearing at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. Such public notice
shall be posted at least seven days prior to the date of the said
public hearing.
(8) The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Article IX
of the MPC.
(a) The Borough Council may continue the public hearings from
time to time; provided, however, that in any event, the public
hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 60 days after the
date of the first public hearing.
§ 170-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-73
1:437
(9) Action by the Borough Council.
(a) The Borough Council shall, within 60 days following the
conclusion of the public hearing as provided above or within
180 days after the filing of the application, whichever first
occurs, by official written communication to the applicant,
either:
[1] Grant tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted;
[2] Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions
not included in the development plan as submitted; or
[3] Deny tentative approval of the development plan.
(b) Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted.
(10) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings
of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the
reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial.
The written communication shall set forth with particularity in
what respects the development plan would or would not be in the
public interest, including but not limited to findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
(a) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be
in the public interest;
(b) The respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of
the Borough;
(c) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space,
the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and
conservation of common open space, and the adequacy or
inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common open
space as related to the proposed density and type of residential
development;
(d) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which the design does or does not make adequate provisions
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment;
§ 170-73 WILSON CODE § 170-73
1:438
(e) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed PRD to
the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established; and
(f) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents of the PRD in the integrity of the development plan.
(11) In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval with
or without conditions, the Borough Council may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application
for final approval of the development plan shall be filed, or, in the
case of a development plan which provided for development over a
period of years, the periods of time within which applications for
final approval of each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the
consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and application for final approval shall not be
less than three months, and, in the case of developments over a
period of years, the time between applications for final approval of
each part of the plan shall not be less than 12 months.
(12) The official written communication shall be mailed to the
landowner. Where tentative approval has been granted, it shall be
deemed an amendment to the Zoning Map, effective upon final
approval, and shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
(13) In the event the PRD is granted tentative plan approval subject to
conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a
copy of the official written communication from the Borough, notify
the Borough Council of his refusal to accept all required conditions,
in which case the Borough Council shall be deemed to have denied
tentative approval of the development plan. In the event the
landowner does not, within 30 days, notify the Borough Council of
his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan along with any conditions shall stand as granted.
(14) Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plan of
the PRD for recording nor authorize construction or the issuance of
any zoning and/or building permits. A development plan which has
been given tentative approval as submitted, or which has been
given tentative approval with conditions which have been accepted
by the landowner (provided the landowner has not defaulted or
violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not
be modified or revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the
Borough pending application for final approval, without the
consent of the landowner, provided an application or applications
for final approval is filed, or, in the case of development over a
period of years, provided applications are filed within the periods of
time specified in the official written communication granting
tentative approval.
§ 170-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-73
1:439
(15) In the event a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon the development plan and shall so notify the Borough
Council, in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file
application or applications for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval
shall be deemed to be revoked and all the portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not
been given shall be subject to those ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and
the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and in the records of
the Borough Secretary.
B. Application for final approval.
(1) An application for final approval may be for all the land included in
a development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to
the Zoning Officer of the Borough within the time or times specified
by the official written communication granting tentative approval.
The application shall include any drawings, specifications,
covenants, easements, funds or securities in sufficient amount as
determined by the Borough Council to insure performance and
such other requirements as may be specified by ordinances, as well
as any conditions set forth in the official written communication at
the time of tentative approval. A fee shall be required at the time of
submission in accordance with § 170-76. A public hearing on an
application for final approval of the development plan or a part
thereof shall not be required, provided the development plan or
part thereof submitted for final approval is in compliance with the
development plan theretofore given tentative approval and with
any specified conditions attached thereto.
(2) In the event the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this chapter and the official
written communication of tentative approval, the Borough Council
shall, within 45 days of such filing, grant such development plan
final approval.
(3) In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Borough
Council may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days
from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the
landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile the application for final approval without the variations
objected to.
§ 170-73 WILSON CODE § 170-73
1:440
§ 170-74. Approval requirements.
The following shall be submitted for PRD plan approval:
(b) File a written request with the Borough Council that it hold a
public hearing on his application for final approval. All plans
will be referred to the Wilson Borough Planning Commission
and Northampton County Planning Commission for review. If
the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply
for final approval or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the
landowner shall fail to take either of these alternate actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public hearing shall be conducted
in the manner prescribed in this section for public hearings on
applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days after the
conclusion of the hearing, the Borough Council shall by official
written communication either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The granting or
denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in cases
arising under this section, be in the form and contain the
findings required for an application for tentative approval set
forth in this article.
(4) A development plan or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval, shall be so certified without delay by the Borough Council
and shall be filed on record forthwith in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds before any development shall take place in accordance
therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the
zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land
included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending
completion, in accordance with the time provisions stated in § 508
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended by Act 170),97 of said PRD or part thereof as finally
approved, no modification of the provisions of said development
plan or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with
the consent of the landowner. Upon approval of the final plat, the
developer shall record the plat and post financial security in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 513(a) and 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended
by Act 170).98
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 and 10513(a).
§ 170-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-74
1:441
A. A plan indicating the location, size, topography, and vegetative cover of
the site and the nature of the landowner's interest in the land proposed
to be developed.
B. A site plan and other drawings showing the overall density, impervious
surface ratio, and open space ratio, and the density of the land use to be
allocated to various portions of the site to be developed, the location
and size of the common open space, the use, approximate height, bulk,
and location of buildings and other information, including building
elevations, planting plan schedule, provisions for parking vehicles, and
location and width of streets and public ways. Site plans shall include:
(1) The project name or identifying title.
(2) The name and address of the landowner of the tract, the developer,
and the firm that prepared the plans.
(3) The plan date, and the dates of all plan revisions.
(4) A North arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
(5) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
(6) A location map, for the purpose of locating the site to be developed,
at a minimum scale of 2,000 feet to the inch, showing the relation
of the tract to adjoining property and to all major roads, municipal
boundaries and streams existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the
property proposed to be developed.
(7) The plotting of all existing adjacent land uses and lot lines within
200 feet of the proposed development, including historic sites, and
other significant natural or man-made features.
(8) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the Tax Map
parcel number of adjacent properties, including those across any
adjoining roads.
(9) Topographic information and identification of steep slopes
differentiating between slopes from 15% to 20% and then all slopes
greater than 20%. The extent of existing tree masses shall also be
clearly shown.
(10) The delineation of one-hundred-year floodplain as per the most
recent Wilson Borough FEMA Flood Insurance Study.
(11) The delineation of all soil types as indicated by the USDA Soil
Conservation Service Soil Survey of Northampton County.
(12) The plotting of all existing landmarks within the proposed
development, including the location of all existing streets,
buildings, easements, rights-of-way, sanitary sewers, water mains,
storm drainage structures, and watercourses.
(13) A list of site data, including but not limited to the following:
§ 170-74 WILSON CODE § 170-74
1:442
(a) Total acreage of the tract.
(b) Zoning district.
(c) Proposed use of the land.
(d) Proposed gross area of the development.
(e) Proposed gross residential density.
(f) Proposed number of dwelling units and building type.
(g) Acreage and percentage of common open space.
(h) Proposed number of parking spaces.
(14) The approximate proposed location and dimensions of all proposed
streets, access drives, parking areas and pedestrian circulation
systems.
(15) The proposed location of block or lot lines with approximate
dimensions and areas.
(16) Notation indicating which existing structure on the tract is to be
retained or removed.
(17) The proposed location of building setback lines from all streets,
and the distances between buildings and adjacent tract boundaries
and lot lines.
(18) The proposed location, size and use of all common open space
areas and recreation facilities where applicable.
(19) The proposed areas to be dedicated to the Borough with
approximate acreage of all areas and widths of all rights-of-way.
(20) A proposed phasing plan of the development, which shall include
the proposed time within which applications for final approval of all
sections are intended to be filed.
(21) Plans shall include information depicting typical roadway crosssections,
lighting and planting.
C. Such drawings and documents as are required to establish the
feasibility of proposals for water supply and the disposal of sanitary
wastes and stormwater, the substance of covenants, grants, easements
or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including easements or grants for public
utilities.
D. Evidence shall be presented that the PRD is to be supplied by a
certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
§ 170-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-74
1:443
agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in
question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence. If
only an application for a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission is provided, tentative approval
shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a certificate of public
convenience.
E. A compilation and analysis relative to the effect of the proposed PRD
with respect to the impact upon existing and proposed public facilities,
utilities and roadway systems. This includes a compilation and analysis
of the costs to the Borough and the projected revenue in comparison
with the existing conditions and anticipated conditions if the
development is created by conventional methods.
F. A master traffic impact study analyzing traffic generation, including an
analysis of the capacity of streets serving the site as well as predictions
on traffic generated by the site. A master plan of proposed on- and offsite
traffic improvements which is coordinated with the project phasing
plan shall be prepared and submitted as part of the study.
G. A lighting plan with the location and size of all street, parking
compound, recreational and open space lighting fixtures, whether
freestanding or affixed to buildings, including the delineation of isolux
lighting lines at increments of 0.2, 0.5 and 1.0 footcandles for each
fixture, as applicable, and construction details, manufacturers
specifications, elevations, materials and colors for each type of lighting
fixture proposed.
H. A landscape plan identifying existing vegetation to be retained;
proposed plantings, including shade trees, designated by symbols
appropriately scaled to represent the sizes of such at time of planting; a
planting schedule for all proposed plantings, including botanical and
common plant names, identification key, total quantity, size (height,
width and caliper) at time of planting; details and specifications for all
proposed plantings, topsoiling, seeding and mulching, including notes
regarding special maintenance requirements temporarily during the
period of establishment, or permanently, and the limits of any such
special maintenance areas. The landscape plan shall meet the
requirements outlined in § 170-87, Buffer yard requirements, and
§ 170-90, Landscaping.
I. Profile drawings shall be submitted for all streets, storms sewers, water
mains and sanitary sewer mains. Generally, the drawings shall be at a
scale of 50 feet to the inch horizontally and 10 feet to the inch vertically.
Existing and proposed grades shall be shown on each drawing.
J. Cross-sections, details and specifications shall be submitted for all
improvements, including streets, parking lots, curbs, sidewalks,
bikeways, recreation facilities, play equipment, lighting, planting,
sanitary sewer facilities, water mains and sediment and erosion control
facilities.
§ 170-74 WILSON CODE § 170-74
1:444
§ 170-75. Abandonment of PRD.
When the landowner fails to meet the schedules fixed in the tentative
approval and does not appear to request an extension prior to the scheduled
date or when final approval has been granted and the developer fails to start
work within one year or when work is stopped for a period of one year, the
PRD shall be considered to be abandoned. If the landowner fails to meet
the above deadlines, and within such time does not request an extension,
abandonment shall be considered to have taken place.
§ 170-76. Fees.
K. An agreement shall be entered into between the Borough and the
landowner to cover in detail the improvements required to be
constructed as a condition of acceptance of a PRD which specify time
limits for the completion of required improvements. The items to be
covered by the agreement shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, the construction of streets, storm drainage facilities, sanitary
sewers, water lines, street signs, survey markers and monumentation,
sidewalks, curbs, off-street parking, streetlights, street trees, fire
protection, and common open space improvements.
L. Financial security shall be calculated and posted to secure the
completion of improvements in accordance with the requirements of
Article V of the Pennsylvania MPC and the requirements of this article.
The financial security shall be released as construction progresses in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Article V of the Pennsylvania
MPC. Upon completion of the improvements and acceptance of
dedication by the Borough of any improvements, the landowner shall
post financial security to secure the structural integrity and functioning
of the improvements which have been accepted by the Borough in
accordance with the requirements of Article V of the Pennsylvania MPC.
M. All necessary state and federal permits.
A. Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees to be
paid by the developer at the time of tentative and final plan filing.
B. The applicant shall pay the plan review fees charged according to the
adopted fee schedule. At time of the plan submission, the applicant
shall deposit the amount of money specified in the fee schedule with
Borough Council. No application will be accepted for consideration
unless accompanied by the required deposit. Charges and expenses will
be withdrawn as they are incurred by Borough Council. If the charges
and expenses attributable to the application exceed the amount
deposited, the applicant shall be notified so that additional funds as are
necessary to meet the charges and expenses are deposited with
Borough Council. No plan shall be approved unless all fees are paid in
full. Any amounts that were deposited in excess of the charges and
expenses recorded shall be returned to the applicant following Council
action on the proposal.
§ 170-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-77
1:445
§ 170-77. Additional requirements.
Borough Council shall have the authority to modify the allowed number
and maximum sign area of signs allowed by Article XVII within a PRD, in
response to a written application by an applicant.
§ 170-78. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which has violated the
planned residential development provisions of this article, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by a municipality as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the appropriate
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
article to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of planned residential
development provisions shall be paid over to the municipality whose
ordinance has been violated.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 170-77 WILSON CODE § 170-78
1:446
ARTICLE XIII
Use Regulations
§ 170-79. Applicability.
Except as provided by law or in this chapter, in each district no building,
structure or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted in § 170-82 and for the zoning districts so indicated.
§ 170-80. Uses by right, special exception, conditional use and uses
not permitted.
§ 170-81. Uses subject to other regulations.
A. A use listed in § 170-82 is permitted by right in any district denoted by
the letter "P" subject to such requirements as may be specified in
§ 170-83 and after a zoning permit has been issued in accordance with
Article II.
B. A use listed in § 170-82 is permitted as a special exception in any
district denoted by the letters "SE," provided the Zoning Hearing Board
authorizes the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer,
subject to the requirements of § 170-15 and such further conditions as
said Board may impose to insure the protection of adjacent uses, or the
health, safety and general welfare.
C. A use listed in § 170-82 is permitted as a conditional use in any district
denoted by the letters "CU," provided the governing body, having
received a recommendation from the Planning Commission, grants the
conditional use subject to the express standards set forth in § 170-16
and such further conditions that the governing body may impose to
insure the protection of adjacent uses, or the health, safety or general
welfare.
D. A use listed in § 170-82 is not permitted in any district denoted by the
letter "x."
E. On any parcel or tract of land only one principal use shall be permitted
except where specifically permitted by this chapter.
A. Uses permitted by right or as special exception or conditional uses shall
be subject, in addition to use regulations, to such regulations of yard,
lot size, lot width, building area, easements, provisions for off-street
parking and loading, and to such other provisions as are specified in
other sections hereof.
B. The conversion of an existing structure to a permitted nonresidential
use in a zoning district shall be permitted, provided the character of the
existing structure is maintained, the parking and other requirements
for the particular use are met, and the buffer requirements of § 170-87
are met. A new zoning permit is required each time a structure is
converted to a different nonresidential use.
§ 170-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-82
1:447
§ 170-82. Table of use regulations.
See the Table of Use Regulations included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-83. Uses.
A. Agricultural uses.
(1) A-1 Forestry. To encourage maintenance and management of
forested or wooded open space and promote the conduct of forestry
as a sound and economically viable use of forested land throughout
the Borough, forestry activities, including timber harvesting, shall
be a permitted use by right in all zoning districts. The following
regulations apply to all timber harvesting within the Borough
where the value of the trees, logs, or other timber products
removed exceeds $1,000. These provisions do not apply to the
cutting of trees for the personal use of the landowner or for
precommercial timber stand improvement.
(a) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings given
in this section:
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to
the ground.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands
when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural
principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting,
transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which
does not involve any land development.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood, or firewood are
assembled for transportation to processing facilities.
LANDOWNER — An individual, partnership, company, firm,
association, or corporation that is in actual control of forest
land, whether such control is based on legal or equitable title,
or any other interest entitling the holder to sell or otherwise
dispose of any or all of the timber on such land in any manner,
and any agents thereof acting on their behalf, such as forestry
consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting.
LITTER — Discarded items not naturally occurring on the site
such as tires, oilcans, equipment parts, and other rubbish.
LOP — To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow
material to settle close to the ground.
OPERATOR — An individual, partnership, company, firm,
association, or corporation engaged in timber harvesting,
including the agents, subcontractors, and employees thereof.
PRECOMMERCIAL TIMBER STAND IMPROVEMENT — A
forest practice, such as thinning or pruning, which results in
better growth, structure, species composition, or health for the
§ 170-82 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:448
residual stand but which does not yield a net income to the
landowner, usually because any trees cut are of poor quality,
too small or otherwise of limited marketability or value.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to
the landing by any means.
SLASH — Woody debris left in the woods after logging,
including logs, chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, and
broken or uprooted trees or shrubs.
STAND — Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions,
past history, and current species composition are sufficiently
uniform to be managed as a unit.
STREAM — Any natural or artificial channel of conveyance
for surface water with an annual or intermittent flow within a
defined bed and bank.
TIMBER HARVESTING, TREE HARVESTING, or LOGGING —
That part of forestry involving cutting down trees and
removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale
or commercial processing into wood products.
TOP — The upper portion of a felled tree that is not
merchantable because of small size, taper, or defect.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas.
(b) No timber harvesting shall occur until notice has been
provided to the Borough. Notification shall be in writing and
shall specify the land on which harvesting will occur, the
expected size of the harvest area, and, as applicable, the
anticipated starting or completion date of the operation.
(c) Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur
shall prepare a written logging plan in the form specified by
this chapter. No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan
has been prepared. The provisions of the plan shall be followed
throughout the operation. The plan shall be available at the
harvest site at all times during the operation and shall be
provided to the Borough enforcement officer upon request.
(d) Contents of logging plan:
[1] Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the
access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails
and landings;
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:449
[2] Design, construction, and maintenance of water control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based
dips, filter strips, and water bars;
[3] Design, construction, and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings;
[4] The general location of the proposed operation in relation
to municipal and state highways, including any accesses to
those highways;
[5] A sketch map or drawing containing the following
information: site location and boundaries, including both
the boundaries of the property on which the timber
harvest will take place and the boundaries of the proposed
harvest area within that property; significant topographic
features related to potential environmental problems;
location of all earth disturbance activities, such as roads,
landings, and water control measures and structures;
location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth;
and the general location of the proposed operation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to
those highways.
[6] Compliance with the requirements of all applicable state
regulations, including but not limited to erosion and
sedimentation control regulations contained in Title 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to
The Clean Streams Law; and stream crossing and
wetlands protection regulations contained in Title 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105, promulgated pursuant to
the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act.
(e) Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Borough
or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever
is responsible for maintenance of the thoroughfare.
(f) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public
thoroughfare or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property.
(g) All tops and slash between 25 feet and 50 feet from a public
roadway or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property or within 50 feet of adjoining residential
property shall be lopped to a maximum height of four feet
above the ground.
(h) No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the operation without the consent of the
owner thereof.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:450
(i) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be
removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.
(j) Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes,
Chapter 49; and Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the
landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing
any damage to Borough roads caused by traffic associated with
the timber harvesting operation to the extent the damage is in
excess of that caused by normal traffic, and may be required to
furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such damages.
(k) The Borough enforcement officer may go upon the site of any
timber harvesting operation before, during, or after active
logging to:
[1] Review the logging plan or any other required documents
for compliance with the regulations of this section; and
[2] Inspect the operation for compliance with the logging plan
and other on-site requirements of these regulations.
(l) Any landowner or operator who violates any provision of this
subsection; refuses to allow the Borough enforcement officer
access to a harvest site; or who fails to comply with a notice of
violation or suspension order is guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $300, plus costs, for each separate
offense. Each day of continued violation of any provisions of
this section shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Residential uses.
(1) B-1 Single-family detached dwelling: a single-family detached
dwelling on an individual lot with private yards on all sides of the
house and with no public or community open space. Detached
dwellings may include dwellings constructed on the lot,
prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings, modular
dwellings and mobile homes.
(a) No more than one single-family detached dwelling shall be
placed on a lot, and such detached dwelling shall be occupied
by not more than one single-family.
(2) B-2 Two-family dwelling: a detached or semidetached building
where not more than two individual family dwelling units are
entirely separated by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced
except for access to the outside or to a common cellar.
(3) B-3 Multifamily dwelling: structures which contain three or more
dwelling units, including townhouses, row houses, garden
apartments or quadruplex units or high-rise units for the elderly or
other designations.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:451
(a) Each dwelling unit in such a structure shall be designed for
occupancy of families living independently of each other.
(b) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(c) Performance standards:
Maximum
Building
Height in
Stories
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Units Per
Net Acre
Townhouses or
row houses
2.5 45% 14
Garden
apartments
3.0 45% 16
High rise for the
elderly
8.0 35% 60
(d) Such dwelling structures shall be served with adequate public
water and sewer systems.
(e) Yard planting and screening, as per § 170-87 shall be provided
to effectively screen off any adjoining uses.
(f) High-rise units for the elderly shall be designed for use
primarily (65% or greater) by handicapped persons or persons
at least 62 years of age.
(g) Any proposed development with 10 or more dwelling units
shall be provided with usable open space suitably designed and
maintained for use as outdoor recreation space for residents in
amounts not less than 250 square feet per dwelling unit.
(4) B-4 Mobile home parks: includes the coordinated development,
under single ownership, which is planned and will be improved for
the placement of mobile homes occupied for dwelling purposes.
(a) All applicable mobile home park provisions of Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development, as presently enacted and
as may be amended.
(b) All requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and other applicable agencies shall
be met.
(c) All mobile home parks shall be served with public water and
sewer facilities.
(d) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between mobile
homes.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:452
(e) The overall net project density shall not exceed nine dwelling
units per net residential acre.
(f) Twenty percent of the site shall be set aside in open space, and
1/2 of that amount shall be usable recreation area.
(g) Minimum tract road frontage width shall be 300 feet.
(h) Twenty-foot-wide buffer yard areas shall be provided along all
perimeter property lines, and the area shall be screened in
accordance with § 170-87.
(i) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(5) B-5 Rooming house or boardinghouse: a building containing one or
more dwelling accommodations in which at least two rooms are
offered for rent to adults ages 18 years or older, payable in money
or other consideration, whether or not meals are furnished to
occupants, and in which no transients are accommodated and no
public restaurant is maintained. This use does not include a school
or college dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, membership club
with residents and other similar uses.
(6) B-6 Group home: includes a group of persons, some or all of whom
are not related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or foster
placement, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
residential dwelling unit, but not including group care facilities.
(a) The minimum separation between group homes shall be 1,200
feet, as measured from the closest property lines.
(b) There shall be no sign or other exterior indication of a group
home visible from a street.
(c) The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
parking in excess of what is characteristic of the district in
which it is located.
(d) A group home use shall be licensed or certified under
applicable federal, state or county programs.
C. Religious, educational, recreational and institutional uses.
(1) C-1 Place of worship: Such use shall include a church, synagogue,
or other place of worship, as provided.
(a) Access shall be to a primary or arterial highway as delineated
in the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Minimum yards:
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard: 15 feet each.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:453
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(2) C-2 School: A school shall be limited to a private school, religious or
nonreligious, public school or a college or university, operated by a
public or quasi-public institution, which is not conducted as a
private, gainful business as a commercial school and is licensed
under the proper governmental authority, provided that:
(a) The minimum lot area for elementary schools, junior high
schools, middle schools or high schools shall meet the
minimum requirements of the Pennsylvania State Board of
Education.
(b) The site plan shall include the following:
[1] An emergency response plan, reviewed and approved by
the appropriate emergency services personnel.
[2] An impact statement, addressing all requirements of
Articles XIV through XVI.
(c) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 50 feet of a residential lot
line.
(d) Outdoor play areas shall be screened so as to protect adjacent
residential neighborhoods from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances.
(e) Minimum yards shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard: 50 feet.
[2] Side yard: 20 feet each.
[3] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(f) There shall be no outdoor storage of buses on the property.
(3) C-3 Commercial school: Such use shall include a trade,
professional, music or dancing school, provided:
(a) A trade school that includes an outdoor athletic field, court, or
play area shall be screened so as to protect adjacent
residential neighborhoods from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances and shall be no closer than 50 feet from a
residential lot line.
(4) C-4 Library or museum: Such use shall be limited to a library or
museum open to the public or connected with a permitted
educational use and operated by a public or quasi-public
institution.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:454
(5) C-5 Recreational facility: public park, nature preserve or outdoor
recreation area, owned and operated by the Borough, county, state
or federal government, subject to the following:
(a) No outdoor active recreational area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than 15 feet, unless the adjacent property is
preserved open space or park land.
(b) A planted buffer 10 feet in width shall be provided where the
use abuts existing residences or where properties that adjoin
are zoned for residential use and are not preserved open space
or park land.
(c) Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(d) This use shall not include a shooting range or target or gun
club.
(6) C-6 Athletic facility: This use shall be limited to a commercial
athletic recreational facility owned or operated by a
nongovernmental agency and shall be limited to the following uses
and facilities related thereto: fitness club or athletic training
center, dance or gymnastics studio; tennis, racquetball, or squash
club, and shall be subject to the following:
(a) A minimum lot size of 30,000 square feet is required.
(b) This use shall not permit amusement parks, shooting range or
target or gun club, or any other activity specifically listed by
this chapter as commercial recreation and entertainment or
recreational facility.
(c) No outdoor active recreational area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than 25 feet.
(d) A planted buffer 10 feet in width shall be provided where the
use abuts existing residences or land zoned residential.
(7) C-7 Private organization or community center: a building and
related facilities used for fraternal, educational, social, cultural or
recreational activities, owned or operated by a corporation,
association or group of individuals, or by an educational,
philanthropic, governmental or religious institution.
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) No outdoor recreational area shall be located nearer to any lot
line than 15 feet.
(c) In residential districts, private organizations and community
centers shall be limited to those operated by groups which do
not provide dining services and/or the service of alcoholic
beverages.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:455
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet in the R-1 and
R-2 Zoning Districts, but in all other districts the minimum lot
size shall be 10,000 square feet.
(8) C-8 Day-care center: day-care center for four or more children
providing out-of-home care for part of a twenty-four-hour day to
children under 16 years of age, excluding care provided by
relatives and care provided by places of worship during religious
services, subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) The facility shall meet all applicable design, site and area
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare,
Day-Care Division.
(b) Buffer yards shall be provided if the use is located within a
residential district or adjacent to a residential use or district.
(c) No portion of a child-care facility shall be located within a
three-hundred-foot distance from any potentially hazardous
land use, activity, or natural condition of land, water or any
other element which could pose a threat to the safety and
welfare of the children, staff and other occupants at the facility.
Hazardous land uses or activities include, but shall not be
limited to, gasoline service stations, heavy industrial
operations, storage of flammable or high-pressure materials,
flammable or high-pressure underground pipelines, truck or
rail loading areas, etc. Determination of a hazardous land use
shall be that of the Zoning Officer. All child-care facilities shall
provide adequate fencing to contain all children upon the
property, as approved by the Borough.
(d) Whenever possible, a dropoff area shall be located immediately
adjacent to the facility. The dropoff area should be designed in
such a way that pedestrians do not cross vehicular traffic lanes
in any parking area or driveway. The dropoff area may be
designed either as a part of the on-site parking area or as a
part of a driveway providing direct access to the facility. When
the dropoff area is incorporated into the on-site parking area,
the parking spaces nearest to the facility shall be designated as
dropoff spaces. When the dropoff area is incorporated into a
driveway, the dropoff spaces shall be located within a vehicle
turnout area 12 feet in width exclusive of the driveway through
traffic lane(s).
(9) C-9 Adult day-care center: a facility providing care for the elderly
and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a
portion of a twenty-four-hour day, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) When a license is required by the state, proof of licensing shall
be presented with the application for the conditional use
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:456
approval. Day-care centers exempt from state licensing
requirements shall provide proof of exemption.
(b) The day-care center shall be screened from adjacent properties
with a fence or vegetative buffer, and an adequate fenced area
shall be provided.
(c) Site design and supervision characteristics shall ensure the
safety of the users.
(d) An adult day-care center shall not be located closer than 500
feet to any other adult or child day-care center.
(10) C-10 Group care facility: a facility which provides resident services,
for a fee or charge, for individuals who are being cared for by an
appropriate residential supervisory staff. These individuals may be
handicapped, aged or disabled or in need of medical and/or adult
supervision and are undergoing rehabilitation and are provided
service and supervision in accordance with their individual needs.
This category includes uses licensed or supervised by any federal,
state or county health/welfare agency (all ages), halfway houses,
resident schools, resident facilities and foster care homes or
boardinghomes for children or adults, but does not include group
homes, nursing homes or detention centers.
(a) The minimum separation between group homes shall be 1,200
feet, as measured from the closest property lines.
(b) The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
parking in excess of what is characteristic of the district in
which it is located.
(c) A group care facility use shall be licensed or certified under
applicable federal, state or county programs.
(11) C-11 Nursing home: a nursing facility or convalescent home
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health which is set up
to provide long-term health care primarily to senior residents with
chronic diseases or disabilities. This use does not include life-care
or continuing-care facilities.
(a) A minimum of 15% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(12) C-12 Hospital: a state-licensed facility subject to the following
provisions:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be 65 feet.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:457
(c) A hospital shall have direct access from a primary road or
arterial highway.
(d) Emergency and service entrances shall be located so as not to
be offensive to adjoining residential areas.
(13) C-13 Cemetery: A cemetery shall be limited to a burial place or
graveyard, including a mausoleum, provided that:
(a) Cemetery area and bulk regulations.
[1] The minimum lot size shall be one acre.
[2] No more than 5% of the entire area may be devoted to
aboveground buildings not serving as burial markers or
memorials, such as business and administration offices,
chapels, maintenance facilities, greenhouses, workhouses,
repair shops and the like. This restriction includes parking
facilities.
[3] For all accessory buildings, the setback line requirement
shall be the same as for single-family detached dwellings
in the zone in which the cemetery is located.
[4] A buffer strip of at least 20 feet shall be provided between
building or burial sites and the cemetery property line.
[5] One dwelling, to be used for custodial personnel, may be
permitted.
(b) Cemetery design standards.
[1] The maximum height of buildings, including dwelling
units, where permitted, shall be two stories or 35 feet.
[2] For all entrance features, including gates, fountains,
statuary, identification signs and the like:
[a] There shall be not more than two identification signs
at such entrance.
[b] The main portion of entrance features shall be located
no closer to the nearest right-of-way line of any public
street than a distance equal to the building setback
line required in the district in which the cemetery is
located.
[c] No such entrance features shall exceed 12 feet in
height.
(c) Such use may be an accessory use to any place of worship.
(14) C-14 Municipal/governmental building or use: Such use shall be
limited to a municipal or governmental administration building,
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:458
municipal police station, courthouse, district justice office, road
maintenance facility and such other uses as would customarily be
associated with the operations of government, except such use
shall not be deemed to encompass a landfill, incinerator or other
waste disposal facility.
(15) C-15 Detention facility: Such use shall be limited to facilities owned
and operated by the County of Northampton and shall be limited to
the following:
(a) A juvenile detention facility as described and regulated in 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 6327.
(b) A rehabilitation center providing for minimum security
detention of prisoners for work release or partial confinement.
Such rehabilitation center shall not include facilities for the
total confinement of prisoners who have been sentenced or
who are awaiting trial.
(c) A penitentiary, correctional institution or prison.
(16) C-16 Assisted living facility:
(a) A minimum of 15% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(b) At least 65% of residents must be 62 years of age or older or
handicapped.
D. Office uses.
(1) Office: a building for business, professional or governmental
offices, provided that:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
(b) No office building shall include a store, beauty shop or other
personal service shop.
(c) No office building shall include a store front, a store window or
any other retail commercial characteristic which detracts
materially from the character of the district or surrounding
neighborhood.
(d) No structure designed for office use erected or renovated after
the effective date of this chapter shall include any dwelling unit
or units.
(2) D-2 Medical office: Such use shall be limited to a building or
buildings with multiple offices for more than one physician or
dentist or other medical professional for examination or treatment
of persons as outpatients and laboratories incidental thereto.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:459
E. Retail and consumer uses.
(1) E-1 Retail shop: A retail shop shall be limited to a store selling
apparel, baked goods, books, confections, catering services, drugs,
dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs, furniture, gifts, hardware, household
appliances, jewelry, liquor, milk, notions, periodicals, shoes,
stationery, tobacco, toys, paint, records, cards, novelties, hobby
and art supplies, music, luggage, sporting goods, pets, floor
covering, garden supplies, plants, fabrics and beer and soft drinks
or other retail goods, provided that:
(a) All products produced on the premises are sold on the
premises.
(b) Over-the-counter sale of alcoholic beverages in taverns and
bars is not included.
(c) Stores with a gross floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet
are not included.
(2) E-2 Large retail store: A large retail store is a store with greater
than 10,000 square feet of floor area, including, regardless of size,
any variety store, supermarket, department store and discount
store.
(3) E-3 Service business: A service business shall be limited to such
uses as a barber, beautician, laundry and dry cleaning (whether or
not coin-operated), shoe repair, tailor, photographer, newspaper,
printer and travel agency, provided that laundry, dry-cleaning or
clothes-pressing establishments shall not employ equipment or
materials which involve danger from fire or explosion, which
detract from the character of the district or which involve the
disposal of materials or fluids which may result in pollution of air,
soil or waterways.
(4) E-4 Financial establishment: A financial establishment shall be
limited to a bank, savings and loan association, credit union or
other financial establishment, provided that if a drive-in window is
provided, a stacking area to accommodate at least six vehicles shall
be provided for each drive-in window.
(5) E-5 Eating place: An eating place shall be limited to any place for
the sale and consumption of food and beverages, provided that:
(a) Drive-in service is prohibited.
(b) The sale of alcoholic beverages must be incidental to the sale
and consumption of food.
(6) E-6 Eating place, drive-through: Such use shall be limited to
cafeterias and eating establishments in which the principal
business is the sale of foods and/or beverages in a ready-toconsume
state for consumption either within the restaurant
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:460
building or for carryout with consumption off the premises,
provided that:
(a) The use must have direct access to a primary or arterial street.
(b) There shall be only one point of ingress and only one point of
egress per collector or arterial street.
(c) Where a drive-in window is proposed, a stacking lane shall be
provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars. The stacking lane
shall not be used for parking lot circulation aisles nor shall it in
any way conflict with through circulation or parking.
(d) A pedestrian walkway shall be provided between an existing
sidewalk and the entrance to the restaurant. If there is no
sidewalk, one shall be provided along the street frontage.
(e) All such restaurants shall provide a trash storage area which
shall be screened from the street and adjacent properties, in
accordance with this chapter, to prevent trash from blowing
from the area and to permit safe and easy removal of the trash.
(f) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside the restaurant for
patron use.
(7) E-7 Repair shop: A repair shop shall be limited to any business for
the repair of appliances, lawn mowers, watches, guns, bicycles,
locks and small business machines (but not including automobile,
vehicle and motorcycle repairs).
(8) E-8 Motel, hotel and inn: Such use shall be limited to a building or
group of buildings containing rooms for rent for the
accommodation of transient guests, chiefly motorists, plus an
eating place, provided that:
(a) The use must have direct access to a primary or arterial street.
(b) Units in such facilities shall contain a minimum of 200 square
feet of floor space, with a minimum of two rooms: a bedroom
and a separate bathroom equipped with a flush water closet, a
lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower, all properly connected
to a public water and public centralized sewer system.
(c) All such uses shall be served by public water and public
centralized sewage disposal systems.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 50,000 square feet.
(e) Any retail or commercial use accessory to the hotel, motel or
inn use shall be subject to the following restrictions:
[1] The accessory use shall be contained within the hotel,
motel or inn building, and any customer entrance to any
place of business, except for a banquet, convention or
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:461
conference center associated with the hotel, motel or inn,
shall be from inside the building.
[2] The accessory use, except for a banquet, convention or
conference center associated with the hotel, motel or inn,
shall be principally for customers of the hotel, motel or
inn.
[3] There shall be no display of merchandise or other
manifestation of commercial or retail use visible from the
street or property line.
(9) E-9 Commercial recreation and entertainment: An indoor or
outdoor entertainment or recreational facility operated as a
commercial venture, which may include a bowling alley, skating
rink, movie theater, theater, games arcade, recreational camps,
driving range, chip and putt golf or miniature golf.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than 50 feet.
(c) Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened with a
planted buffer 10 feet in width.
(d) This use does not include a shooting range or target or gun
club.
(10) E-10 Service station: A service station shall be limited to a building
or group of buildings for the sale of petroleum products, tires and
automotive service, provided that:
(a) A minimum lot width of not less than 200 feet shall be provided
along each street on which the lot abuts.
(b) The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
(c) Such use shall be located on an arterial or a higher order road.
(d) All fuel tanks shall be placed underground.
(e) All pumps, lifts and other service facilities shall be located not
closer than 35 feet to any lot or street line.
(f) No vehicle shall be stored in the open, except those awaiting
minor repairs, for a period exceeding seven consecutive days,
unless screened from adjacent or residential properties.
(g) All lubricating, making of minor repairs or similar activities
shall be performed in an enclosed building.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:462
(h) Separate accessways shall be provided for the safe and
convenient egress and ingress of motor vehicles. No accessway
shall exceed 35 feet in width nor be less than 15 feet in width.
(i) Access to the street shall be physically controlled by a concrete
curbing at least eight inches in height.
(j) All parking, access and outdoor service areas shall be graded,
surfaced, drained and suitably maintained to the satisfaction of
the Borough Engineer to the extent necessary to avoid
nuisances of dust, erosion or excessive water flow across
streets.
(k) All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within
a building.
(l) All refuse shall be stored within a building or enclosed area.
(m) Paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be permitted.
(n) Junk vehicles shall not be stored in the open at any time.
(o) The sale or rental of automobiles, trucks, trailers or other
vehicles shall be prohibited.
(p) Convenience shopping shall be permitted as an accessory use
to the sale of petroleum products, provided that:
[1] It shall be in lieu of the sale of tires and automotive
service.
[2] The use shall occupy no more than 50% of the service
station building.
(q) Service stations designed to offer to the public self-service
facilities for dispensing of gasoline and other motor vehicle
fuels shall meet the following conditions:
[1] At least one qualified attendant shall be on duty while the
station is open to the public, whose primary function shall
be to supervise, observe and control dispensing of
flammable or combustible liquids.
[2] The attendants shall be situated so as to have a clear view
of the dispensing operations.
[3] A voice communication system, such as but not limited to
an intercom system, shall be provided so as to allow direct
voice communications at all times between the person
dispensing flammable or combustible liquids and the
attendant.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:463
[4] Emergency controls, including the main power shutoff,
shall be conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of
the principal control or the dispenser island.
[5] Instructions for the operation of the dispensers shall be
conspicuously posted on either the dispenser or the
dispenser island.
[6] A list of emergency procedures and instructions shall be
conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of the
principal control location of the attendant.
[7] Fire-extinguishing and flammable liquids dispensing
equipment shall be approved through National Standards
testing.
[8] At least one fire extinguisher shall be located within 25
feet of each gasoline pump.
[9] Warning signs shall be placed in a conspicuous place with
each sign indicating "Warning: (a) It is unlawful to
dispense gasoline into any portable container unless the
container is constructed of metal or is approved by the
Fire Marshal; (b) No smoking; (c) Stop motor."
(11) E-11 Automotive sales: Automotive sales shall be limited to the sale
and lease of automobiles by a duly franchised new car, truck, boat
or motorcycle dealership; used car, truck, boat or motorcycle sales;
or car, truck, trailer, motorcycle and/or boat rentals; farm
machinery or travel campers, provided that:
(a) Lighting. All outside lighting shall be directed in such a way as
not to create a nuisance to any adjacent property, and all
lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to protect the
street or highway and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
(b) All facilities shall be located and all services be conducted
within the confines of the lot.
(c) All preparation, lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
accessory.
(12) E-12 Automotive body repair and paint shop: Such use shall be
limited to paint spraying, body and fender work and custom body
work, provided that:
(a) All such work is performed within a building.
(b) All related automotive parts, refuse and similar articles shall
be stored within a building or enclosed area.
(c) Spray painters must apply coatings in a spray booth.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:464
(13) E-13 Car wash:
(a) A car wash shall include a water-recycling facility.
(b) Car washes shall be designed with a stacking area adequate
for six cars so that waiting cars do not interfere with traffic
flow.
(14) E-14 Shopping center: Such use shall be limited to a building or a
group of buildings, designed as a planned complex of related
structures and circulation patterns, subject to the following
additional criteria:
(a) Such centers shall have a lot area of not less than five acres
and a lot width of not less than 500 feet at the street right-ofway
line.
(b) The majority of all parking shall be provided in separate areas
surrounding any group of shopping buildings.
(c) Such centers shall be located on an arterial or higher order
road.
(d) The following uses are permitted as part of a shopping center:
C-3 Commercial school
C-6 Athletic facility
D-1 Office
D-2 Medical office
E-1 Retail shop
E-2 Large retail store
E-3 Service business
E-4 Financial establishment
E-5 Eating place
E-6 Eating place, drive-through
E-9 Commercial recreation and entertainment
(e) The shopping center shall be constructed in accordance with
an overall plan and designed with a single architectural style
approved by the Borough Council.
(f) Regulations dealing with lighting, parking, outdoor storage,
buffering, points of access, signs, landscaping and other
applicable regulations set forth herein shall be met.
(g) All establishments in the shopping center must have vehicular
service access either from an individual service yard or from a
common service area serving several establishments. All such
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:465
service areas must be segregated from public areas and
screened from public view.
(h) Within a tract to be used for a shopping center, subdivision of
the tract into individual lots is not permitted.
(15) E-15 Funeral home: Such use shall be limited to a mortuary or
funeral home and shall not include a cemetery, columbarium,
mausoleum or other permanent storage facility.
(16) E-16 Veterinary office or clinic: Such use shall be limited to the
office of veterinarian. If a kennel is part of the office or clinic, the
following conditions shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be one acre.
(b) No animal shelter or runway shall be located closer than 100
feet to any residential building other than the owner's or closer
than 50 feet to the property line.
(c) The kennel shall be constructed so that the animals cannot
stray therefrom.
(d) All animals must be kept indoors between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(17) E-17 Banquet facility: a facility available for special dinners,
banquets or other dining events by prearrangement with the
management of the facility for groups or parties and not open to the
general public on a daily basis; not an eating place or restaurant.
(18) E-18 Adult-oriented use:
(a) The building or structure of such use shall be located no less
than 400 feet from any residential use or district, public or
private school, church recreation facility or any other religious,
institutional or educational, or any youth-oriented use (e.g.,
day-care service, entertainment, and including parks and
recreation areas) within Wilson Borough or any adjoining
municipality.
(b) No such use shall be located within 2,000 feet of a similar use.
(c) No display of adult-related materials depicting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas shall be visible from a
window, door or exterior of the building.
(d) No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted
within a building whose operation would be considered an
adult-oriented establishment.
(e) No more than one adult-oriented use shall be permitted within
any one building or lot, and no adult-oriented use shall be
permitted on the same lot as any other principal use.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:466
(f) No adult-oriented use or activity may change to another type of
adult-oriented use or activity except upon application to and
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of such change as a
special exception.
(g) The entrance to the adult-oriented use shall include a sign
warning all individuals that the premises are classified as an
adult-oriented use and that no persons under the age of 18 are
permitted on the premises.
(h) No adult-oriented use may remain open at any time between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
(i) The Zoning Hearing Board must determine that the adultoriented
use:
[1] Is in general harmony with the immediate vicinity.
[2] Does not create an atmosphere of enticement for minors.
[3] Will not be detrimental to the public health, public safety
or general welfare of the Borough.
(j) It shall be a violation of this subsection for a person who
knowingly or intentionally, in an adult-oriented use, appears in
a nude or seminude condition, unless the person is an
employee who, while nude or seminude, shall be at least 10
feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two
feet above the floor level.
(19) E-19 Mixed-use building:
(a) Mixed-use building use shall contain residential and
commercial or office uses only.
(b) Uses shall be limited to those uses permitted within the district
in which it is located. In no case shall a use not permitted in the
district be approved.
(c) At least 33% of the gross floor area shall be designated for
residential use.
(d) Residential uses are not permitted on the ground floors of
mixed-use buildings.
(20) E-20 Kennel:
(a) A minimum lot size of 0.25 acres is required.
(b) All animals must be kept indoors between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:467
(c) No animal shelter or runway shall be located closer than 100
feet to any residential building other than the owner's or closer
than 50 feet to the property line.
(d) The kennel shall be constructed so that the animals cannot
stray therefrom.
(e) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at the lot
lines.
(f) Must comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Dog
Law.99
(21) E-21 Animal shelter or rescue:
(a) A minimum lot size of 0.5 acres is required.
(b) All animals must be kept indoors between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(c) No animal shelter or runway shall be located closer than 100
feet to any residential building other than the owner's or closer
than 50 feet to the property line.
(d) The kennel shall be constructed so that the animals cannot
stray therefrom.
(e) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at the lot
lines.
(f) Animal shelters shall be operated in accordance with
procedures accepted by animal rights groups such as the
Large Animal Protection Society (LAPS) and the society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) and the applicable
state laws concerning cruelty to animals.
(g) All such uses shall meet all applicable Pennsylvania state
licensing and codes.
F. Public utilities and public service organizations.
(1) F-1 Utility operating facility: Such use shall be limited to a sewage
pumping station, electrical substation, telephone substation,
sewage treatment plant, and any public service or utility, not
including a public incinerator, public or private landfill, or a
telecommunications facility or tower, and provided that the
following conditions are met:
(a) Such installation must be essential to serve the Borough of
Wilson.
99.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:468
(b) No zoning permit shall be required for public utilities to be
located in public streets or rights-of-way.
(c) The following minimum setbacks from all property lines shall
be provided:
[1] Water tower: setback not less than the height of the tower,
plus 200 feet.
[2] Electrical substation: 50 feet.
[3] Well facility: 100 feet.
[4] Sewer pumping station: 50 feet.
[5] Water treatment facility: 100 feet.
[6] Water pump station: 20 feet.
[7] Sewage treatment plant: 200 feet.
[8] All other uses: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum lot sizes shall be adequate to accommodate the
above setbacks, parking requirements and other building
requirements.
(e) No parking shall be permitted within the required setbacks.
(2) F-2 Emergency services: Emergency services shall be limited to
fire, ambulance, rescue and other emergency services of a
municipal or volunteer nature.
(a) For facilities without a community room, there shall be a
minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet.
(b) For facilities with a community room, there shall be a minimum
lot size of one acre.
(3) F-3 Terminal: A terminal shall be limited to a railway station or bus
station providing transportation services to the general public.
(4) F-4 Telecommunications facility: a structure or structures intended
for transmitting or receiving radio, television, microwave or
telephone communication; any telecommunications facility,
including a tower and associated building, for cellular and personal
wireless communications used to transmit or receive cellular and
personal wireless telecommunications signals.
(a) Maximum height: 150 feet.
(b) The tower must be licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission and must be reviewed and approved by the
Federal Aviation Administration and any other regulatory
authority with jurisdiction.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:469
(c) Allowable districts.
[1] Applicants seeking to construct a telecommunications
facility in Wilson Borough must first apply to the Borough
to determine if a suitable site is available on Boroughowned
and/or controlled land or structures, irrespective of
zoning district requirements. If the facility is not to be
located on Borough-owned and/or controlled facilities,
telecommunications facilities, including buildings and
towers, are permitted in the following zoning districts, and
only as conditional uses approved by the Borough Council:
C-1, C-2 and I-1.
[2] Telecommunications facilities, including towers, may be
permitted by conditional use in any other zoning district,
provided that the tower and other facilities can be
attached to an existing structure, can be disguised and
shielded so as not to alter the appearance of the existing
structure and where the proposed telecommunications
tower does not increase the height of the existing
structure or extend beyond the existing structure more
than five feet, so that it will fit in with the character of the
community.
(d) All buildings, structures, towers and guy wires shall be located
so that none of same are located within the required front, side
or rear yard setbacks for the district in which it is located. The
minimum lot area for the communications facility shall be
10,000 square feet; provided, however, that the lot area must
be adequate to accommodate all necessary setbacks from
property lines, in accordance with these regulations, and that
any communications tower shall be located no less than 200
feet from any occupied building.
(e) General standards for conditional use.
[1] The applicant shall present documentation that the tower
is designed in accordance with the standards cited in this
chapter for telecommunications towers and with all
applicable safety standards for towers. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed telecommunications
facility and tower are constructed in a manner consistent
with all applicable industry standards, and the
surrounding area will not be adversely affected by support
structure failure. Towers and antennas shall be designed
according to the standards of the American National
Standards Institute and the Telecommunications Industry
Association.
[2] Where the proposed site abuts a residential zoning
district, towers shall be permitted only where they are
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:470
disguised by attaching them to an existing tall structure
where the proposed tower does not increase the height of
the existing structure or by disguising the tower so that it
resembles a tree, silo or church steeple so that it will fit in
with the residential character of the community.
[3] The applicant shall present a site plan showing the
following items:
[a] Locations of all existing uses and proposed
telecommunications facilities.
[b] Elevations and drawings of any existing uses and
proposed telecommunications facilities, showing
proposed width, depth, height, architectural style and
structural data for any towers proposed.
[c] Vehicular access, fencing, landscaping and any
easements for access and utilities.
[d] The applicant shall demonstrate that the height of the
tower for the telecommunications facility is the
minimum height necessary for the service area.
[e] In order to reduce the number of telecommunications
towers in the Borough, all towers and support
structures shall be designed to permit other future
users, including other telecommunications companies
and police, fire and emergency services. The applicant
shall demonstrate that other telecommunications
licensees have been contacted with the objective of
encouraging collocation of licensed antennas on the
same tower.
[f] No telecommunications facilities (buildings or towers)
shall be located on any site or building registered on
the National Register of Historic Places.
[g] The telecommunications facility shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall
be visited only for periodic maintenance or emergency
repair.
[h] A six-foot high security fence shall completely
surround the facilities (tower, buildings and any guy
wires).
[i] An evergreen screen consisting of a row of evergreen
trees planted 10 feet on center shall be provided
around the outside of the security fence.
(f) As part of the development agreement for the construction or
installation of any telecommunications facility, provisions shall
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:471
be made for the removal of the structure by the applicant
should the facility not be used for a period of 12 consecutive
months.
(g) Standards for telecommunications facilities combined with
another use on a lot. A telecommunications facility is permitted
on a property with another permitted or lawful nonconforming
use subject to the general standards and to the following
additional requirements:
[1] If the facility consists of a separate building, the building
and tower shall not be located within the minimum front,
side and rear yard setbacks for the zoning district. The lot
area for the use shall be the area needed to accommodate
the buildings, towers, guy wires, buffer planting and
security fencing.
[2] Vehicular access to the building and tower shall not
interfere with the parking or circulation on the site for the
principal use.
[3] Documentation from the owner of the principal use
indicating the willingness to grant an easement, lease or
other interest in real estate shall be provided to the
Borough.
G. Industrial uses.
(1) G-1 Manufacturing: Manufacturing uses shall include but not be
limited to the production, processing, cleaning and testing of
materials, goods, foodstuffs and products from the following
previously processed and prepared materials: bone, ceramics,
cork, feathers, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, metal, paper,
plaster, plastics, precious and semiprecious stones, rubber, shells,
textiles and tobacco. Manufacturing may also include the
manufacture of electrical appliances and supplies, small or hand
tools, hardware, toys, jewelry, clocks and watches, musical,
professional and scientific instruments, optical goods, machinery
and machine tools, electrical equipment, motors, iron and steel
products, including fabrication and assembly, or other similar uses.
(2) G-2 Research: scientific or industrial research, testing or
experimental laboratory or similar establishment for research or
product development, provided that:
(a) No research facility shall be a commercial production facility.
(b) No research facility shall be permitted which constitutes a
danger to the community because of combustible or
radioactive materials.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:472
(3) G-3 Mini warehouse, mini storage: Such use shall be limited to the
storage of items, limited to personal property generally stored in
residential structures, within a warehouse structure or mini
warehouse structure, provided that:
(a) The use shall be enclosed with a fence. Between the fence and
the perimeter of the property there shall be a landscaped
buffer planted in accordance with § 170-87.
(b) The minimum driveway width between buildings shall be 20
feet.
(c) No business activity other than leasing of storage units shall be
permitted.
(d) All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
(e) Explosive, radioactive or highly flammable materials and
automobiles shall be prohibited.
(4) G-4 Printing: Such use shall be limited to printing, publishing and
binding.
(5) G-5 Contract services: Contract services shall be limited to offices
and supply shops such as building supplies, cement, electric,
heating, plumbing, masonry, painting, landscaping and roofing.
(6) G-6 Trades: Such use shall be limited to a plumbing shop, carpentry
shop, electrical shop, cabinetmaking, furniture-making and other
similar trades, provided that this use shall not include outside
storage.
(7) G-7 Fuel storage and distribution: Such use shall be limited to fuel
storage and distribution tanks and related buildings, provided that:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(b) No retail sales will be permitted on the premises.
(8) G-8 Building materials sale: Such use shall be limited to a
lumberyard and the storage and sale of finished products used in
building and construction, such as concrete and metal pipes,
provided that:
(a) Millworking is permitted as an accessory use.
(b) Storage yards shall be fully enclosed by fencing and a
landscaped buffer at least 20 feet in width.
(c) The storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids and the
production and mixing of asphalt and concrete is prohibited.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:473
(9) G-9 Equipment storage yards: Such use shall be limited to the
rental and storage of construction equipment. No storage of junk
vehicles shall be permitted.
(a) Storage yards shall be fully enclosed by fencing and a
landscaped buffer at least 20 feet in width.
(b) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(10)G-10 Truck terminal: this shall be limited to express trucking or
hauling stations.
(a) This use may not include facilities for the hauling or transfer of
solid or liquid wastes.
(b) No outdoor storage of materials or vehicles is permitted.
(c) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(11)G-11 Food processing: This use shall be limited to food processing,
packing, canning of meat, fish, dairy and other food products as
well as the manufacture and packaging of nonalcoholic beverages,
provided that such uses are served by public water and public
sewer services.
(12)G-12 Laundry, dry-cleaning or dyeing plant: a commercial plant for
laundry, dry cleaning or dyeing.
(13)G-13 Warehouse: wholesale business, wholesale storage or
warehousing, excluding retail sales except as provided for below. A
small retail store may be operated in conjunction with use G-13,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The retail store shall be an accessory use which is clearly
incidental and subordinate to the primary use G-13;
(b) The retail store may only sell those items stored at the property
in accordance with use G-13; and
(c) The retail store may not exceed 15% of the gross floor area or
1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(14)G-14 Junkyard: Such use shall be limited to an area of land, with or
without buildings, that is used for the storage of used or discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal,
building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles and
parts thereof, provided that:
(a) The proposed use of an area shall not be detrimental to
adjacent land uses.
(b) There shall be maximum lot size of five acres.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:474
(c) Such use shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any public road
as measured from the street line.
(d) The land area used for such purposes shall not be exposed to
public view from any residence or public street or road.
(e) Such uses shall be entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall at
least six feet high and constructed of plank boards, brick,
cinder block or concrete, with access only through solid gates.
Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and neatly
painted in uniform color.
(f) A dense evergreen buffer shall be provided on the outside
perimeter of the fenced area. Evergreens shall be four to five
feet in height and planted on ten-foot staggered centers.
(g) The contents of such use shall not be placed or deposited to a
height greater than the height of the fence or wall herein
prescribed.
(h) The storage of paper shall be within a building.
(i) The storage of toxic chemicals shall be prohibited.
(j) Dumping of trash or landfill operations and burning of any
materials shall specifically be prohibited.
(k) All such uses shall be sealed from groundwater contamination
and shall provide groundwater monitoring wells.
(15)G-15 Mineral extraction:
(a) The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions
hazardous or otherwise adverse to the value and use of
adjacent properties or the well-being of the surrounding area
and its residents.
(b) The site shall be reclaimed to a nonhazardous state permitting
some reasonable future use and so that the extracting
activities and resulting condition of the site will not result in
environmental degradation of the surrounding area.
(c) All activities of these land uses shall be effectively screened
from adjacent properties and set back from adjacent properties
by a minimum distance of 50 feet and from residential
structures by a minimum distance of 100 feet or such greater
distance as may be required by site conditions to protect
adjacent properties as determined necessary by the governing
body.
(d) Unique or environmentally significant natural features and
significant historic or architectural structures and sites shall
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:475
be protected from disruption or adverse effects from quarrying
and/or mining activities.
(e) A copy of all information submitted to the state agencies shall
also be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer at the same
time.
(f) A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse plan of
the area to be excavated shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Compliance with such plan shall be a
condition of Borough permits.
(16)G-16 Lawful use not otherwise permitted: This subsection is
intended to provide, by conditional use, for any lawful use that is
required to be permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code and which is not otherwise permitted in any other
use categories described in this section. A lawful use not otherwise
permitted shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a) The use must comply with the impervious surface, area, lot
area, and dimensional requirements of the district in which the
use is proposed.
(b) The applicant must demonstrate that the use proposed will
comply with all permit requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or any other
commonwealth or federal government agency which regulates
such use.
(c) Conditional use approval shall only be granted by the Borough
Council after it has determined that the granting of such will
not result in additional threats to public safety or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public or conflict with local laws or ordinances.
H. Accessory uses.
(1) H-1 Home-based business: a business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves
some customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, meeting location, delivery or removal functions
to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated with
a residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy
the following requirements:
(a) The home-based business shall be accessory to a residence and
carried on wholly indoors and within a dwelling or other
structure accessory thereto and shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:476
(b) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses and shall
meet the minimum and maximum area, height and dimensional
requirements of the district in which the use is located.
(c) Such use shall be limited to single-family detached dwellings.
(d) There shall be no use of show windows, display or advertising
visible outside the premises, except as provided for signs
herein.
(e) There shall be no exterior storage of material or building
material.
(f) There shall be no parking of commercial vehicles, except that
parking of not more than one commercial vehicle exceeding a
one-ton loading capacity and with no more than two axles or
four wheels, whichever is less, including any construction or
landscaping vehicles and trailers used for their transportation
(i.e., front-end loaders, cranes, cement mixers, riding lawn
mowers, etc.), shall be permitted only within a completely
enclosed building.
(g) The appearance of the residential structure shall not be altered
or the home-based business within the residence be conducted
in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from the
residential character by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, show windows or advertising visible on
the premises to attract customers or clients, other than an
identification sign not exceeding two square feet,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter.
(h) A sign displaying the name and address of the home-based
business may be permitted, subject to the following
requirements: no more than one such sign shall be erected on
the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed two square feet in
size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of
the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within
10 feet of the cartway.
(i) No articles shall be sold or offered for sale except such as may
be produced on the premises.
(j) There shall be no stockpiling, storage or inventory of products
of a substantial nature.
(k) There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that
require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or
equipment by other than passenger motor vehicle or by parcel
or letter carrier mail service using vehicles typically employed
in residential deliveries.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:477
(l) The home-based business shall be carried on only by
inhabitants of the dwelling and not more than two additional
employees.
(m) The floor area devoted to a home-based business shall not
occupy more than 25% of the ground floor of the principal
residential structure or 500 square feet, whichever is less; all
portions of the floor area to be used for the home-based
business shall be accessible to employees and clients without
having to enter or walk through the areas of the residence
devoted to solely residential use, and all areas to be used for
employees and client visits shall be in one location and not
separated by rooms or hallways which are used for residential
purposes.
(n) No equipment or process shall be used in a home-based
business which creates discernible noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference at the property line, and
no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the
lot or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the lot.
(o) No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be
performed in any open area. All such activities shall be
conducted in such a manner that they are not detectable or
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
(p) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(q) The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be
limited to six parking spaces, which shall not include any
garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the
appropriate provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
(r) No more than one home-based business shall be permitted per
residential dwelling.
(s) The hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through
Saturday, and activities shall occur between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(t) Parking spaces required by the home-based business in
addition to those required for the residential use must be
located to the side or to the rear of the principal residence and
must be separated from adjoining properties by a ten-foot-wide
planted buffer.
(u) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:478
(2) H-2 No-impact home-based business: a business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is
clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which
involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the
premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential
use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following
requirements:
(a) The no-impact home-based business shall be accessory to a
residence and carried on wholly indoors and within a dwelling
or other structure accessory thereto and shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes
by its occupants.
(b) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses and shall
meet the minimum and maximum area, height and dimensional
requirements of the district in which the use is located.
(c) There shall be no use of show windows, display or advertising
visible outside the premises.
(d) There shall be no exterior storage or building material.
(e) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including but not limited to parking, signs or lights.
(f) The appearance of the residential structure shall not be altered
or the no-impact home-based business within the residence be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to
differ from the residential character by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, show windows or advertising
visible on the premises to attract customers or clients.
(g) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling, storage or inventory of products of a substantial
nature.
(h) There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that
require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or
equipment by other than passenger motor vehicle or by parcel
or letter carrier mail service using vehicles typically employed
in residential deliveries.
(i) The no-impact home-based business shall be carried on only by
inhabitants of the dwelling.
(j) The floor area devoted to a no-impact home-based business
shall not occupy more than 25% of the ground floor of the
principal residential structure or 500 square feet, whichever is
less.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:479
(k) No equipment or process shall be used in a no-impact homebased
business which creates discernible noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference at the property
line, and no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receiver off the lot or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
lot.
(l) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(m) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(3) H-3 Residential accessory structure: Such use shall include a
residential accessory structure or use, including but not limited to:
(a) Parking of not more than one commercial vehicle not
exceeding a one-ton loading capacity and with no more than
two axles or four wheels, whichever is less, including any
construction or landscaping vehicles and trailers used for their
transportation (i.e., front-end loaders, cranes, cement mixers,
riding lawn mowers, etc.), shall be permitted only within a
completely enclosed building and only as an accessory to a
single-family detached dwelling and shall only be for the use of
the inhabitants of the subject residence.
(b) Structures, such as fences and walls, that are man-made
structures, erected to enclose or screen areas of land are
permitted, subject to the property owner and/or applicant
applying for and receiving a zoning permit from the Borough
and subject to the following restrictions:
[1] Fences and walls in any portion of the front yard, as
defined by this chapter, shall not exceed four feet in
height. Height shall be measured from the mean ground
level surrounding the fence or wall to the highest point of
the fence or wall.
[2] Fences and walls in side and rear yards shall not exceed
six feet in height.
[3] No fences or walls may be constructed in the clear site
triangle or in any portion of a street right-of-way or in a
public easement or in any portion of any public or private
easement where the easement agreement prohibits fences
or walls.
[4] Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
subsection, fences or walls surrounding tennis courts may
be not more than 10 feet in height, but tennis courts may
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:480
not be located in any portion of the required front yard as
defined by this chapter.
[5] These regulations shall not apply to the following:
[a] Fences or walls required to be installed in order to
comply with swimming pool fencing requirements of
this chapter and/or the Borough Building Codes.
[b] Fences or walls solely required as a result of an
agricultural or horticultural use of real property.
(c) Structures such as storage sheds, bathhouses and private
greenhouses, provided that they do not exceed 15 feet in
height and that they meet the following requirements:
[1] Structures with a floor area of 144 square feet or less shall
be no closer than four feet to any property line.
[2] Structures, other than detached garages, with a floor area
of more than 144 square feet shall meet the setback
requirement for principal buildings for the applicable
zoning district.
[3] Such structures shall be permitted accessory uses for
single-family detached dwellings only.
[4] The impervious surface requirements of the district in
which the use is located must be met and shall be
calculated, including the accessory structures.
[5] Decks attached to or immediately adjoining a dwelling unit
shall not encroach more than 10 feet into a required rear
yard.
(d) Detached garages which are accessory to residences are
permitted to be located no closer to a side or rear property line
than four feet. Such garages shall be located behind the
principal building setback line closest to the street on which
the principal building fronts and shall be set back from the
street line a distance no less than the actual setback of the
principal building from the street line. Garages shall not
exceed 15 feet in height.
(4) H-4 Outside storage:
(a) Outside storage, other than storage as a primary use of the
land, necessary but incidental to the normal operation of a
primary use, shall be permitted, subject to the following
additional provisions:
[1] No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other
areas intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:481
parking areas and no part of the required front yard shall
be occupied by outside storage.
[2] Outside storage areas shall occupy an area of less than 1/2
of the existing building coverage.
[3] Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from the
public streets in accordance with the buffer requirements
of this chapter.
(b) Uses requiring more substantial amounts of land area for
storage, such as any nursery, garden center, automotive sales,
truck terminal and lumberyard, may be exempt from the
provisions of Subsection H(4)(a)[2] and [3] above. For these
and other similar uses, no more than 25% of the lot area shall
be used for outside storage. For these uses only, outdoor
storage may be placed within the required yard area so long as
all storage is set back a distance equal to at least 50% of the
required yard area for the district in which the use is located.
Among the uses that shall not be considered appropriate for
inclusion under this provision are retail shop, repair shop,
service station, automobile repair and car wash, automotive
accessories, wholesale, contracting and trades.
(c) The storage of tractor trailers, panel trucks, vans and similar
vehicles which supply or service establishments in commercial
or industrial districts shall be permitted, provided that such
vehicles shall be used by the establishment in the normal
conduct of its business.
(5) H-5 Temporary structures and vehicles: Such use shall be limited to
a temporary structure, vehicle or use. A temporary permit may be
issued for structures or uses necessary during construction or
other special circumstances of a nonrecurring nature, such as fires,
construction or other causes of a similar nature, subject to the
following additional provisions:
(a) The time period of the initial permit shall be six months. This
permit may be renewed for three-month time periods, not to
exceed a total time period of two years.
(b) Temporary nonconforming structures or uses shall be subject
to authorization by the Zoning Officer or Borough Council.
(c) Such structure or use shall be removed completely within 30
days of the expiration of the permit without cost to the
municipality.
(d) Tractor trailers shall not be permitted to be parked in
residential districts except during construction.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:482
(e) No retail sales shall be permitted from temporary uses or
structures.
(f) The placement of all temporary structures shall be subject to
the approval of the Zoning Officer.
(6) H-6 Swimming pool: A swimming pool shall be permitted as an
accessory to a residential use, provided that:
(a) No person, owner or occupant of land shall install or maintain a
swimming pool or other artificial body of water capable of
being filled to a depth exceeding 18 inches at the deepest or
lowest point unless a permit is first obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer and the required plans and information
are filed, together with required permit fees. Ornamental pools
and wading pools which do not exceed 18 inches in depth are
exempt from these provisions. Swimming pools shall include
any pool, regardless of design or construction materials or the
permanency of its location both above and below ground level,
which is built, erected or used for the purpose of bathing or
swimming and all buildings, equipment, and appurtenances
thereto. This chapter shall also apply to public swimming pools
used and maintained by an individual, firm, corporation, club
or association of persons for use by the public or members and
their invitees or guests.
(b) The building area restrictions as set forth for the pertinent
zoning districts in this chapter shall apply and, in addition
thereto, each such pool area and the paving or coping
surrounding it or associated with it shall not be located in any
front yard and not closer than four feet to any property lines.
(c) Building permits are required prior to the construction,
alteration, remodeling or additions to a swimming pool or
other artificial water areas not specifically exempt from this
chapter. Application for a permit for the construction of a
swimming pool shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer.
Each application for a private or public swimming pool shall be
accompanied by a duplicate set of plans, specifications and plot
plans of the property. The location of the pool on the property
and with respect to adjoining property and street lines shall be
shown, together with the location, height and type of fencing
or walls or protective equipment and accessory buildings. No
permit for a private or public swimming pool shall be issued
until the plans, specifications and plot plans have been
approved by the Zoning Officer through compliance with this
chapter and the Borough Building Code.
(d) Written approval must be obtained upon inspection of the pool
and subject to the discretion of the inspecting officer.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:483
(e) All swimming pools shall be subject to an annual inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Health Officer or other
official designated by the Borough Council or the Health
Department who shall have the right of inspection whenever
they, in their sole discretion, deem it necessary to do so.
(f) Safety. Any pool or water area subject thereto shall be suitably
designed, located and maintained so as not to become a
nuisance or hazard either to adjoining property owners or the
public generally. All detachable ladders shall be removed when
the pool is not in use.
(g) Sanitary quality of water. The physical, chemical and bacterial
qualities of the water in public swimming pools shall comply
with the latest standards of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Health. Failure to maintain the
sanitary quality of water prescribed by this section or to
restore such water to the required quality within the time
prescribed by the Department of Health shall be a violation of
this section.
(h) Accessory buildings. Locker rooms, bathhouses, cabanas,
shower rooms, toilets, runways and all other physical facilities
or equipment incidental to the operation of any public
swimming pool shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times
and shall otherwise comply with the Borough ordinances, rules
and regulations.
(i) Construction and maintenance. The construction and design of
all pools shall be such that the same can be maintained and
operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The owners of
every such pool shall be responsible to maintain said pool in
such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water
from the pool overflowing into adjacent public or private
property. Swimming pools shall be constructed, equipped and
maintained in strict conformity with the provisions of the
swimming pool and public health codes issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Northampton County
Health Department.
(j) Outdoor lighting, if used, shall be installed in such a way as to
be shielded and not to reflect toward or into the interior of
adjacent residential properties.
(k) All electrical work connected with the pool and all equipment
incidental thereto shall comply with all Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., regulations and must be inspected and
certified by an ICC Electrical Inspector prior to the issuance of
a certificate of compliance. In no event may said pool be used
prior to such approval.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:484
(l) If pools are connected to any water, sewer or public utility line,
there must be installed a separate valve controlling such line,
both as to supply and drainage, and a permit must be obtained
prior to installation from the agency furnishing such utility
service. A minimum isolation distance of 25 feet shall be
required between a swimming pool and any sewage disposal
system.
(m) Approved filtration systems and circulators must be provided
for all pools except such exempt or nonexempt wading pools as
are emptied on a daily basis as hereinafter provided.
(n) All pool installations shall conform to all applicable building
codes.
(o) In no case shall water in the pool or pool area be permitted to
emit an offensive odor or create any unhealthful condition.
Further, it shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or allow
drainage onto adjoining land, public or private; provided,
however, that the Zoning Officer may issue a permit for
drainage into storm sewers at his discretion.
(p) No pool shall be located under any electric power lines
(including service lines), and the pool must be located at least
10 feet (measured horizontally) from such power lines.
(q) No water shall be placed in the pool until a fence, as required
by this chapter, has been completed.
(r) Fencing of pools. Fencing of pools must comply with Appendix
G of the most current adoption of the International Residential
Code.
(s) The owner of any swimming pool shall allow the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, Health Officer or other authorized official
access to the pool and appurtenances for the purpose of
inspection to ascertain compliance with this chapter at all
reasonable times.
(t) Pool construction and security. All pools shall be constructed
and secured in accordance with the Uniform Construction
Code (UCC), International Code Council (ICC), and
International Residential Code (IRC), as adopted by Wilson
Borough.
(7) H-7 Recreational vehicles: These regulations apply to recreational
vehicles which are stored on a property but are not enclosed within
a garage or other building.
(a) Recreational vehicles include travel trailers, boats, campers,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, trailers for these vehicles
and other similar vehicles.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:485
(b) Two recreational vehicles, not enclosed within a garage or
other building, shall be permitted per dwelling.
(c) Recreational vehicle parking is permitted as an accessory
residential use only for single-family detached dwellings.
(d) Recreational vehicles shall not be stored between the street
line and the front building line and/or in front of the principal
building unless the recreational vehicle is totally screened
from view by fencing and vegetation or the recreational vehicle
is at least 100 feet from the front property line of the singlefamily
dwelling.
(e) No such vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential
lot or in any location not approved for such use.
(f) No recreational vehicles stored on the property shall be closer
than seven feet from any property lines.
(g) For the purpose of this subsection, recreational vehicles shall
be presumed stored on a property if they remain on the
property for more than seven consecutive days and more than
10 days in any calendar month.
(8) H-8 Garage/yard sales: Such uses shall be limited to no more than
two days in duration. No more than two such sales can be held per
property in a calendar year. There shall be at least 30 days between
sales.
(9) H-9 In-law suite: One in-law suite to a residential dwelling shall be
permitted, provided that the conditions set forth in this subsection
are met, and further provided that the accessory use, in all
respects, complies with this chapter relating to the zoning district
wherein the proposed in-law suite is to be constructed or to be
used. The intent of these provisions is to allow for related family
members to reside on the premises.
(a) In-law suites may contain separate cooking, sleeping, living
and bathroom facilities.
(b) The in-law suite shall occupy no more than 25% of the total
usable floor area of the principal residence, not including any
garage.
(c) In-law suites shall be part of the principal residence or may be
contained in the existing accessory structure such as a garage.
No new separate structures on the same lot with the principal
residence shall be permitted to be constructed for this use.
(d) The required off-street parking for the principal dwelling plus
one additional off-street parking space for the in-law suite shall
be provided.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:486
(e) No more than one in-law suite shall be permitted per
residential dwelling.
(f) Each in-law suite shall be registered with the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall keep record of its use to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(g) A certification shall be received from the Northampton County
Department of Human Services or other regulatory agency
certifying that the wastewater facilities are adequate to
accommodate the principal residential dwelling as well as the
in-law suite as defined in this section.
(10) H-10 Wind energy system: An energy conversion system, including
appurtenances, which converts wind to a usable form of energy to
meet all or part of the energy requirements of the on-site use.
Accessory wind energy systems shall not be used primarily for the
generation of power to sell to other users, although this provision
shall not prohibit the sale of excess power generated to the local
utility company. The following requirements shall apply to
accessory wind energy systems:
(a) No wind energy system, or addition of a wind turbine to an
existing wind energy system shall be constructed or located
within Wilson Borough unless a permit has been issued to the
facility owner or operator approving construction of the facility
under this chapter.
(b) There shall be a maximum of one device on a single parcel.
(c) Any physical modification to an existing and permitted wind
energy system that materially alters the size, type and number
of wind turbines or other equipment shall require a permit
modification under this chapter. Like-kind replacements shall
not require a permit modification.
(d) The design of the wind energy system shall conform and
comply with all manufacturer's specifications and any and all
applicable industry standards.
(e) To the extent applicable, the wind energy system shall comply
with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of
1999, as amended,100 and the regulations adopted by the
Department of Labor and Industry.
(f) Maximum height of the structure, including all moving and
rotating parts, shall be 65 feet, measured from the undisturbed
ground elevation at the base of the device, to the highest point
of the arc of the blade, or to the top of the tower, whichever is
100. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:487
greater, unless a greater restriction is imposed by FAA
regulations.
(g) All wind energy systems shall be equipped with an over speed
control system in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
(h) All electrical components of the wind energy system shall
conform to relevant and applicable local, state and national
codes, and relevant and applicable international standards.
The facility shall have an output limit of 50 KW.
(i) Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white, offwhite
or gray.
(j) Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted, except to
the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other applicable authority that regulates air safety.
(k) Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility
owner or operator.
(l) On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines
shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be placed
underground and in accordance with applicable IRC Codes.
(m) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations.
(n) Visible, reflective, colored objects such as flags, reflectors, or
tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and
along the guy wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
(o) Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
ground surface.
(p) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment
shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by
nonauthorized persons.
(q) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property
line a distance of not less than the maximum setback
requirements for that zoning classification where the turbine is
located or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is greater.
The setback distance shall be measured to the center of the
wind turbine base. In no case shall a system be located within
or above a front yard or within or above the minimum required
side and/or rear yards.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:488
(r) Minimum distance between the undisturbed ground at the
base of the device and any protruding blade shall be 15 feet, as
measured at the lowest point of arc of the blades.
(s) When a building is necessary for storage cells or related
mechanical equipment, the building shall not exceed 150
square feet in area, shall not exceed eight feet in height and
must not be located in any required front, side or rear yards.
(t) Accessory wind energy systems attached to existing structures
shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the height of the
existing structure that it is attached to, and shall be located on
the existing structure so that a minimum distance of 1.1 times
the overall height of the accessory wind energy system is
maintained between the device and any property line and/or
existing street right-of-way.
(u) Noise and shadow flicker.
[1] Audible sounds from a wind energy system shall not
exceed 50 dBA, as measured from the setback line (front,
side or rear) of a contiguous neighboring property.
Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions
from wind turbines and the wind energy system shall be
equal to or exceed the minimum standards for precision
described in AWEA Standard 2.1 - 1989 titled Procedures
for the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions
from Wind Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First
Tier.
[2] The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable
efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building
on a nonparticipating landowner's property.
(v) Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable
efforts to avoid any disruption or loss of radio, television or
similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the wind
energy system.
(w) Decommissioning.
[1] The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense,
complete decommissioning of the wind energy system, or
individual wind turbines, within 12 months after the end of
the useful life of the system or individual wind turbines.
The wind energy system or individual wind turbines will
presume to be at the end of its useful life if no electricity is
generated for a continuous period of 12 months.
[2] Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines,
buildings, cabling and electrical components.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:489
[3] The Borough Engineer shall review and approve a cost
estimate provided by the applicant, which cost estimate
shall establish the total cost of decommissioning
(decommissioning costs) without regard to salvage value
of the equipment. Said estimates shall be submitted to
Wilson Borough after the first year of operation and every
fifth year thereafter.
[4] The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain a
decommissioning fund (escrow account) in an amount
equal to the net decommissioning cost with the Borough.
Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a
performance bond, surety bond, letter of credit, corporate
guarantee or other form of financial assurance as may be
acceptable to Wilson Borough.
[5] If the facility owner or operator fails to complete
decommissioning as set forth herein, then the landowner
shall have six months to remove the wind energy system.
[6] If neither the facility owner or operator nor the landowner
complete decommissioning within the periods prescribed,
then Wilson Borough may take such measures as
necessary to complete decommissioning. Wilson Borough
is authorized to use the decommissioning funds held in
escrow by the Borough to complete the decommissioning
process.
[7] The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds
when the facility owner or operator has demonstrated and
the municipality concurs that decommissioning has been
satisfactorily completed, or upon written approval of the
municipality in order to implement the decommissioning
plan.
(11) H-11 Solar energy system: Solar energy systems include any solar
collector or other solar energy device, or any structural design
feature whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection,
storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, for water heating or for electricity generation that may be
mounted on a building or on the ground and is not the primary use
of the property. Solar energy systems may include solar panels
which, for purposes of this subsection, are structures containing
one or more receptive cells, the purpose of which is to convert solar
energy into usable electrical energy by way of a solar energy
system. Solar energy systems may be installed as ground arrays or
roof mounted. The following requirements shall apply, as
applicable, to solar energy systems:
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:490
(a) The solar energy system shall conform to the area and
dimensional regulations of the zoning district in which the
solar energy system is installed.
(b) All components of the system shall be considered impervious
and considered as such in the calculation of the maximum
impervious coverage. Impervious coverage for solar panels/
collectors shall be measured when oriented at the absolute
maximum horizontal plane.
(c) No adjacent property owner shall be required to remove or cut
any plant, bush, crop, or tree nor shall any solar energy system
be located so that any reflection is directed toward an
adjoining property.
(d) Ground-mounted systems shall not be permitted in a front
yard.
(e) A ground-mounted system may not exceed a height of 15 feet
above the ground when oriented at maximum tilt.
(f) Permitted roof-mounted solar panels shall not exceed a height
of three feet from the rooftop at any point; shall not project
vertically above the peak of a sloped roof or project vertically
more than five feet above a flat roof installation; and shall not
exceed the maximum height requirements for the district in
which it is located.
(g) The collector surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted
accessory solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the
exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is
mounted or built. Exterior piping for solar hot water systems
shall be permitted to extend beyond the perimeter of the
building on side and/or rear yard exposures only.
(h) The installation of a solar energy system shall conform to the
extent applicable to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, as amended,101 and regulations, if any, adopted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, and to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute. Manufacturer's data and
certificates of design compliance shall be submitted with the
zoning permit and plans.
(i) All wiring shall comply with the applicable version of the
National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility provider shall
be contacted by the owner to determine grid interconnection
and net metering policies.
101. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 170-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-83
1:491
(j) Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any
identification be visible from the property line.
(k) The design of solar energy systems shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening,
and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural
setting and existing environment.
(l) Mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the
operation of the solar energy system shall be screened from
any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for
residential purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery,
trees, or other plant materials that provide a visual screen.
(m) All solar energy system operators/owners must comply with
any and all federal, state, and local regulations pertaining to
solar energy and its collection for personal use.
(n) If any of the requirements herein conflict with federal and/or
state requirements then the federal and/or state requirements
shall govern unless the requirements of this chapter are more
stringent in which case this chapter shall govern.
§ 170-83 WILSON CODE § 170-83
1:492
ARTICLE XIV
Environmental and Performance Standards
§ 170-84. Performance and environmental impacts.
No building, structure or land use within the Borough shall be used or
occupied in any manner that creates any dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable condition; fire, explosive or other hazard; noise
or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat,
electromagnetic or other radiation or other condition in such manner or
in such amount as to affect adversely the reasonable use or value of the
surrounding area of adjoining premises or be dangerous to public health or
safety.
A. Radioactivity. Activities which may emit radioactivity shall comply with
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Radiology, and the Federal Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
B. Heat. Activities which employ the use of heat or produce heat as a
product or by-product of said activity shall be so located and/or
buffered to prohibit a raise in temperature of 2° F. at the lot line.
C. Glare.
(1) No direct glare shall be permitted, with the following exceptions:
(a) Parking areas and walkways may be illuminated by luminaries
so hooded or shielded that the maximum angle of the cone of
direct illumination shall be 60° drawn perpendicular to the
ground. Such luminaries shall be placed not more than 16 feet
above the ground level, and the maximum illumination at
ground level shall not be in excess of three footcandles at 30
feet, horizontally measured, from the light source.
(b) A luminary less than four feet above the ground may have a
cone angle of 90°.
(2) The total of any and all direct glare and indirect glare (produced by
illuminating a reflecting surface) shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle
instantaneous maximum measurement or 0.1 footcandle average
measurement at any side or rear lot line.
(3) Deliberately induced sky-reflected glare, as by casting a beam
upward for advertising purposes, is specifically prohibited.
D. Noise. Refer to Chapter 130, Noise, of the Code of the Borough of
Wilson.
E. Smoke, dust, etc. The air-pollution control regulations promulgated by
the Air Pollution Control Act of January 9, 1960, P.L. 2119, as amended
(35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.), shall be used to control the emissions of dust,
dirt, smoke, vapors, gases and odors. (These regulations are part of
§ 170-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-84
1:493
Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article III, Air
Resources.)
F. Vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or
beyond any lot line; nor shall any vibration produced exceed 0.002 g
peak at up to 50 cycles per second (cps) frequency, measured at or
beyond the lot line using either seismic or electronic vibrationmeasuring
equipment.
(1) Vibrations occurring at higher than 50 cps frequency or aperiodic
vibrations shall not induce acceleration exceeding 0.001 g.
(2) Single impulse aperiodic vibrations occurring at an average
interval greater than five minutes shall not induce accelerations
exceeding 0.01 g.
G. Storage of hazardous and toxic substances.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to the storage of hazardous
and toxic materials and the disposal of said materials. Hazardous
and toxic materials include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products.
§ 170-84 WILSON CODE § 170-84
1:494
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Impoundments containing toxic substances are not permitted.
(3) Storage and handling areas for toxic and hazardous substances
must have impermeable surfaces designed to contain material and
direct it to a predetermined collection point.
(4) Storage and handling facilities for hazardous and toxic substances
should not be sited within 300 feet of a public or private water
supply.
(5) Any use requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 110
gallons or other comparable volume of any toxic or hazardous
substances on the premises or which will involve the production,
storage or use of any amount of radioactive substance shall be
inventoried, and the inventory shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager. In addition, spill contingency plans acceptable to the
Borough Manager, Police Chief and fire companies shall be
developed and kept on file in the offices of the above-cited officers
and agencies.
(6) At least two groundwater monitoring devices are required for all
facilities handling toxic or hazardous substances.
(7) Impervious liners and all-weather coverings are to be installed at
all road-deicing salt facilities.
H. Storage of chemicals. The following regulations shall apply to all
chemicals:
(1) No underground or subsurface storage of chemicals, either gas,
liquid or solids, shall be permitted in any district, except for
underground storage of petroleum products as regulated by the
state police and/or other state or federal regulatory agency.
(2) No aboveground or surface storage of chemicals, either gas, liquid
or solids, in any quantity in excess of 20 cubic feet in volume shall
be stored or maintained within 300 feet of a residential district
boundary or within 300 feet of a residential dwelling, except for the
following:
(a) Chemicals such as heating oil or propane, which may be
required for the normal heating and cooling of a building, and
fire-suppression chemicals.
(b) Printing supplies, photographic developing chemicals,
janitorial chemicals and lawn and agricultural fertilizers in a
quantity not to exceed 40 cubic feet.
§ 170-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-84
1:495
§ 170-85. Traffic impact requirements.
All development projects will be evaluated by the Zoning Officer to
determine the level of traffic impact on the Borough. This will apply to
all new projects or uses proposed or to any expansion of an existing
development, which is proposed after the effective date of this chapter. The
level of traffic impact will be based on the estimated trip ends generated by
the proposed uses in the project. "Trip ends" are defined as the total number
of trips entering and leaving a specific land use or uses located in a project
per day. These trip ends will be based on the estimated trip generation
rates for various types of land uses based on the latest edition of the
publication entitled "Trip Generation, An Information Report," published by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
(c) Aboveground tanks for storage of fuel oil for use by the
property owner for: farm-related equipment; trucks or
automobiles; emergency equipment; and/or recreational
equipment or vehicles.
(3) All storage and waste disposal shall conform to all existing
municipal fire prevention code and state and federal regulations.
I. Storage of wastes.
(1) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces; nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream,
watercourse or groundwater system or otherwise render such
stream, watercourse or groundwater undesirable as a source of
water supply or recreation or which will destroy aquatic life be
allowed to enter any streams or watercourse.
(2) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
(3) Storage and waste disposal facilities of commercial, industrial,
institutional or multifamily uses shall be screened.
A. Determination of major traffic impact. Any development which has an
estimated average daily traffic (or daily trip ends per day) in excess of
1,000 shall be considered to have a major traffic impact.
B. Special exceptions. All major traffic impact projects shall be considered
to be special exceptions, as defined herein, even if they are listed as
permitted uses in § 170-82, and all procedures applicable to special
exceptions shall apply to zoning applications for such projects.
C. If any project is proposed after the date of adoption of this chapter
which does not have a major traffic impact, as defined herein, and a
§ 170-84 WILSON CODE § 170-85
1:496
later or subsequent addition to that project is proposed within 10
years of the initial project, then the cumulative effect of all separate
submissions shall be used, regardless of any changes in ownership
which may take place over the time period under consideration. This
shall apply to major shopping centers, medical centers, hospital
expansion, apartment complexes, planned cluster residential
developments or any other use proposed under this chapter.
D. The developer shall identify all subsequent phases of a project at the
time of submission of the initial phase.
E. Phased projects. In the event that a project is to be phased over a
period of time, not exceeding 10 years, the total traffic impact for the
entire period of phasing shall be used in determining the traffic impact.
F. Requirements for projects having a major traffic impact. All projects
which are determined to have a major traffic impact shall comply with
the following:
(1) Compliance with the site plan review procedures set forth in
§ 170-11.
(2) All such projects shall have direct access to an arterial road or to a
collector road in the Borough as identified in the Comprehensive
Plan. In lieu of such access, the developer shall provide a project
road which is capable of handling the level of traffic to be
generated and which is proposed for development by the developer
to collector or major road standards, as established by the
Borough, from the project site to the closest existing collector or
arterial road.
(3) All such projects shall comply with the parking and loading
requirements set forth in Article XVI.
G. Major traffic impact study.
(1) A major traffic impact study shall include at least the following:
(a) All projects which have an estimated average daily traffic
(ADT) exceeding 1,000 vehicles per day shall be required to
submit a traffic impact study prepared by a competent
authority. The requirements for such a study are set forth
below.
(b) Identification of all major roads and intersections serving and
substantially impacted by the project.
(c) An analysis of how the proposed project users or residents will
use these major roads.
(d) Existing traffic conditions (without the proposed project),
including traffic volumes (ADT) and peak hour volumes on the
identified major roads, based on Pennsylvania Department of
§ 170-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-85
1:497
Transportation (PennDOT) information, surveys and trip
generation rates. (In addition, commercial projects shall
provide weekend traffic volume data at peak hours.)
(e) Projected traffic conditions (without the project) based on
trends in growth of traffic for ADT and peak hour volumes. (In
addition, commercial projects shall provide weekend traffic
volume data at peak hours.)
(f) Estimates of traffic volumes (ADT), weekday peak hour
volumes and weekend peak hour volumes after development of
all stages of the project.
(g) Highway and intersection traffic capacities and levels of
service for Subsection G(1)(c), (d) and (e) above, as defined by
the Highway Capacity Manual, must be calculated.
(h) Identification of existing and projected traffic problems on
roads serving the project or substantially impacted by the
project, including highway capacity deficiencies for the various
roads and intersections involved.
(i) Analysis of parking requirements and needs and the extent to
which these needs are met by the project.
(j) Solutions proposed by the developer to alleviate the identified
problems and deficiencies and the proposed cost of these
improvements.
(k) Evaluation of impact of project on adjoining residential
neighborhood areas.
(l) Identification and analysis of high-accident areas located in
proximity to the project, as identified by the Borough, and the
effect which the proposed project will have on the high
accident areas and locations.
(m) The competent authority responsible for preparing the major
traffic impact study shall certify to the following:
[1] That in the preparation of the study, the applicable
Comprehensive Plan and any pertinent Borough or other
traffic or transportation plan or study, as identified by the
Borough, has been considered in the preparation of the
major impact study.
[2] That the competent authority has consulted with and
received information pertaining to the streets and traffic
data and projections from PennDOT and from the Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission.
[3] That in the professional opinion of the competent
authority, the completed major traffic impact study is a
§ 170-85 WILSON CODE § 170-85
1:498
§ 170-86. Environmentally sensitive areas.
All areas in the Borough may be proposed for development in accordance
with the requirements set forth in this chapter and Zoning Map. Such areas
may also be subject to special environmental or hazardous conditions or
other site problems which require a special consideration and conformance
with special regulations required to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. Areas of the Borough which are subject to the following special
conditions and problems shall conform with the following additional
requirements.
true and accurate study which has given adequate
consideration to available information and includes
reasonable projections and analysis to the factors
considered and that the study represents the best opinion
of the competent authority on the traffic and parking
impact of the proposed development.
[4] That, if it has not been possible to fully analyze all relevant
factors, then those factors not analyzed shall be identified,
together with the reasons for their exclusion from the
study.
(2) The major traffic impact study shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and a recommendation made to the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the special exception procedures and
requirements established herein. The Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Hearing Board may request additional data or information
to clarify the findings set forth in said study. The Board shall not
approve any such special exception if it determines that any traffic
or parking problem to be created by the proposed development
cannot be adequately alleviated by the developer.
H. The applicant or developer, as determined by the Borough, will be
responsible for the guaranty of payment for the proportionate share of
all traffic control devices or for the construction of public facilities
applicable to the proposed development which are required as a result
of the traffic impact generated by the proposed development project.
A. Floodplains.
(1) General provisions.
(a) The floodplain area shall be those areas expected to be subject
to the one-hundred-year flood, as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) which accompanies the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the Borough by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), dated February 20,
1987, or the most recent official federal revision thereof. Such
mapping and study shall be known as the "Federal Floodplain
§ 170-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:499
Map." The referenced FIS is declared to be part of this chapter
and shall be kept at the Wilson Borough offices.
(b) No development shall be undertaken, no structure or land shall
hereafter be used; no structure shall be located, relocated,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered;
and no area shall be developed, graded, filled or excavated in
any flood hazard district except in full compliance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable
ordinances and regulations.
(c) Failure to comply with the provisions of this section is a
violation of this chapter, and the Borough may proceed with
court action and/or issue a declaration of violation, under
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency to deny flood
insurance on the property in violation. The effects of having a
Section 1316 violation are nonavailability of flood insurance for
any buildings, possible reduction of market value, risk of
damage without compensation, possible mortgage foreclosure,
and denial of disaster assistance for repair of structural
damage.
(d) Warning and disclaimer of liability.
[1] The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of
this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods
of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes,
such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris.
This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
identified floodplain or that land uses permitted within a
floodplain area will be free from flooding or flood damages.
[2] This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Wilson
Borough or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(e) No encroachment, land development, improvement or
reconstruction of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such
action have been notified by the Borough, and until all required
permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office. In
addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development (DCED) shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:500
(f) Any new construction, uses, activities or land development
occurring within the floodplain shall be undertaken only in
strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations, including
the UCC, as amended, and Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(g) Under no circumstances shall any new construction, uses,
activity and/or land development adversely affect the capacity
of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage
ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
(h) Any new construction and/or land development, with the
exception of redevelopment projects, that would cause any
increase in the base flood elevation shall be prohibited.
(i) New construction, development or redevelopment in the
floodway area is prohibited.
(2) Identification and establishment of floodplain areas. The floodplain
area may consist of the following specific areas:
(a) The floodway area (FW): the areas identified as "floodway" in
the AE Zone in the Flood insurance Study prepared by FEMA.
The term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the Flood Insurance Study. Such studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a through technical review by the Borough.
(b) The flood-fringe area (FF): the portion of the AE Zone not
included in the floodway. The basis for the outermost boundary
of this area shall be the base flood elevations shown in the
flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
(c) The general floodplain area (FA): the areas identified as A Zone
in the Flood Insurance Study for which no base flood elevations
have been provided or areas subject to flooding defined by one
of the following methods:
[1] Soils identified with potential for flooding, as described
and mapped by the United States Department of
Agriculture;
[2] Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
reflect accepted technical concepts. Such studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the Borough.
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:501
(d) An initial determination shall be made by the Zoning Officer
should a dispute concerning any floodplain boundary arise. Any
party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board under the provisions of this chapter. The
burden of proof is on the appellant.
(e) The delineation of the floodplain area may be revised by the
Borough where natural or man-made changes have occurred
and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or
undertaken by FEMA, United States Army Corps of Engineers
or other qualified agency, or an individual. However, prior to
any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
(3) Nonconforming uses and structures in the floodplain. A structure
or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the
enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with
those provisions, shall be subject to the requirements of this
section.
(4) Permitted uses and development. The following uses and activities
are permitted in the FF or FA areas, provided they are in
compliance with the provisions of the zoning district in which the
use or activity is located and are not prohibited by any other
ordinance:
(a) Agriculture, horticulture, and forestry that:
[1] Do not include any structures;
[2] Do not require grading which would cause any increase in
flood heights or frequency;
[3] Are conducted in accord with recognized soil conservation
and water quality practices;
(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities, limited to
parks, day camps, picnic grounds, boat launching and
swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, and
hunting and fishing areas;
(c) Accessory uses, including yard areas, gardens, play areas and
parking areas, provided that no structures are erected, and no
impervious surfaces are created;
(d) Redevelopment projects that:
[1] Do not include residential structures or critical facilities;
[2] Do not include prohibited uses listed below;
[3] Are consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan;
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:502
[4] Are permitted in the applicable zoning district;
[5] Are elevated to regulatory flood elevation and in full
compliance with the floodproofing requirements in the
Borough Building Code, as amended;
[6] Include a document, certified by a registered professional
engineer which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such
statement shall include the lowest floor elevation of all
proposed structures, the elevation of the one-hundredyear
flood, and the type and extent of floodproofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of
all proposed structures and/or the development;
(e) The repair or expansion of riparian buffers;
(f) Floodproofing to protect only lawfully existing nonconforming
structures and lawfully existing nonconforming uses within
structures;
(g) Fences and temporary protective fencing that do not impede
floodwaters;
(h) Dams, culverts, bridges, and altered or relocated watercourses
with permits and/or approvals from the PA Department of
Environmental Protection, PA Public Utility Commission, and/
or United States Army Corps of Engineers. Furthermore,
notification of such actions shall be provided to all affected
adjoining municipalities, FEMA and the Pennsylvania DCED;
(i) Public utility facilities under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
(5) Prohibited uses and development. The following uses are
prohibited from locating within the floodplain area:
(a) All uses prohibited in the zoning district;
(b) New construction, development or redevelopment in the FW
area;
(c) All structures, with the exception of those specifically allowed
in § 170-86A(4);
(d) The production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances;
(e) The production, storage or use of a substance or material,
underground or aboveground, that is buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human,
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:503
animal, plant, fish or aquatic life, including but not limited to
the following:
[1] Acetone;
[2] Ammonia;
[3] Benzene;
[4] Calcium carbide;
[5] Carbon disulfide;
[6] Celluloid;
[7] Chlorine;
[8] Hydrochloric acid;
[9] Hydrocyanic acid;
[10] Magnesium;
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.);
[13] Phosphorus;
[14] Potassium;
[15] Sodium;
[16] Sulphur and sulphur products;
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides);
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated;
(f) The production, storage or use of explosives;
(g) The storage or disposal of materials used for snow and ice
control, including sand, salt and other deicing chemicals;
(h) Sanitary landfills, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and outdoor
storage of vehicles and/or materials;
(i) The storage or disposal of any soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel,
rock, or other mineral substance, refuse, trash, rubbish,
debris, or dredged/excavated spoil;
(j) Draining, excavation, or dredging, or removal or relocation of
loam, peat, sand, gravel, soil, rock, or other mineral substance,
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:504
except as accessory to work permitted as of right or by special
permit;
(k) Manure storage facilities and manure stockpiles;
(l) Improvements to existing manufactured home parks and
subdivisions;
(m) Sewage disposal facilities.
(6) Existing structures in floodplains.
(a) No improvement or reconstruction of an existing structure
shall be allowed within any FW area as identified by the Flood
Insurance Study prepared by FEMA or other available studies
or sources of information found acceptable by the Borough and
approved by FEMA.
(b) No improvement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any FF or FA area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
(c) The improvement or reconstruction of existing structures that
store materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant,
fish or aquatic life shall be prohibited in floodplains.
(d) Existing structures in the FF and FA areas are defined and
regulated as follows:
[1] Intact structures. Any improvement to an existing intact
structure, to an extent 10% or more of its market value,
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
floodproofing requirements in the UCC and ICC, as
amended.
[2] Partially damaged structures. Any improvement or
reconstruction to an existing partially damaged structure
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
floodproofing requirements in the UCC and ICC, as
amended.
[3] Substantially damaged structures. Any improvement or
reconstruction to a substantially damaged structure shall
be in full compliance with the floodproofing requirements
in the UCC and ICC, as amended, and shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to flood protection
elevation.
[4] Repetitive loss structures. An improvement to a repetitive
loss structure to an extent 10% or more of its market value
of the intact structure shall be prohibited. Any permitted
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:505
improvement to a repetitive loss structure shall be in full
compliance with the floodproofing requirements of the
UCC and ICC, as amended, and shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to flood protection elevation.
The reconstruction of a repetitive loss structure shall be in
full compliance with the UCC and ICC, as amended, and
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
flood protection elevation.
[5] Severe repetitive loss structures. An improvement to a
severe repetitive loss structure to an extent 5% or more of
its market value as an intact structure shall be prohibited.
Any permitted improvement to a severe repetitive loss
structure shall be in full compliance with the floodproofing
requirements of the UCC and ICC, as amended, and shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
flood protection elevation. The reconstruction of a severe
repetitive loss structure shall be:
[a] In full compliance with the UCC and ICC, as amended;
[b] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to flood protection elevation; and
[c] The applicant shall provide documentation from the
Borough, the State of Pennsylvania and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that states Wilson
Borough, the State of Pennsylvania or FEMA will not
acquire the property for the purposes of flood
mitigation prior to the reconstruction of the structure.
(e) The cost of improvements or reconstruction commenced since
the adoption of this chapter must be calculated at today's
current cost.
(f) It is the responsibility of the applicant to supply the
information necessary (e.g., appraisals, construction costs,
estimates, etc., to make the determination that the market
value is reasonably accurate and that the cost estimate
reasonably reflects the actual costs of the improvements to the
structure.
(g) Acceptable estimates of market value shall be determined from
one of the following methods: independent appraisals by a
state licensed real estate appraiser; or the value of the building
taken from NFIP claims data.
(7) Building and zoning permits.
(a) Building and zoning permits shall be required for all proposed
development, construction, reconstruction, placement,
improvement of uses or structures, regardless of value and
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:506
activities such as mining, dredging, grading, logging, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
(b) The requirements of the UCC and ICC, as amended, shall apply
to this section.
(8) Floodplain variances.
(a) General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this
chapter would result in an exceptional hardship for a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Zoning
Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
(b) Variance procedures and requirements. Requests for variances
shall be considered by the Board in accordance with this
chapter and with the following:
[1] No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodplain or
floodway area that would cause any increase in the base
flood elevation.
[2] No variance shall be granted for any of the prohibited uses
or activities in § 170-86A(5) to locate in the floodplain.
[3] If granted, a variance shall involve only the least
modification necessary to provide relief.
[4] In granting any variance, the Board shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards they consider
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
[5] A complete record of all variance requests and related
actions shall be maintained by the Board. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(c) Review factors. In reviewing applications for a variance, the
Board shall consider all relevant factors and procedures
specified in other articles of this chapter and:
[1] The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
[2] The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands
or downstream to the injury of others.
[3] The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination
and unsanitary conditions.
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:507
[4] The susceptibility of the proposed use and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owners.
[5] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
use to the community.
[6] The requirements of the use for a waterfront location.
[7] The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
[8] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
[9] The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and the Borough stormwater management objectives
and regulations.
[10] The safety of access to the property in times of flood of
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
[11] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
[12] The requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations, Part 59: General Provisions, and
Part 60: Criteria for Land Management and Use.
[13] Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of
this chapter.
(d) Supplemental technical review. The Board may refer any
application and accompanying documentation pertaining to
any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified
person or agency for technical assistance and/or all hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis.
B. Wetland areas.
(1) Purpose: to encourage the preservation of wetlands to protect the
quantity and quality of surface water and groundwater, to control
flooding, to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to protect
extremely important habitats and food sources for wildlife, birds
and aquatic life.
(2) Permits.
(a) All permits of Wilson Borough are issued with the condition
that federal and state wetlands regulations be complied with.
(b) Where the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer determine that
there is evidence that there may be indicators of a wetland on a
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:508
proposed development site, the Zoning Officer may suspend,
withdraw or delay Borough zoning permits until the applicant
provides evidence from a qualified professional that such site
does not contain wetlands or that such action will comply with
applicable federal and state permit requirements.
(c) If a proposed development site does not include any wetlands
based upon established indicators and federal and state
regulations, then the applicant shall provide a written
statement to such effect.
(3) Wetlands identification and notification:
(a) Those areas of lands defined as wetlands in either the United
States Army Corps of Engineers Technical Report Y87-1, Corps
of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual; or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency Wetlands
Identification Delineation Manual, Volume I, Rational, Wetland
Parameters, and Overview of Jurisdictional Approach, Volume
II, Field Methodology, as most recently updated or modified; or
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
Wetlands Identification and Delineation, Chapter 105, Dam
Safety and Waterways Management Rules and Regulations, as
most recently updated or modified. Where a difference
between the foregoing criteria exist, the most restrictive
criteria will be used in any particular case. For the purposes of
this definition and for its application to this chapter, "most
restrictive criteria" shall mean the criteria which causes the
preservation of the most extensive area of wetlands.
(b) If any building, structure, use, subdivision, land development
or grading is proposed to occur within any lands believed to be
any type of wetland, the applicant shall clearly state such
information on any permit, subdivision or land development
application and site plan submitted to the Borough, and shall
notify, in writing, the appropriate district offices of the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and the PA Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) Determination of wetlands.
(a) The following activities shall not occur within any area shown
as wetlands, which may be amended by resolution, unless a
determination has been made by a qualified person trained in
wetlands determination that such area is not a wetland:
[1] Construction or enlargement of a building;
[2] Filling or draining of an area;
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:509
[3] Final subdivision of a lot which would require alteration of
the wetland area in order for construction to reasonably
occur.
(b) All determinations of wetlands shall be subject to acceptance
by the appropriate state or federal officials.
(c) The applicant shall be responsible for all costs and work
involved in determining any wetland and in seeking any federal
or state review or approvals.
(5) Usable lot area. A lot must contain a contiguous area in an amount
of at least 75% of the required minimum lot area which is not in
wetlands.
(6) Responsibility. All applicants are put on notice that it is their
responsibility to make sure that federal and state regulations are
complied with. Federal law may require that a wetland that is
altered be later returned to a wetland, which may require
demolition of buildings.
C. Riparian and wetland buffers. This subsection shall apply to all lands
within the Borough that are adjacent to a watercourse or wetland.
(1) General design standards.
(a) For sites where riparian buffer vegetation does not exist, it is
acceptable to allow the buffer to succeed naturally through a
no-mow area where native vegetation is able to establish itself
naturally.
(b) The riparian buffer shall be:
[1] Seventy-five feet from the top of the streambank of a
watercourse;
[2] Seventy-five feet from the outer edge of a wetland.
(c) Principal structures and areas of impervious coverage, unless
permitted in § 170-86C(2), shall be set back from the outer
edge of the riparian buffer a minimum of 25 feet.
(d) It shall be lawful, but not required, to supplement the riparian
buffer with planting of native vegetation. Native plants can
include herbaceous cover, ferns, shrubs and trees. Native
vegetation [as defined in The Plants of Pennsylvania: An
Illustrated Manual, (Ann Fowler Rhoads and Timothy A. Block,
June 2000, or current version thereof) and The Trees of
Pennsylvania: A Complete Reference Guide (Ann Fowler
Rhoads and Timothy A. Block, May 2004, or current version
thereof)] must be used in such efforts. Any supplemental
plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth
and maintenance.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:510
(2) Permitted uses or activities:
(a) Roads, bridges, trails, storm drainage, stormwater
management facilities and utilities are permitted within the
buffer, provided that an alternative analysis has clearly
demonstrated that no other feasible alternative exists and that
minimal disturbance will take place.
(b) Stream restoration projects and activities approved by the
Borough.
(c) Horticulture practices used to maintain the health of
vegetation in the riparian buffer.
(d) Removal of nonnative vegetation or trees in danger of falling,
causing damage to dwellings or other structures, or the
blockage of a watercourse.
(e) Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter with best management practices.
(3) Prohibited uses or activities:
(a) All structures.
(b) Impervious coverage unless permitted in § 170-86C(2).
(c) Creation of new lawn areas.
(d) Lawn care service.
(e) Planting of nonnative vegetation.
(f) Removal, burning or mowing of native vegetation.
(g) Soil disturbance, inclusive of grading, stripping of topsoil,
plowing, cultivating or other practices.
(h) Septic systems.
(i) The production, storage or use of a substance or material,
underground or aboveground, that is buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality, or human,
animal, plant, fish or aquatic life.
(j) The production, storage or use of explosives.
(k) The storage or disposal of materials used for snow and ice
control, including sand, salt and other deicing chemicals.
(l) Sanitary landfills, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and outdoor
storage of vehicles and/or materials.
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:511
(m) The storage or disposal of any soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel,
rock, or other mineral substance, refuse, trash, rubbish,
debris, or dredged/excavated spoil.
(n) Draining, excavating, or dredging, or removal or relocation of
loam, peat, sand, gravel, soil, rock, or other mineral substance,
except as accessory to work permitted as of right or by special
permit.
(o) Manure storage facilities and manure stockpiles.
(p) The maintenance, housing or grazing of animals.
(4) Boundary determination. The developer, applicant, property owner
or designated representative shall be responsible for the initial
width determination of the riparian corridor and identifying this
area on any plan that is submitted to the municipality for
subdivision, land development, or other improvements that require
plan submissions or permits. This determination shall be subject to
review by the Zoning Officer.
(5) Variances. Applications filed with the ZHB shall contain the basis
for the appeal of the Zoning Officer or Engineer's decision and a
description of the relief requested. Plans submitted shall be
prepared by a licensed professional acceptable to the ZHB and
shall include the following:
(a) Location of streams, ponds or other water resources on the
property to be developed;
(b) Species, location and size of trees within the riparian buffer
setback;
(c) Location of any proposed building or structure; and
(d) Any other information deemed relevant by the ZHB.
(6) In addition to these standards and criteria, the following shall be
considered by the ZHB in rendering affirmative decisions where
applicable:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) Whether strict application of this subsection would deny the
applicant reasonable use of the property, or whether the article
would have severe impact and would render the property
unusable or unsuitable for development.
(c) Whether plan modifications or conditions of approval can
achieve conservation objectives of this subsection.
(d) That the relief granted is the minimum necessary and does not
conflict with any municipal, state or federal regulations.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:512
D. Groundwater aquifers and recharge areas.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
GROUNDWATER — Replenished or recharged by the rain or snow
that falls on the land.
GROUNDWATER AQUIFERS — Permeable saturated underground
formations of rock, sand or gravel.
RECHARGE AREAS — Land surface areas through which
groundwater enters the earth.
(2) Special requirements for groundwater protection. Any proposed
land use which may directly, by means of effluent discharge into the
ground, or indirectly through the leaching of stored materials,
result in the pollution of the groundwater shall be prohibited in the
aquifer outcrops and/or recharge areas. The determination of such
hazards shall be made by the appropriate state agency and/or a
qualified sanitary engineer recognized by the Board.
E. River, streams, ponds and lakes.
(1) Rivers, streams, lakes and ponds shall be left as permanent open
space. No development, filling, piping or diverting shall be
permitted except for required roads. Roads, where necessary, shall
be designed to minimize disruption. This regulation also applies to
wetlands.
(2) All developments shall protect rivers, streams, lakes and ponds
from sedimentation and shall control erosion in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Stream Law Act and PA DEP implementing
regulations.
(3) No alteration of watercourses, whether by excavation, filling,
grading, clearing, draining or otherwise, shall be made that affects
the water levels or flow of such watercourses without careful
review and study of the effect of such alteration and any related
facilities on water recharge areas, water table levels, water
pollution, aquatic animal and plant life, temperature change,
drainage, flooding, runoff and erosion. Review and approval of such
alteration shall be made by the Board in consultation with the
County Conservation District and PA DEP.
(4) All development proposed within 100 feet of the normal
streambank of river or stream within the Borough or within 100
feet of any pond, reservoir or other water body in excess of 1/4 acre
of water surface area shall be subject to special exception review
by the Board.
F. Steep slopes.
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:513
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the
reasonable use of steep slopes while ensuring development will not
induce soil erosion, require excessive grading, or increase slope
instability, and shall be in conformance with the following
objectives:
(a) Guard against property damage and personal injury, and
minimize the potential for erosion, slope failure, stream
siltation, increased runoff, flooding and contamination of
surface waters caused by the adverse effects of site
preparation and construction on steep slopes.
(b) Permit land uses by right that are compatible with protection
of steep slope areas, and encourage the use of steep slope
areas for open space and conservation uses.
(c) Require development to avoid steep slope areas wherever
possible, and require all land use, clearing, grading, and
construction to satisfy development standards.
(d) Regulate expansion of land use or development that existed on
steep slope areas prior to enactment of these requirements.
(e) Protect adjoining properties from harmful consequences of
development permitted under these requirements.
(2) Identification and establishment of steep slopes.
(a) Steep slopes are defined as those areas having slopes of 15%
or greater.
(b) The boundaries of steep slopes may be supplemented or
modified by examination of one or more of the following
sources by the Borough whenever a subdivision or land
development plan is submitted for review:
[1] Soil Survey of Lehigh/Northampton Counties,
Pennsylvania, USDA Soil Conservation Service.
[2] Contour maps prepared from aerial photography.
[3] On-site survey prepared by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor.
(c) The Borough Engineer shall decide whether or not steep slopes
have been shown accurately on the applicant's plans. Based on
the Borough Engineer's advice, Wilson Borough may require
applicants to revise the boundaries shown on the plans.
(d) The burden of proving the correct boundary shall be on the
applicant, supported by engineering and/or surveying data or
mapping, testimony of a soil scientist, or other acceptable
evidence.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:514
(3) General provisions.
(a) These regulations apply to lots where the proposed land
disturbing activity is greater than 5,000 square feet.
(b) All uses, activities and development occurring within any steep
slope area shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with
the provisions of this subsection, with all federal and state
laws, and with all other applicable Borough codes and
ordinances.
(c) No building lot shall be created unless it contains at least 5,000
square feet of area with slopes less than 25%. If it is infeasible
to provide this area in accordance with the setbacks required
by the underlying district, the lot area shall be increased as
necessary to provide a minimum area equal to 5,000 square
feet of area with slopes less than 25%.
(d) Finished slopes of all cuts and fills shall not exceed 33%, unless
the applicant can demonstrate that steeper slopes can be
stabilized and maintained adequately to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
(e) All cuts shall be supported by retaining walls or other
appropriate retaining structures when, depending upon the
nature of the soil characteristics, such structures are approved
by the Municipal Engineer in order to prevent erosion.
(f) Any fill placed on the lot shall be properly stabilized and, when
found necessary depending upon existing slopes and soil types,
supported by retaining walls or other appropriate structures as
approved by the Borough Engineer.
(g) No retaining wall shall exceed the height prescribed in this
chapter, and there shall be at least 10 feet between stepped
retaining walls. All retaining walls require a certification by a
professional engineer that the wall was constructed in
accordance with approved plans and applicable building codes.
(h) Any disturbance of steep slopes shall be completed within one
construction season, and disturbed areas shall not be left bare
and exposed during the winter and spring thaw periods.
Permanent vegetative cover shall be planted within three days
after completion of grading.
(i) No trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of eight inches
or more shall be removed from steep slope areas unless in
accord with § 170-83A(1) (regulating forestry).
(j) The alignment of roads and driveways shall follow the natural
topography, minimize regrading and comply with design
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:515
standards for maximum grades set forth in the Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(k) The maximum grade of a road or driveway shall not exceed
10%.
(l) The degree of steep slope protection sought by the provisions
of this subsection is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This subsection does not imply that steep slope
areas less than 15% or permitted uses within the zoning
district will be free from erosion or slope instability. This
subsection shall not create liability on the part of Wilson
Borough or any officer or employee thereof for any damages
that result from reliance on this section or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(4) Permitted uses and development on slopes of 15% but less than
25%. Open space and conservation uses are permitted by right on
steep slopes, provided that they shall not include any structures,
roads, driveways, parking areas, construction, or other
development, or grading, or clearing of vegetation:
(a) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum, and passive
park and recreation areas.
(b) Forestry and reforestation in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices, and as
permitted by municipal and state regulations.
(c) Pasture and grazing land in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(d) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(e) Cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(f) Front, side, or rear yards, and required lot area for any
underlying zoning district, subject to the requirements of
§ 170-86F(3), General provisions, herein; and provided such
yards shall not be used for any use prohibited under
§ 170-86F(5), herein.
(g) Nonstructural accessory uses necessary to the operation and
maintenance of the above permitted uses.
(5) Prohibited uses and development on slopes of 15% but less than
25%. The following uses are specifically prohibited on slopes of
15% but less than 25%:
(a) Removal of topsoil except when related to an approved
conditional use.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:516
(b) Solid waste disposal, recycling uses, junkyards, or other
outdoor storage uses.
(6) Conditional uses and development on slopes of 15% but less than
25%.
(a) The following uses and activities may be permitted by
conditional use, provided that they are in compliance with the
provisions of the zoning district and are not prohibited by any
other ordinance:
[1] Structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, construction
or other development.
[2] Clearing of vegetation or grading, including the addition of
fill.
[3] Sealed public water supply wells with approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
[4] Sanitary or storm sewers and stormwater detention basins
with the approval of the Borough Engineer and the
Department of Environmental Protection.
[5] On-lot sewage disposal systems, when approved by the
Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
[6] Utility transmission lines and aboveground utility line
structures, unless upon petition of a public utility
corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the lines or structures in question is
reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public.
[7] Extractive uses in accordance with recognized
conservation practices and regulations of the state
Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Applications for conditional uses shall provide the following
information and documentation:
[1] A plan by a registered professional engineer or surveyor
which accurately locates the proposed use with respect to
the steep slope boundaries, with all pertinent information
describing the proposal, and a topographical survey with
contour elevations at no greater than two-foot intervals,
where feasible.
[2] A plan of proposed development or use of the site,
conforming to the preliminary plan requirements of
Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development, with
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:517
contours shown at two-foot intervals, where feasible,
throughout the steep slope areas proposed for
development or use. Contours shall be accurately drawn
from on-site survey or aerial photographic sources.
[3] Proposed modifications to the existing topography and
vegetative cover, as well as the means of accommodating
stormwater runoff.
[4] Specifications for building construction and materials,
including filling, grading, storage of materials, and water
supply and sewerage facilities.
[5] Documentation of any additional engineering and/or
conservation techniques designed to alleviate
environmental problems that may be created by the
proposed activities, in compliance with municipal
sedimentation and erosion control regulations.
[6] Written confirmation from the Wilson Borough Fire
Department that emergency access is satisfactory to
provide adequate fire protection.
(7) Permitted uses and development on slopes of 25% or more. Open
space and conservation uses are permitted by right on slopes of
25% or more, provided that they shall not include any structures,
roads, driveways, parking areas, construction, or other
development, or grading, or clearing of vegetation:
(a) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum, and passive
park and recreation areas.
(b) Forestry and reforestation in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices, and as
permitted by municipal and state regulations.
(c) Pasture and grazing land in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(d) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(e) Cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(f) Front, side, or rear yards, and required lot area for any
underlying zoning district, subject to the requirements of
§ 170-86F(3), General provisions, herein; and provided such
yards shall not be used for any use prohibited under
§ 170-86F(8), herein.
(g) Nonstructural accessory uses necessary to the operation and
maintenance of the above permitted uses.
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:518
(8) Prohibited uses on slopes of 25% or more. The following uses are
specifically prohibited on slopes of 25% or more:
(a) Removal of topsoil.
(b) Solid waste disposal, recycling uses, junkyards, or other
outdoor storage uses.
(c) Structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, construction or
other development.
(d) Clearing of vegetation or grading, including the addition of fill.
(e) Sealed public water supply wells.
(f) Sanitary or storm sewers and stormwater detention basins.
(g) On-lot sewage disposal systems.
(h) Utility transmission lines and above ground utility line
structures.
(i) Extractive uses.
(9) Conditional use standards and criteria. In considering a conditional
use application, the Borough Council shall consider the following:
(a) Relationship of the proposed use to the objectives set forth in
§ 170-86F(1).
(b) Adverse effects on abutting properties.
(c) The need for a woodland management plan on wooded steep
slope areas.
(d) Proposed roads, driveways and parking areas are designed so
that land clearing and/or grading will not cause accelerated
erosion. Both vertical and horizontal alignment for such
facilities shall be so designed that hazardous conditions are not
created.
(e) Alternative placements on non-steep slope areas were
carefully evaluated for structures, including buildings,
retaining walls, swimming pools, roads, access driveways,
parking facilities and other development, and can be shown to
be inappropriate or infeasible to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
(f) Proposed on-lot sewage disposal facilities are properly
designed and constructed in conformity with applicable
regulations.
(g) Proposed nonagricultural displacement of soil is for purposes
consistent with the intent of this subsection and will be
executed in a manner that will not cause erosion or other
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-86
1:519
unstable conditions. The applicant shall provide an erosion and
sediment control plan and supporting evidence.
(h) Surface runoff of water will not create unstable conditions,
including erosion, and appropriate stormwater management
facilities will be constructed as necessary.
G. Carbonate areas.
(1) A recognized professional with competence in the field of geology
shall review aerial photographs, soils, geologic and other related
data available, as the data relates to the subject property. The
professional shall also conduct a site inspection of the property.
(2) Based on the information acquired from § 170-86G(1), the
professional shall prepare a map of the site showing all karst
features or feature indicators. The mapping shall indicate, but not
be limited to, the following features:
(a) Closed depressions.
(b) Open sinkholes.
(c) Seasonal high-water table indicators.
(d) Outcrops of bedrock.
(e) Surface drainage into ground.
(3) All buildings, structures, impervious surfaces and utilities shall be
so situated, designed and constructed as to minimize the risk of
structural damage from existing or future sinkholes.
(4) The Municipal Engineer shall report to the governing body the
capability of the site to support the proposed development in a
manner in which the risks attendant to development in carbonate
areas are either eliminated or minimized. Recommendations for
site development, including stormwater management, the layout of
utility lines, and building location may be included. Additional
studies or testing as deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer
in order to produce an adequate study given the scale of the
proposed development and the hazards revealed may be required
of the applicant.
(5) Compliance with the above-noted regulations represents no
warranty, finding, guarantee, or assurance that a sinkhole will not
occur on an approved property. The Borough, its agencies,
consultants and employees assume no liability for any financial or
other damages which may result from sinkhole activity.
H. Stormwater runoff control.
(1) Purpose. The purposes of stormwater runoff control are:
§ 170-86 WILSON CODE § 170-86
1:520
§ 170-87. Buffer yard requirements.
(a) To guide drainage and prevent increase in runoff on and off the
site.
(b) To prevent destruction and loss of soils on and off the site from
increased runoff.
(c) To prevent siltation of water bodies, watercourses and wet
areas on and off the site and subsequent harm to or loss of
aquatic plant and animal life.
(2) Special requirements for stormwater runoff control.
(a) The owner/applicant shall comply with any stormwater
management plan or ordinance which has been adopted by the
Borough or county which is applicable to the proposed
development.102
(b) All developments shall limit stormwater runoff so that no more
runoff is generated than that of the site in its current or natural
condition. Use of one or more of such techniques as retention
ponds, turfed swales, diversion ditches and energy dissipators
shall be considered.
(c) The Borough Engineer or Code Enforcement Officer shall
require the owner/applicant to provide a stormwater runoff
control plan where site conditions warrant the preparation of
such a plan. The plan shall be based on adequate topographic
surveys, soil investigations and runoff projections. To the
maximum extent possible, the following standards shall apply:
(d) The natural drainage patterns on and off site shall be used in
their present state to the degree possible and protected from
disturbance.
(e) Stormwater runoff shall be directed away from impervious
surfaces and toward absorbent ground area.
(f) The plan shall minimize blockage, collapse or washout, street
drainage or other hazards associated with drainage and spring
runoff conditions.
(g) Connection shall be made to existing stormwater runoff
drainage systems, where possible.
I. Other adverse conditions. Where other adverse environmental or
hazardous conditions exist, the Borough Planning Commission and
Zoning Hearing Board shall establish suitable requirements to ensure
the public health, safety or welfare.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Stormwater Management.
§ 170-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-87
1:521
A. Softening buffers. A "softening buffer" is a mixed perimeter landscape
planting intended to provide an informal separation between
neighboring developments. It is not intended to be an impenetrable
screen. Softening buffer yards shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) Refer to Table 1 for requirements in each zoning district or land
use.103
(2) Where a softening buffer is required as per Table 1, a minimum
twenty-foot wide softening buffer shall be required along rear and
side lot lines.
(3) The softening buffer area shall be used for no purpose other than
planting of trees, shrubs and lawn to meet planting requirements
and may include a wall or fence that meets the standards outlined
in this section. Any wall or fence shall be constructed in such a
manner that it will not conflict with sight lines or conflict with the
character of the abutting district. All softening buffer areas shall be
kept free of trash, yard waste, and any other debris.
(4) Existing vegetation. In cases where preserved natural features
existing on the site duplicate or essentially duplicate the planting
requirements of this chapter, these requirements may be waived or
amended by the Borough Council.
(5) Within the buffer area, no slopes shall be steeper than one foot in
height for each four feet in width 25%.
(6) A softening buffer is not required where a screen buffer is
provided.
(7) Location. Softening buffers, when required, shall be aligned
adjacent and parallel to property lines or right-of-way boundaries
but may be sited on any position of the property if permitted by the
Borough Council. Plant material used in the softening buffer shall
be located within 20 feet of the property line or right-of-way lines
and may be grouped informally.
(8) Quantity. Four shade trees and eight deciduous, evergreen or
semievergreen shrubs shall be included for each 100 feet of
property perimeter. Up to 50% of required shade trees may be
substituted with flowering trees, evergreen trees or shrubs at the
rate of two flowering trees, two evergreen trees or 10 shrubs for
every shade tree.
(9) A naturalistic planting design with plants arranged in groups or
clusters rather than symmetrically shall be encouraged. All
required plant materials shall be located within the buffer yard.
Refer to § 170-90F for a list of recommended plant material.
103. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-87 WILSON CODE § 170-87
1:522
(10) Not more than 20% of plants shall be evergreen.
(11) All plant material used shall meet minimum size and other
requirements as stated in § 170-90, Landscaping.
(12) Buffer areas may be included as part of required front, side or rear
yards. All buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all
debris and rubbish.
(13) All landscaping required by this chapter shall be perpetually
maintained by the property owner. Any landscaping needed to meet
a chapter requirement that dies, is removed, or is severely
damaged shall be replaced by the current property owner on a oneto-
one basis as soon as is practical considering growing seasons,
within a maximum of 150 days.
(14)No buffer plants or structures in excess of two feet in height shall
be erected in any sight triangle area.
B. Screen buffers. A "screen buffer" is a predominantly evergreen
perimeter landscape planting intended to provide a formal,
impenetrable visual screen. However, it is not intended to be a
monocultural planting. Screen buffers shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All truck loading, outside storage areas, mechanical equipment and
trash receptacles shall be screened from view from streets and
abutting residential areas.
(2) Screening shall consist of evergreen trees in double rows,
staggered five feet to 15 feet on center. Evergreen or deciduous
shrubs may be used to supplement the evergreen trees. Required
spacing depends on the type of trees used:
(a) Pine, spruce and fir: 15 feet on center.
(b) Arborvitae: five feet on center.
(c) American holly and juniper: 10 feet on center.
(d) Hemlock: 12 feet on center.
(3) Trees used for screen buffers shall be composed of 100% evergreen
varieties. Shrubs may be a combination of evergreen and deciduous
varieties. The required plant material shall be so arranged as to
provide immediate visual screen of 50% and at least eight feet in
height at the time of planting.
(4) Walls, fences and/or earth berms may be used in combination with
plant material subject to the approval of the Borough Council and
in conformance with § 170-91C, fence, hedge and wall regulations.
(5) All plant material used shall meet minimum size and other
requirements as stated in § 170-90, Landscaping.
§ 170-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-87
1:523
(6) Buffer areas may be included as part of required front, side or rear
yards. All buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all
debris and rubbish.
(7) All planting in the buffer area shall be installed and thereafter
maintained by the property owner.
(8) No buffer plants or structures in excess of two feet in height shall
be erected in any sight triangle area.
C. Walls or fences within buffer yards.
(1) Fences in residential districts shall be constructed of materials
which do not detract from the general neighborhood.
(2) Fences, hedges or walls which are located on property lines shall
not exceed six feet in height. Fences, hedges or walls which are set
back from property lines may be increased in height at a ratio of
one foot additional height for every two feet of additional setback.
In no case shall any fence, wall or hedge exceed 10 feet in height.
(3) Retaining walls which are used as landscaping features shall be
considered fences and shall be subject to the same height
limitations.
§ 170-87 WILSON CODE § 170-87
1:524
ARTICLE XV
General Regulations
§ 170-88. Lot area, lot width and height regulations.
In addition to complying with the provisions of the district in which a
use is permitted, each use shall comply with the following standards and
requirements where applicable. For certain specific uses or exceptional
situations, these basic regulations are supplemented by Article XIII and by
other provisions of this chapter.
A. Lot area and yard requirements. The lot or yard requirements for any
new building or use shall not include any part of a lot that is required by
any other building or use to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. No required lot area or yard shall include any property, the
ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter, if such property was part of the area required for
compliance with the dimensional requirements applicable to the lot
from which such transfer was made.
B. Minimum lot area. Where a minimum lot area is specified, no principal
building or use shall be erected or established on any lot of lesser size
than as specified within this chapter.
C. Minimum lot width.
(1) Where a minimum lot width is specified in the applicable district
regulations or other regulations of this chapter, no principal
building or use shall be erected or established on any part of a lot
which has a width less than is specified.
(2) The lot width for a single-family semidetached dwelling or end unit
of townhouses shall be measured from the side lot lines to the
center line of the wall in common with an adjoining dwelling.
D. Yard requirements. No portion of a building or structure shall be built
within the minimum depth of front, side, or rear yards as specified
within this chapter.
E. Maximum height of buildings. No building shall exceed the maximum
height of buildings specified in this chapter.
F. Permitted variations from required areas. The minimum lot, yard and
height requirements of Articles V through XII shall prevail in all cases,
except as follows:
(1) Existing nonconforming lots. In any district where a nonconforming
lot exists as a separate entity at the time of passage of this chapter
and where the owner of the nonconforming lot does not own an
adjoining lot, then the following development is permitted:
(a) Lots in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts.
§ 170-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-88
1:525
[1] If the lot is located in the R-1 or R-2 District, a singlefamily
dwelling, including any attached permitted
accessory use, may be constructed on it as a permitted use
subject to the following requirements:
[a] Minimum lot size: 3,500 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 35 feet.
[c] Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
[d] Minimum rear yard: 15 feet.
[e] Minimum side yards:
[i] One side yard: three feet.
[ii] Both side yards combined: 11 feet.
[f] Maximum building height for principal building: 2.5
stories or 35 feet.
[g] Maximum building coverage: 50%.
[2] If the lot has an existing single-family dwelling located on
it, then the dwelling may be enlarged to comply with, but
not exceed, the requirements listed above.
[3] Accessory structures located in the rear yard area which
are not attached to the principal structure may be built up
to eight feet from the rear lot line and up to two feet from
one side lot line, provided that such accessory structures
are not located closer than four feet to the other side lot
line and are not less than 10 feet from any principal
structure.
(b) Lots in nonresidential zoning districts (H-1, TC, C-1, C-2 and
I-1). If the existing nonconforming lot is located in any
remaining nonresidential zoning district (H-1, TC, C-1, C-2,
I-1), then a structure not exceeding two stories in height may
be constructed on it, for a use permitted in the district in which
it is located, provided that the off-street parking and loading
requirements of this chapter shall be complied with and that
the front, side and rear yards, as required by the district in
which the use is located, are not reduced by more than 1/3 of
said requirement and are compatible with the surrounding
area, as determined by the Board. Said use shall be considered
to be a special exception subject to the review and approval of
the Board.
(c) Changes to existing conforming uses. For changes to existing
conforming uses located on nonconforming lots, see § 170-93.
§ 170-88 WILSON CODE § 170-88
1:526
(d) Nonconforming uses. For requirements governing
nonconforming uses and structures, see § 170-92.
(2) Height limitations. District height limitations for church spires,
cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys,
smokestacks, antennas, farm structures, silos and flag poles may
extend to a maximum height of 150 feet. Required utility and radio
and television station transmitting or receiving towers which are
permitted under the requirements of this chapter may exceed the
district height limitations by 35 feet. Although exempted from
structural height limitations, these structures should not impair
solar access of buildings or solar collector locations.
(3) Front yard exception. When an unimproved lot is situated between
two improved lots, each having a principal building within 25 feet
of the side lot line of the unimproved lot, and where the lot is not
located on a major state or federal highway, then the required front
yard may be reduced to a depth equal to that of the greater front
yard of the two adjoining lots; provided, however, that it may not be
reduced to below 15 feet in Residential Districts R-1 and R-2.
(4) Projections into yards. Projections into required yards may be
permitted as follows, except that no such projection shall be
located closer than three feet to any side lot line or 10 feet to any
rear lot line or 15 feet to any front lot line, except as may be
provided for in § 170-92 for existing nonconforming lots:
(a) Fire escapes, uncovered stairs and landings, canopies, eaves or
other architectural features not required for structural support
may project into the required side, front or rear yard not more
than a total of three feet.
(b) Accessory structures may project into yards as set forth in
§ 170-88F.
(c) Patios may be located in the required yard area, not closer than
the following to any property line, except that patios
constructed on existing nonconforming lots may line up with
and be as wide as the principal structure on the lot:
[1] Side and rear property lines: five feet.
[2] Front property line: 10 feet.
(5) Changes to conforming uses and buildings. Any conforming use or
building may be repaired, maintained, restored or rebuilt up to the
same dimensions existing at the time of the effective date of
adoption of this chapter.
(6) Any enlargement of an existing conforming use or structure on the
same lot must comply in all respects with the regulations of this
chapter.
§ 170-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-88
1:527
§ 170-89. Unique lots and building locations.
G. Supplementary regulations. Supplementary regulations governing
special conditions, uses or requirements are set forth in Article XIII.
A. Two or more buildings on a lot. Two or more principal buildings located
on a parcel in single ownership shall conform to all the requirements of
this chapter which would normally apply to each building if each were
on a separate lot.
B. Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends
from one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street or alley, the
Borough Council shall decide which street will be considered as the
front street. No principal structure shall be erected on any portion of a
lot which does not have primary access from an improved public street,
except as specified in § 170-89A and C.
C. Lots fronting on an alley. Individual lots existing at the effective date of
this chapter fronting on an alley shall comply with all the requirements
of this chapter and the district in which said lots are located, except
that no principal structure shall derive its primary or only access from
an alley.
D. Side yard of a corner lot. The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a
street shall be equal to the required front yard for that street, except as
may be limited by § 170-89E.
E. Obstruction to vision. No obstruction to vision, as defined herein, shall
be planted, constructed or maintained in the vicinity of any street
intersection or driveway, entrance or on a corner lot which creates
potential vehicular safety hazards.
(1) In all districts, no structure, fence, planting or other obstruction
shall be maintained between a horizontal plane two feet above curb
level and a horizontal plane seven feet above curb level so as to
interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within that part of
the required front or side yard which is within a horizontal clearsight
triangle bounded by the two street lines (rights-of-way) and a
straight line drawn between points on each such line 25 feet from
the intersection of said lines or extension thereof. When one or both
streets which form the intersection are classified as collector or
arterial highways, the clear-sight triangle bounded by the two
street lines and a straight line drawn between points on such line
shall be 50 feet from the intersection of said lines or extension
thereof.
§ 170-88 WILSON CODE § 170-89
1:528
§ 170-90. Landscaping.
(2) At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street
or road, a clear-sight triangle of 10 feet measured from the point of
intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway shall
be maintained within which vegetation and other visual
obstructions shall be limited to a height of not more than two feet
above the street grade.
A. General requirements.
(1) Where, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the literal
application of these standards in certain cases would work undue
hardship or be plainly unreasonable, the Borough Engineer may
recommend to the Borough Council such reasonable exceptions as
would not be contrary to the public interest. The Borough Council
may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization
of property while securing substantial conformance with the
objectives of the regulations.
(2) The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. The Borough Council reserves the right, in any case,
to request that the requirements listed herein exceed these
standards if conditions so warrant.
(3) Nonconforming uses. Whenever there is a nonconforming use, the
nonconforming use must comply with the most restrictive
landscape requirements for either the land use or the zoning
district in which it is located or the zoning district which would
normally permit the nonconforming use.
B. Landscape plan requirements. Where landscaping is required by this
chapter, the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan, in addition to a
site plan.
§ 170-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-90
1:529
C. Buffer yards. Landscaping within required Buffer Yards shall meet the
requirements outlined in § 170-87 as well as all other applicable
requirements within this section.
D. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) A minimum of one deciduous shade tree shall be required for every
10 off-street parking spaces.
(2) Where a parking lot is to include 30 or more parking spaces, a
maximum of 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a row with a
landscape island of 15 feet in width. Where required, this island
shall contain not less than 290 square feet of planting area.
(3) The use of salt tolerant species is encouraged.
(4) When parking areas are located within 100 feet of a public street,
the perimeter of the parking area that is adjacent to the public
street shall be softened by a continuous low hedge around the
outside perimeter. Required softening or screening buffer shrubs
may be used to meet this requirement, so long as the hedge is to be
located within the area where the buffer yard is required.
E. Existing vegetation. In cases where preserved natural features existing
on the site duplicate or essentially duplicate the planting requirements
of this chapter, these requirements may be waived or amended by the
Borough Council.
F. Recommended plant list. The following is the recommended list of
trees, shrubs and ground cover for use in Wilson Borough. However, the
Borough Council may permit other planting types if they are hardy to
the area, not subject to blight or disease and are of the same general
character and growth habit as those listed below. The following sizes
listed for shade trees, evergreen trees, ornamental trees, deciduous
shrubs, evergreen shrubs and ground cover are the minimum
acceptable sizes at the time of installation.
(1) Shade trees: (2 1/2 to 3 inches caliper minimum) 14 to 18 feet high,
eight feet minimum spread, clear trunk to seven feet zero inches
above the ground and full branching structure.
Acer rubrum — Red Maple***
Acer saccharum — Sugar Maple***
Fagus grandifolia — American Beech**
Fagus sylvatica — European Beech**
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis — Thornless Honey Locust***
Liquidambar styraciflua — Sweet Gum*
Liriodendron tulipifera — Tulip Poplar**
Nyssa sylvatica — Blackgum**
§ 170-90 WILSON CODE § 170-90
1:530
Platanus acerifolia — London Plane Tree
Platanus occidentalis — American Planetree***
Quercus alba — White Oak
Quercus borealis — Northern Red Oak
Quercus coccinea — Scarlet Oak**
Quercus palustris — Pin Oak**
Quercus phellos — Willow Oak
Quercus velutina — Black Oak
Tilia tomentosa — Silver Linden
Tilia cordata — Littleleaf Linden
NOTES:
* Seedless varieties only
** Not to be used as a street tree; shade tree only.
*** Shallow rooting or large growing tree — to be located a
minimum of six feet from any public sidewalk.
(2) Evergreen trees: minimum eight feet high, four feet minimum
spread (NOTE: Spread may be less than four feet for upright or
columnar varieties.) single leader, symmetrically branching to the
ground.
Abies balsamea — Balsam Fir
Abies concolor — White Fir
Ilex opaca — American Holly
Juniperus virginiana — Eastern Redcedar
Picea abies — Norway Spruce
Picea glauca — White Spruce
Picea pungens — Colorado Spruce
Pinus rigida — Pitch Pine
Pinus strobus — White Pine
Pinus virginiana — Virginia Scrub Pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii — Douglas Fir
Thuja occidentalis — Eastern Arborvitae, including varieties
Green Giant, Elegantissima, and Nigra
Tsuga Canadensis — Canadian Hemlock
(3) Ornamental/flowering trees: minimum eight feet high, five feet
minimum spread, symmetrically branched to within four feet from
the ground.
§ 170-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-90
1:531
Acer pennsylvanicum — Striped Maple
Amelanchier canadensis — Shadblow Serviceberry
Asimina triloba — Common Pawpaw
Betula lenta — Sweet Birch
Betula nigra — River Birch
Betula papyrifera — Paper Birch
Carpinus caroliniana — American Hornbeam
Cercis canadensis — Eastern Redbud
Chionanthus virginicus — Fringetree
Cornus amomum — Silky Dogwood
Cornus florida — Flowering Dogwood
Crataegus crus-galli — Cockspur Hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum — Washington Hawthorn
Diospyros virginiana — Common Persimmon
Magnolia acuminata — Cucumber tree Magnolia
Magnolia virginiana — Sweet bay Magnolia
Mauls sp. — Crabapple (Native species only, or varieties
Snowdrift and Zumai)
Oxydendrum arboretum — Sourwood
Prunus pennsylvanica — Pin Cherry
Prunus serotina — Black Cherry
Prunus subhirtella pendula — Autumnalis, Pendula, Rosy Cloud,
Stellata, and Whitcomb
Prunus virginiana — Common Chokecherry
Robinia pseudoacacia var. inermis — Thornless Black Locust
Sassafras albidium — Common Sassafras
Taxodium distichum — Baldcypress
(4) Deciduous shrubs: 30 inch minimum height, twenty-four inch
minimum spread and symmetrically branched to the ground.
Aesculus parviflora — Bottlebrush Buckeye
Aronia arbutifolia — Red Chokeberry
Aronia melanocarpa — Black Chokeberry
Azalea sp. — Azalea, native species only
Calycanthus floridus — Common Sweetshrub
Ceanothus americanus — New Jersey Tea
Cephalanthus occidentalis — Buttonbush
Clethra alnifolia — Summersweet Clethra
§ 170-90 WILSON CODE § 170-90
1:532
Cornus sericea — Red-osier Dogwood
Corylus americana — American Filbert
Euonymus americana — Strawberrybush
Hamamelis vernalis — Vernal Witch Hazel
Hamamelis virginiana — Common Witch Hazel
Hydrangea quercifolia — Oakleaf Hydrangea
Ilex verticillata — Winterberry
Itea virginica — Virginia Sweetspire
Leucothoe racemosa — Sweetbells Leucothoe
Lindera benzoin — Spicebush
Myrica pensylvanica — Northern Bayberry
Spiraea Anthony Waterer and Van Houtei
Staphylea trifolia — American Bladdernut
Symphoricarpos albus — Snowberry
Vaccinium angustifolium — Lowbush Blueberry
Vaccinium corymbosum — Highbush Blueberry
Viburnum acerfolium — Mapleleaf Viburnum
Viburnum carlesii — Koreanspice Viburnum
Viburnum cassinoides — Witherod Viburnum
Viburnum dentatum — Arrowwood Viburnum
Viburnum lantana — Wayfaring Tree Viburnum
Viburnum lentago — Nannyberry
Viburnum prunifolium — Blackhaw Viburnum
Viburnum tribolum — American Cranberrybush Viburnum
(5) Evergreen shrubs: twenty-four-inch minimum height, eighteen-inch
minimum spread and symmetrically branched to the ground.
Azalea sp. — Native species only
Ilex glabra — Inkberry Holly
Juniperus communis — Common Juniper
Kalmia latifolia — Mountain Laurel (including cultivars)
Rhododendron catawbiense — Catawba rhododendron
Rhododendron maximum — Rosebay Rhododendron
Taxus canadensis — Canadian Yew
NOTE: Height and spread requirements may be reversed for
spreading varieties of evergreen shrubs.
(6) Ground cover plants:
§ 170-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-90
1:533
§ 170-91. Fencing and walls.
(a) Heavily rooted plans provided in four-inch pots and spaced a
maximum of 18 inches on center or as noted below:
Hemerocallis hybrids — Daylillies
Liriope spicata — Lily turf (12 inches o.c. maximum)
Liriope muscari — Liriope (12 inches o.c. maximum)
Pachysandra procumbens — Allegheny Pachysandra
(b) Heavily rooted woody plants with minimum fifteen-inch spread
provided in two-gallon containers and planted a maximum of
36 inches on center:
Juniperus horizontalis — Creeping Juniper
Xanthorhiza simplicissima — Yellowroot
(c) Basin floor coverings:
Grass: PennDOT Formula "L" modified seed or other
naturalized mix
Wildflower Seed — Native species preferred
Wildflower Sod — Native species preferred
A. General requirements.
(1) Any person, corporation, firm or association intending to erect a
fence shall, before work is commenced, make application to the
Code Enforcement/Zoning Officer as required below and by this
chapter, and no work on such a fence shall be commenced before
receipt of a permit from the Code Enforcement/Zoning Officer.
(2) Fences may be either a natural living fence or a fabricated
materials fence, as defined in Article III.
(3) Well-maintained and safe trees, shrubs or hedges and other
appropriate plant material which do not constitute a natural living
fence, as defined herein, and which are designed to enhance the
livability and attractiveness of any lot may be located in any yard or
court, provided that they do not encroach on adjoining properties
or uses.
B. Location of fences. Fences may be located within any front, rear or side
yard.
(1) All fences shall be located completely on the owner's property and
shall not overlap property lines. Fence designs and locations must
permit the fence to be maintained completely from the owner's side
of the property.
§ 170-90 WILSON CODE § 170-91
1:534
(2) Location of property lines will be the responsibility of the applicant
to verify, through a surveyor's account, the precise location of the
lines.
C. Height of fences. The height of all fences shall be as set forth in the
table below.
D. Obstruction to vision. No fence shall create an obstruction to vision, as
defined in Article III and § 170-89E.
E. Removal of unsafe or nuisance fences. Any fence which obstructs
vision, as defined herein, or which impedes vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or which causes a fire hazard, restricts safe access, unduly
restricts light or air and/or affects public or traffic safety or which
creates a nuisance, as defined under § 170-92E(1), shall be removed.
The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to direct the removal of such
unsafe or nuisance fences or to direct the trimming or modification of
any natural living fence or of any other vegetation so as to eliminate the
unsafe or nuisance conditions.
Maximum Height
(feet)a
Located on Parcels Used
Predominantly for:
Type of Fence and Location
Residential or
Open Space Use
Nonresidential
Uses
Fabricated materials fence —
located in:
Front yard 4 6
Side yard 6 6
Rear yard 6 6
Natural living fence — located
in:
Front yard 6 8
Side yard 6 8
Rear yard 10 12
§ 170-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-91
1:535
NOTES:
(a) Special situations requiring security, complete prevention of
access or the provision of buffers to protect adjoining uses may
have a higher fence if approved by the Borough Council. The
Council shall determine that such additional height is necessary
to meet these objectives and also to protect the public safety
and general welfare and shall not adversely affect adjoining
properties. In such cases, the Council may require that the fence
be set back from the property line to prevent adverse effects on
adjoining properties.
F. Swimming pool fences. Private outdoor swimming pools shall be
protected with a fence as set forth in the UCC.
G. Fence materials and construction.
(1) All fences shall be designed and constructed to serve as permanent
fences which are solidly constructed and which are capable of
resisting the effects of weather and which are permanently affixed
in place, except as provided below.
(2) The following fences or fencing materials are specifically
prohibited:
(a) Barbed wire fence unless specifically reviewed and approved
by the Borough Council and where the Council determines
such fences are safe and substantially free from accident
exposure.
(b) Picket or pointed fences which are less than 36 inches in
height.
(c) Canvas fences.
(d) Cloth fences.
(e) Electrically charged fences.
(f) Poultry fences.
(g) Temporary fences, such as snow fences and expandable fences
and collapsible fences, except when needed to meet
emergency conditions or during construction of a building.
(3) All chain link fences erected shall be erected with the closed loop at
the top of the fence.
(4) All entrances or gates shall open into the property.
(5) All fences or walls must be erected so as not to encroach upon a
public right-of-way or easement.
§ 170-91 WILSON CODE § 170-91
1:536
§ 170-92. Nonconforming uses and structures.
Any legal nonconforming use or structure may be continued, repaired,
maintained and improved except as provided below. An application for such
changes shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
(6) If the fence is wood cover on wood frame, the framework must face
onto the interior of the lot, unless the fence is designed to provide
equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
(7) If the fence is open metal mesh, supported by posts and frames of
either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the interior of
the mesh.
(8) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished surface must be
provided on the exterior side.
H. Application for fence. All applicants for permits to construct a fence
shall make application for a permit for a permitted use as required
under Article II and shall include with said application a plan or sketch
showing the proposed location of the fence and the materials to be
used, including sufficient information to determine conformance with
the requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall submit a narrative
statement and location plan explaining the need and reason for the
proposed fence.
A. Enlargement. Such nonconforming use or structure may not be
enlarged more than 40% of the existing floor or ground area except for
junkyards which may not be enlarged. Such enlargement shall not
exceed the maximum height or maximum building coverage
requirements set forth for the district in which such nonconforming use
is located and shall be accompanied with the required off-street parking
spaces to serve the expansion as set forth in Article XVI.
B. Restoration. If a nonconforming structure or any structure containing a
nonconforming use is wholly or partially destroyed by fire, explosion,
flood or other phenomenon, legally condemned or needing to be
replaced or reconstructed for any reason, then a permit for its
restoration may be obtained if such application is filed within 12
months of the initial damage or destruction and restoration is
completed within 24 months of the issuance of the permit.
C. Discontinuance. No such use or structure may be reestablished after it
has been discontinued or vacated for a period of 12 months. Also, a
nonconforming use or structure when razed or removed from the
premises shall not be relocated except in conformity with the
regulations of the district to which it is moved.
D. Change of use. A change in use (as defined in Article III of this chapter)
includes any change among the specific uses identified under each
category in the Table of Use Regulations. Once changed to a
conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a
§ 170-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-92
1:537
§ 170-93. Temporary uses.
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use only under all of the following conditions:
(1) Such change shall be permitted only as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot be
reasonably be changed to a conforming use.
(3) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming
use with respect to:
(a) Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger
car, and pedestrian traffic.
(b) Noise, smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare
or vibration.
(c) Storage and waste disposal.
(d) Appearance.
E. Termination. Certain types of nonconforming uses or structures which
present a special nuisance or hazardous condition shall be terminated
as follows:
(1) General nuisances. Upon a complaint registered by the Zoning
Officer from 50% of the property owners within 200 feet of a
nonconforming use which is considered to be a general nuisance or
a hazard to the health, safety, welfare and morals of persons
residing or working in or using the area, the Council shall hold a
hearing and make a finding with respect to the nuisance or
hazardous condition which exists and shall determine the necessity
of terminating such nonconforming use. Such uses shall be
terminated within such reasonable time as shall be determined by
the Council after consideration of the time required for the
reasonable amortization of the capital investment in such uses or
as may be provided for by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) Advertising signs. All nonconforming advertising signs shall be
terminated within two years of the adoption of this chapter.
F. Off-street parking. Sufficient off-street parking spaces shall be
provided, as set forth in Article XVI, to serve any proposed expansion
permitted by § 170-93A.
A. Special events or activities. Any applicant may submit a zoning
application for the purposes of requesting permission to undertake or
conduct a special event, activity or use (hereinafter referred to as a
§ 170-92 WILSON CODE § 170-93
1:538
"temporary use") that shall be temporary in nature. Such a temporary
use shall exist for a period of time not to exceed one year. Said
application shall be submitted in accordance with the special exception
use procedure established in § 170-15, and the temporary use shall
be clearly related to the requirements for permitted uses set forth in
this chapter. Any approval of such a temporary use shall be subject to
the applicable safeguards and procedures established in §§ 170-84 and
170-85. Said application shall clearly set forth the following:
(1) The exact purpose, nature and location of the proposed temporary
use, including all private and public lands and rights-of-way
involved.
(2) The relationship of the temporary use to other uses permitted in
the zoning district.
(3) The number of employees, spectators, participants or other
persons or agencies, equipment or other paraphernalia to be
involved or used in such temporary use.
(4) Evidence that the Borough will be held harmless from any
unforeseen adverse consequences resulting from such temporary
use and evidence of the availability of sufficient insurance
coverage.
(5) An evaluation of the traffic impact of said use based on the
requirements of § 170-85.
(6) The length of time for which a temporary use permit is requested.
(7) Any special requirements, hardships or conditions to be imposed on
the Borough or its residents or to other uses which may be affected
by the temporary use.
B. Excavations and fill material.
(1) Operations subject to state regulation.
(a) All quarry or other noncoal mining operations are considered
temporary uses under this chapter as required by § 170-93
above. Such uses which are subject to state law or to
regulations of the PA DEP shall require necessary permit(s)
from the appropriate state agency. Particular reference is
made to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Noncoal Surface
Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act No. 1984-219, as it
may be amended,104 and to other requirements relating to the
operation of sanitary landfill areas and to preservation of water
quality in the commonwealth as administered by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA
DEP).
104. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
§ 170-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-93
1:539
(b) All excavations or placement of fill in wetland areas shall be
subject to the requirements of the PA DEP and the Army Corps
of Engineers.
(c) Such operations may take place in the Borough only in those
areas where permitted by this chapter.
(d) All applicants for such operations shall submit a copy of any
request for a state permit to the Zoning Officer, together with
any plans required by the state for the reclamation of such
areas. The Zoning Officer shall also require a zoning permit
application form to be submitted, plus any other information
required to properly evaluate the application. Approval of any
zoning permit for an operation permitted in the Borough shall
be conditioned upon the receipt by the operator of any permit
required from the state.
(e) The Borough may present information to or request a public
hearing of PA DEP to be held on such applications for a permit
which are submitted to the state.
(2) Other excavations.
(a) Any other excavations, regrading of the natural terrain where
ground levels are affected by more than one foot, the removal
of topsoil or other earth products, the placement of fill or the
alteration of drainage patterns may be permitted by the Zoning
Hearing Board only as a temporary use as required in § 170-93
above. Such excavations must be adequately drained to
prevent the formation of pools of water. The Zoning Hearing
Board may require that such an excavation be enclosed by a
fence if it is deemed to be a menace to the public health, safety
and welfare.
(b) Unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
open excavations shall not be maintained, except those
excavations made for the erection of a building or structure for
which a permit has been issued.
(c) The dumping of earth, gravel, rock or other materials not
subject to decay, noxious or offensive odors may be permitted
in any zone or any vacant land, provided that the existing
grade shall not be raised more than one foot above the grade of
the nearest road, that hazardous or nuisance conditions are
not created and that an unsightly appearance or unstable
slopes are not created. Industrial or other operations requiring
the dumping of such materials above the grade of the nearest
road may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception use if the Zoning Hearing Board determines
that such dumping is not a menace to the public health, safety
or welfare or a nuisance to nearby residential areas.
§ 170-93 WILSON CODE § 170-93
1:540
§ 170-94. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are not included as permitted, special exception, or
conditional use in any zoning district and are therefore prohibited in any
district in the Borough:
(d) Operations affecting drainage patterns shall be studied by the
Borough and appropriate recommendations or conditions
developed for consideration by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Necessary reviews from other affected agencies such as the
Northampton County Conservation District shall also be
secured prior to the issuance of any permit.
A. Illegal uses which violate federal, state or local laws.
B. Uses which create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive, radioactivity, environmental or other
hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air, solid
waste or water pollution; electrical, glare, traffic congestion or other
disturbances of a permanent or recurring nature which will adversely
affect the surrounding area or premises or be dangerous to public
health and safety.
C. Junkyards, automotive junkyards and dumps, as defined herein.
D. Hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facilities.
E. The breeding and keeping of farm animals.
F. Manufacture or storage of explosives or fireworks in violation of
federal, state, county or local laws.
G. Rendering plants for animal products.
H. Adult materials or activities. Any use involving activities which
constitute a violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, as amended, or as defined
herein relating to display, sale, lending, distribution or exhibiting of
adult and other sexual materials are prohibited in every zoning district.
The exhibition or dissemination of adult materials or activities, as
defined herein, which do not constitute a violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5903, as amended, shall only be permitted in a zoning district which
clearly lists such a use, and all such uses shall be special exception
uses, as defined herein.
I. The use of outdoor boilers, furnaces or any equipment, device or
apparatus which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors, and not
situated within a building intended for habitation by humans or
domestic animals, which is used for the primary purpose of combustion
of fuel to produce heat for energy as a heating system, or component
thereof, which provides heat or hot water to the principal structure, to a
structure used for human or animal habitation, or to any accessory uses
§ 170-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-94
1:541
or structures, including, but not limited to, greenhouses, conservatories
and swimming pools.
§ 170-94 WILSON CODE § 170-94
1:542
ARTICLE XVI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 170-95. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
A. Off-street parking. In all districts, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as set forth in Table 2105 whenever any building is erected,
enlarged or converted. Such spaces shall be at least 10 feet wide by 18
feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall have adequate
and well-designed ingress and egress and shall be located on the same
lot as the use to which they are accessory or within a radius of 400 feet
in the same district or in an adjoining district when approved by the
Board.
Said Table 2 shall apply only to any new construction, new uses or to
the enlarged section of any addition which may be approved by the
Borough after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Off-street loading. Every commercial, industrial, resort or other
building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise shall provide one off-street loading space for
each 10,000 square feet of gross building ground floor area or part
thereof, and each such space shall be at least 400 square feet in area.
(1) Said loading spaces shall apply to all uses or to the enlarged
section of any addition which may be approved by the Borough
after the effective date of this chapter.
C. Development of parking and loading spaces. All off-street parking and
loading areas shall conform with Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, as well as the following:
(1) Off-street parking and loading spaces may be developed on any
required side, front or rear yard, except that such spaces located in
the residential districts shall have landscaping setbacks of at least
five feet from any street on which they abut and at least two feet
from any side or rear yard lot line on which they abut. Such spaces
shall be properly designed in relation to adjoining uses and/or
buildings. Adequate barriers shall be provided to protect buildings
and sidewalks, and screening shall be provided as required in
§ 170-87.
(2) The design of all parking areas shall give special attention to the
applicable site design guidelines set forth in § 170-11I and special
attention to avoidance of the following problems:
(a) Shielding of lighting fixtures to prevent glare on adjoining
properties.
105. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-95
1:543
(b) Proper design to prevent vehicles from backing out into public
streets and to promote safe traffic circulation.
(c) Proper grading and management of stormwater runoff.
(d) Screening and planting along perimeter of parking areas to
protect adjoining properties and to enhance appearance of the
area, including evergreen shade trees and shrubbery.
(e) Reservation of parking space(s) for use by handicapped
persons (ADA specific).
(3) All residential parking areas which are accessory to individual
dwelling units and all other types of required parking and loading
spaces for nonresidential or other uses shall be surfaced and
properly graded with a durable bituminous or concrete paving
material and shall be approved by the Zoning Officer. All parking
areas shall be properly graded and drained to dispose of all surface
water, except that the Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with
the special exception use procedure set forth in this chapter, may
permit a reduction in the number of nonresidential parking spaces
to be paved if the applicant demonstrates that the full number of
spaces as required herein will not be necessary to serve the
proposed use for a period of five years. Such a reduction in the
number of paved parking spaces required shall not relieve the
applicant from the submission of an overall plan for the parking lot
which designates the total number of parking spaces as required by
Table 2. Said plan shall indicate those spaces which are to be paved
for immediate use and those which are reserved for potential use as
required by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) They shall be arranged and marked for the orderly and safe
movement, loading, parking and storage of vehicles and shall be
adequately illuminated if designed for use by more than three cars
after dusk. All illuminated parking areas shall be designed to shield
and prevent glare on adjoining properties.
(5) Exit and entrance driveways or access points shall be approved by
the Zoning Officer and/or Borough Council and shall be at least 20
feet wide for two-way driveways and 12 feet wide for one-way
driveways and shall not exceed 40 feet in width and, wherever
practical, shall not occupy the full length of the streets, alleys or
other rights-of-way from which they derive their access, but shall
be limited to well-defined points and shall be so designed to provide
maximum safety for other adjoining or nearby uses.
D. Off-street parking in residential areas. On any lot used for residential
purposes in a residential district, only one commercial vehicle may be
garaged on such a lot, and said vehicle shall be housed in an enclosed
garage.
§ 170-95 WILSON CODE § 170-95
1:544
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 170-96. Sign requirements.
A. Scope and applicability.
(1) Signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used, removed or
moved only in compliance with the provisions of this section and
with any other applicable Borough regulations.
(2) A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration
of any such sign, except that changes in the copy of any sign or
official governmental signs shall not require such a permit.
(3) Any existing signs which do not conform with the provisions of this
section shall not be altered or enlarged unless approved by the
Zoning Officer.
B. General sign regulations.
(1) No sign shall be erected which states that a property may be used
for any purpose not permitted by this chapter.
(2) Signs referring to a use, product or activity no longer in existence
or available shall be removed within six months after cessation of
the original use, product or activity.
(3) No sign shall be located or used in a manner that interferes with
traffic on a street by causing glare, an obstruction to vision, as
defined herein, by causing confusion with traffic control devices or
through other means.
(4) Signs may be interior lighted with nonglaring lights or may be
illuminated by shielded floodlights. No lights of intermittent or
flashing type shall be permitted.
(5) Illuminated signs adjoining or visible from nearby residential areas
shall be shielded to protect adverse effects or nuisances upon
nearby dwellings.
(6) An awning with or without graphics and visual displays shall not be
considered to be a sign under this chapter, except that all awnings
which project over any public right-of-way or private area shall be
subject to the requirements of § 170-96C(3).
(7) No part of any sign, except for an official governmental sign, shall
be located within the official right-of-way of any street or alley,
unless specifically permitted herein.
(8) Any vehicle to which a sign is attached in such a manner that the
sign is no longer incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose shall
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:545
be considered to be a freestanding sign subject to the sign
provisions for the zoning district in which the sign is located.
(9) Every sign shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be
kept in good condition and repair.
(10) Flashing and moving signs shall not be permitted in any zoning
district.
C. Location, height and projection of signs.
(1) Location of signs. Unless otherwise provided for herein, all signs
may be located in any required yard area and may be freestanding
or attached to a building or other permanent feature on the site,
excluding fences located closer than five feet of side yard property
lines.
(2) Height limitations. Signs shall not exceed the following height
limitations:
(a) Signs accessory to uses located in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning
Districts shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(b) Signs accessory to uses located in the remaining zoning
districts (H-1, TC, C-1, C-2 and I-1) shall not exceed 30 feet in
height.
(c) No sign may be attached to a building in a manner which
allows it to exceed the roof height of the building.
(3) Projection of signs.
(a) No sign erected or replaced after the effective date of this
chapter shall project more than one foot over a public sidewalk
or street right-of-way.
(b) Signs which project over private areas shall conform with
other applicable Borough requirements and shall be approved
by the Borough Council, but in all cases shall be at least 14 feet
above the level of any area used for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
(c) Signs attached parallel to the building which project more than
12 inches from the face of the building shall be at least eight
feet above the ground level.
(d) The owners of all signs and awnings which project over any
public right-of-way shall provide insurance in an amount
specified by the Zoning Officer sufficient to hold the Borough
harmless in the event of any damage to life or property caused
by such a sign or awning in the public right-of-way.
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-96
1:546
D. Type of signs permitted in zoning districts. The size and type of signs
permitted in the various zoning districts are set forth below [refer to
§ 170-96D(5) Diagram: General Sign Types]:
(1) R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts. The following signs are permitted in
the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts:
(a) A simple nameplate sign containing the name, address,
professional or home occupation activity of the occupant of the
premises is permitted. Such sign shall not be illuminated or be
constructed of highly reflective materials and shall not exceed
two square feet in area. Such signs shall be attached to the
building to which they pertain.
(b) A single identification sign or bulletin board, not exceeding 12
square feet in area, is permitted in connection with any church,
school, college, hospital, institution, park, playground or other
similar public or semipublic use. Such signs may be attached to
the building to which they pertain and shall not be located
within five feet of all lot lines if they are freestanding.
(c) A single identification sign attached to the building to which it
pertains and not exceeding 10 square feet in area is permitted
for any legally existing nonconforming use.
(d) A business or identification sign applicable to an approved
special exception, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, which
is specifically approved by the Board is permitted.
(2) H-1, TC and C-1 Zoning Districts. The following signs are permitted
in the H-1, TC and C-1 Zoning Districts:
(a) Business or identification signs are permitted which direct
attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity,
use or entertainment sold or offered on the premises where
such a sign is located. The total area of such a sign or signs
shall not exceed 10% of the surface of the building facade or of
the wall area on which the sign is mounted or to which the sign
pertains, except as provided for in § 170-96D(4).
(b) A single identification sign or bulletin board, not exceeding 24
square feet in area, is permitted in connection with any church,
school, college, hospital, institution, park, playground or other
similar public or semipublic use.
(c) A single identification sign, not exceeding 24 square feet in
area, is permitted for any legally existing nonconforming use.
(3) C-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts. The following signs are permitted in
the C-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts:
(a) Any sign permitted in the H-1, TC and C-1 Zoning Districts.
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:547
(b) Advertising signs or billboards which direct attention to a
business, product, service, activity, use or entertainment not
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign
is located. Advertising signs shall not be closer to each other
than 100 feet.
(4) Maximum size of signs in nonresidential districts. The total square
foot area of all signs located on any single parcel under the
provisions of § 170-96D(2) and (3) above shall not exceed two
square feet for every one linear foot of lot width having frontage on
a public street, provided that on corner lots only the longest
dimension may be used.
(5) Diagram. General Sign Types from the International Zoning Code,
2009:
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-96
1:548
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:549
E. Design of signs. Wherever possible, the applicant for any sign shall
consider the following design principles for the purpose of establishing
a coherent and attractive visual appearance for the area in which the
sign is located:
(1) The height, size and general appearance of signs shall be
consistent in appearance and shall be of uniform height and layout
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-96
1:550
and harmonious with other adjoining signs located within 300 feet
of the parcel.
(2) Signs shall be visible from the street to both pedestrians and
vehicular passengers.
(3) Signs shall not be designed to block the visibility of other adjoining
signs and wherever possible shall be attached flat or parallel to the
building to which they pertain and shall not project out more than
12 inches from the face of the building.
(4) Freestanding signs shall be set back 10 feet from the property lines
and shall be consistent and harmonious with the size of the
structure to which they pertain and shall not detract from the
visibility or appearance of any adjoining structures.
(5) Advertising signs and billboards shall not dominate the view of the
structures located within 500 feet of such signs.
F. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
(1) Signs which in any way simulate official governmental signs that
are not concerned with the protection of the public health and
safety.
(2) Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for
commercial advertising purposes whether containing a message or
not.
(3) Flashing, blinking, twinkling signs, not including signs that
alternately display the time and temperature.
G. Temporary signs.
(1) Activity sign: a sign advertising a civic, social, community or fundraising
gathering or activity, provided:
(a) A sign may be erected no earlier than 14 days prior to the
activity to which the sign relates.
(b) The sign application shall specify sign locations.
(c) The applicant shall obtain written permission to erect such
signs from all property owners involved or from Borough
Council if such signs are to be placed on Borough property.
(d) The size of such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. In the
R-1, R-2, and TC Districts the size shall not exceed eight square
feet.
(e) No more than one temporary activity sign shall be permitted on
a single property.
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:551
(f) A banner sign or sign of any other type across a public street
shall only be permitted when approved by the Borough Council
to be of general benefit to the municipality or for public
convenience, necessity or welfare.
(g) The applicant shall deposit a sum in an amount set by
resolution of Borough Council as a guarantee that all signs
shall be removed promptly within seven days after the event
referred to on the sign. The deposit shall be returned upon the
satisfactory removal of the signs within the seven-day period. If
all signs are not removed at the end of the seven-day period,
the Borough shall have them removed and keep the full sum of
the deposit to reimburse the expense incurred by the Borough.
(2) Temporary promotion sign: a sign advertising the sale of
commercial products, provided:
(a) Such sign shall be erected only on the property to which it
relates.
(b) No more than one temporary promotion sign shall be permitted
on a single property.
(c) The size of such sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
(d) No such sign shall be displayed for more than a thirty-day time
period. Each thirty-day time period shall require a new permit.
(e) The posting of such signs shall be limited to a maximum of four
thirty-day time periods per year.
(f) The applicant shall specify the location of the proposed
temporary promotion sign and provide information about all
other signage which may exist on the property.
(g) The applicant shall deposit a sum in an amount set by
resolution of Borough Council as a guarantee that all signs
shall be removed promptly at the end of the thirty-day time
period. The deposit shall be returned upon the satisfactory
removal of the sign at the end of the thirty-day time period. If
the sign is not removed at the end of the thirty-day time period,
the Borough shall have them removed and keep the full sum of
the deposit to reimburse the expense incurred by the Borough.
(3) Moveable sidewalk sign: self-supporting, double-faced, A-frame
sign, also known as a sandwich board, or similar type sign, capable
of displaying daily specials. The interior angle of such A-frame
signs shall not exceed 45°. Such signs shall only be permitted in
accordance with the requirements herein, and are subject to
removal each evening:
(a) Such signs shall only be permitted in the TC, C-1 and C-2
Districts.
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-96
1:552
(b) Such sign shall be erected only on the property to which it
relates.
(c) No more than one moveable sidewalk sign shall be permitted
on a single property.
(d) Application. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized to require such information from applicants as
deemed necessary to process the application in accordance
with this chapter, including but not limited to the size,
proposed location, composition, content and colors of the
proposed sign, as well as the exact dimensions of the sidewalks
involved and sketches, plans and photographs of the proposed
sign, sidewalk and premises.
(e) Review. All applications for permit hereunder shall be reviewed
with respect to all criteria set forth in this chapter, and also
with respect to aesthetic value and impact of the proposed
sign, prior to the issuance of any such permit. The application
shall be either approved or denied. Appeals from denial of the
permit shall be taken directly to the Borough Council whose
decision shall be final. Second and subsequent applications for
permit shall not require review provided that no change or
alteration has been made to the sign initially approved.
(f) All applications for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by resolution of
Borough Council.
(g) All permits granted hereunder shall automatically terminate
and be null and void upon the expiration of one year from the
date of the issuance of the permit.
(h) Directly illuminated signs shall not be permitted. Indirect
illumination shall emanate only from the building and shall be
positioned in such a manner that it does not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(i) The maximum area of any such sign shall be 10 square feet per
sign face and the height shall not exceed four feet nor be less
than three feet. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section,
no sign shall be permitted which may interfere with or
otherwise impede the visibility of vehicular traffic upon any
street or driveway. All such signs may display the name and
logo of the establishment and may contain information as to
the products or services offered.
(j) A minimum distance of four feet of unobstructed sidewalk must
be maintained at all times. Where no sidewalk exists, such
signs shall not be located within 10 feet of the shoulder or curb
of the road, whichever is greater.
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:553
(k) The applicant, by accepting the permit, agrees to indemnify
and hold the Borough of Wilson, its agents, servants, staff or
employees, harmless from any and all claims arising out of the
location, placement or use of the sign which is the subject of
the permit hereunder. A policy of public liability insurance with
an insurance company authorized to conduct business in
Pennsylvania shall be provided, covering the location,
placement and use of such sign in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 naming the Borough of Wilson as an insured
thereon.
(l) All signs licensed hereunder shall be permitted only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. each day.
(m) Borough Council may, from time to time, establish by
resolution, other such license fees as it deems reasonable and
proper.
(4) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for
public office may be erected or displayed and maintained,
provided:
(a) The signs are erected or displayed by the owner or lessee of
the parcel of real property on said parcel or by the candidate,
political party or other authorized agent of either of them, with
the express permission of the owner or lessee of the parcel of
real property.
(b) The size of such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(c) The signs shall not be erected or displayed earlier than 60 days
prior to the election to which they pertain.
(d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit the
placing or erecting of any such signs within a street right-ofway
or within or on any public alley, sidewalk, parking lot or
other public space, which said placement is hereby prohibited.
(e) The erection of temporary political signs permitted by this
section by the owner or lessee of the parcel of real property or
candidate, political property or other authorized agent shall
not require a permit or other approval; provided, however, that
it shall be unlawful for any such owner or lessee of the lot or
candidate, political party or other authorized agent to permit
such signs to remain erected more than five days after the date
of the election to which they relate, and failure to remove such
signs as required hereby shall subject such offenders to the
penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(5) Sign for property sale or rent: a sign advertising the sale or rental
of a property upon which the sign has been erected, or a sign
indicating that the property has been sold or rented, provided:
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-96
1:554
(a) Such sign shall be erected only on the property to which it
relates.
(b) No more than one for sale or rent sign shall be permitted on a
single property.
(c) The area of the sign shall not exceed six square feet.
(d) The sign shall be removed within 10 days upon settlement or
upon execution of the lease.
(e) Signs advertising sales within a development of more than one
dwelling unit erected by a builder or developer or real estate
agent may be erected, provided that the sign is placed on the
property to which it relates and that it does not exceed a size of
eight square feet. Such sign shall be removed within 10 days
after settlement or execution of a lease of the last dwelling
unit.
(6) Temporary signs of mechanics, artisans, contractors or architects:
a temporary, nonilluminated sign erected and maintained during
the period any of the above are performing work on the property on
which the sign is erected, provided that such sign shall be removed
upon completion of the work by the contractor, and the total area of
all such signs shall not exceed four square feet.
(7) Inflatable signs.
(a) Such signs shall only be permitted in the TC, C-1, C-2 and I-1
Districts.
(b) Such sign shall be erected only on the property to which it
relates.
(c) No such sign shall be displayed for more than a thirty-day time
period. Each thirty-day time period shall require a new permit.
(d) The posting of such signs shall be limited to a maximum of two
thirty-day time periods per year.
(e) No more than one inflatable sign shall be permitted on a single
property.
(f) The size of the sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and six
feet in width.
(g) Inflatable signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from any
public right-of-way.
(h) The applicant shall specify the location of the proposed
inflatable sign and provide information about all other signage
which may exist on the property.
§ 170-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-96
1:555
§ 170-97. Digital or video billboards.
(i) The proposed inflatable sign must be secured and not create a
safety hazard.
(j) If affixed to a roof, the inflatable sign may extend above the
roof line of the building.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAYS (DIGITAL BILLBOARDS) — An onor
off-premises sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static
images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without text
information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using
different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where
the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by
means of fade. Electronic graphic display signs shall include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays.
Electronic graphic display signs include projected images or messages
with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
VIDEO BILLBOARD — A billboard that changes its message or
background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion
or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text and depicts
action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of
pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which mimic
the illusion of motion, including but not limited to moving objects,
moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding and contracting shapes
and/or fade, dissolve, travel or scrolling features. Video billboards
include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto
buildings or other objects.
B. Standards.
(1) Such signs shall only be located on nonresidential parcels located
in the C-1 and I-1 Zoning Districts which have frontage on State
Route 22.
(2) The maximum sign size shall be 300 square feet, inclusive of any
border and trim, but excluding the base or apron, supports and
other structural members. Extensions, projections and/or add-owns
beyond the rectangular perimeter face of the sign are prohibited.
(3) Message duration. Any portion of the message must have a
minimum duration (hold time) of 25 seconds and must be a static
display. Messages may change immediately or fade in and out only
and shall completely change to the next message within one
second. No portion of the message may flash, scroll, twirl, twinkle,
oscillate, rotate, blink, change color, or in any manner imitate
movement.
§ 170-96 WILSON CODE § 170-97
1:556
(4) Brightness (billboard luminance). The illumination and/or intensity
of the display shall be controlled so as to not create glare, hazards
or nuisances. Such signs shall have a maximum nits level of 7,000
nits; provided the brightness of the digital billboard does not
exceed 0.3 footcandle of light above the normal ambient light
levels. Such signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming
technology which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based
on ambient light conditions.
(a) The billboard luminance specification shall be determined by a
footcandle metering device held at a height of five feet and
aimed towards the billboard from a distance of 175 feet.
(b) The metering device should be at a location perpendicular to
the billboard center (as seen in plan view) as this angle has the
highest luminance.
(c) This check shall include the measurement of an all white image
displayed by the billboard to evaluate the worst case condition.
(d) If the difference in illuminance between the billboard-on and
the billboard-off conditions is 0.3 footcandle or less, then the
billboard luminance is in compliance.
(5) Such sign shall not be permitted closer than 100 feet from the
ultimate right-of-way of Route 22, nor farther than 200 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way of Route 22.
(6) The maximum height to the top of the sign shall not exceed 35 feet
from the existing adjacent grade.
(7) No such sign shall be located closer than 2,000 feet from any other
off-premises sign, including digital billboards.
(8) No such sign shall be erected within 250 feet of any existing
freestanding on-premises sign.
(9) No such sign shall be erected within 100 feet of any existing
residential dwelling or residential zoning district.
(10) Such sign shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. However, in the case of local, regional, state, and
national emergencies, service messages are permitted to be
displayed 24 hours per day.
(11) Applicant shall be required to coordinate/permit message access
for local, regional, state, and national emergency services during
emergency situations. Emergency messages are not required to
conform to message standards listed herein.
(12) An engineering certificate shall accompany any application for a
digital billboard. The certification shall indicate under seal of a
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
§ 170-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-97
1:557
Pennsylvania that the sign has been designed in accordance with
acceptable engineering practices.
(13) The applicant shall provide financial security, in a form acceptable
to the Borough, sufficient to secure to the Borough the removal of
any digital billboard upon which no advertising is located or
otherwise ceases to be used for a period of three consecutive
months. The applicant shall further provide, in a form acceptable to
the Borough, proof that the record owner and the licensee or other
person in control of the signage consents to the removal of the sign
for reasons as set forth in this subsection, which said consent shall
be in such form so as to be recorded of record with the
Northampton County Recorder of Deeds' office.
(14) Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers and/or any form of
pyrotechnics are prohibited.
(15) Message default mechanism. All signs must be equipped with a
properly functioning default mechanism that will stop the sign in
one position should a malfunction occur.
(16) Where applicable, such signs shall be located, constructed and
maintained in accordance with all applicable Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation regulations, in addition to all other
regulations of Wilson Borough. Where there is a conflict between
regulations, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
C. No video billboard, as such term is herein defined, shall be permitted in
Wilson Borough.
§ 170-97 WILSON CODE § 170-97
1:558
Appendix
Chapter A172
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
[The following ordinances, regarding cable television service within
the Borough, are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary:
Ord. No. 649, adopted and approved 4-24-1995, granting the renewal
of a nonexclusive franchise to Sammons Communications of
Pennsylvania, Inc.; and Ord. No. 768, adopted and approved
11-11-2013, adopting a cable franchise agreement between the
Borough and Service Electric Cable TV, Inc.]
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
710 3-8-2004 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 157, Art. IV
711 3-22-2004 Uniform construction
codes; building
construction, code
administration, electrical
standards, fire prevention,
housing standards,
mechanical standards, and
plumbing repealer
Ch. 86A
712 4-12-2004 Poolrooms amendment Ch. 138
718 8-23-2004 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
721 10-25-2004 Dumpsters Ch. 91
723 12-28-2004 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 114
725 2-14-2005 Council procedures
amendment
Ch. 13
726 2-28-2005 Little Lehigh Creek
Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan
Ch. 149, reference
statement only
§ 170-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:559
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
727 12-12-2005 Emergency and municipal
service tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 739
728 12-12-2005 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 760
729 3-13-2006 Firefighters pension plan Repealed by Ord.
No. 771
733 11-27-2006 Wilson Park Tax Increment
District
Ch. 67
734 1-8-2007 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 86A
735 2-12-2007 Bushkill Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management
Plan
Ch. 149, reference
statement only
736 2-12-2007 Fry's Run Watershed
Stormwater Management
Plan
Ch. 149, reference
statement only
737 2-26-2007 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan
Repealed by Ord.
No. 770
738 3-26-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 139
739 12-19-2007 Local services tax Ch. 157, Art. II
741 6-23-2008 Rental property: licensing
and inspection
Ch. 142, Art. II
745 11-10-2008 Graffiti Ch. 116
746 2-23-2009 Rental property: licensing
and inspection amendment
Ch. 142, Art. II
747 2-23-2009 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I
748 6-8-2009 Buyer notification
certificates amendment
Ch. 85
749 7-13-2009 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
750 8-24-2009 Fire prevention Ch. 104
751 5-10-2010 Firearms: notification of
lost or stolen firearms
Ch. 103, Art. I
755 6-13-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 157, Art. I
758 11-28-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
760 12-27-2012 Zoning Ch. 170
§ DL-1 WILSON CODE § DL-1
1:560
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
761 11-26-2012 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 760
762 12-27-2012 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I
764 3-25-2013 Excavations: street
openings amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
765 8-12-2013 Rental property: licensing
and inspection amendment
Ch. 142, Art. II
767 9-23-2013 Pensions: police officers
deferred retirement option
plan
Ch. 38, Art. IV
768 11-11-2013 Cable television franchise:
Service Electric Cable TV,
Inc.
Ch. A172 (reference
page only)
769 2-24-2014 Disposal of snow, weeds,
leaves or trash amendment
Ch. 80, Art. I
770 4-14-2014 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan
Ch. 38, Art. III
771 4-14-2014 Firefighters pension plan Ch. 38, Art. II
772 6-9-2014 Foreclosed and abandoned
property
Ch. 138A
773 7-14-2014 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 110
775 11-9-2015 Trees amendment Ch. 62
776 11-9-2015 Foreclosed and abandoned
property amendment
Ch. 138A
777 6-13-2016 Recreation Board
amendment
Ch. 48
778 9-12-2016 Parks and recreation areas Ch. 132
779 11-14-2016 Taxation: business privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 157, Art. IV
782 1-18-2017 Taxation: Payment of Real
Estate Taxes
Ch. 157, Art. VIII
783 4-10-2017 Moving Permits
Amendment
Ch. 128
784 9-25-2017 Brush, Grass, Weeds and
Debris: Cutting and
Removal of Brush, Grass
and Weeds Amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:561
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
787 3-26-2018 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse Amendment
Ch. 114 4
788 6-25-2018 Council Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 13 4
789 7-23-2018 Unsolicited Written
Materials
Ch. 161 4
790 11-12-2018 Sewers: Sewer Rents
and Charges
Amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I 4
792 8-12-2019 Recreation Board
Repealer
Ch. 48,
reference only
4
§ DL-1 WILSON CODE § DL-1
1:562