Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 6-1982]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Township of West
Goshen, County of Chester, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, codified and
consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp., consisting of Chapters 1 through 85, together with an Appendix and
Index, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code
of the Township of West Goshen," hereinafter known and referred to as
the "Code," pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1, of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65741.1.1
§ 1-2. When effective.
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect five days after
enactment and adoption of this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or part of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of West Goshen and in force on the date of
the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 11, 1982, of a general and
permanent nature not included in the Code or superseded or repealed
by provisions therein or inconsistent therewith.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township, or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
1. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66601(d).
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-4A and/or the date of adoption of this ordinance are
hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be
included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; revisions or
additions.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Township of West Goshen
for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes
and other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It
is the intention of the Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance, dedication or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the township, or other instruments
or evidence of the township's indebtedness.
H. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
J. Any ordinance designating the boundaries of water or sewer districts or
establishing sewer design specifications and use regulations.
K. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
L. The dedication of property.
M. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map, which shows the boundaries
of zones created by the Zoning Ordinance.
N. Any ordinance regulating vehicles and traffic.
§ 1-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-7
1:4
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume has been filed in the office of
the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Township Secretary,
as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Secretary for the
use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by the
Township Supervisors subsequent to the effective date of this, codification
which the Supervisors shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Supervisors, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in
the manner required a notice of the adoption of this ordinance adopting
the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance adopting the Code, coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:5
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the township to
be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance
shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Additional Remedies
[Adopted 3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
§ 1-15. Enforcement in equity.
All West Goshen Township ordinances adopted under and pursuant to the
provisions of the Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1, 1933 (P.L. 103,
No. 69), as reenacted and amended November 9, 1995, by Act 1995-60, as
further amended by Act 1996-72, as the same may from time to time be
further amended, may be enforced by West Goshen Township through an
action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 3
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
§ 3-1. Commission created.
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the "West Goshen
Township Historical Commission."
§ 3-2. Responsibilities.
The Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity for historic preservation
and to foster a community appreciation for the historic resources within the
Township. To accomplish this purpose, the Commission shall:
A. Identify significant architectural, historical, and natural sites in the
Township and maintain a detailed inventory and map(s) of these historic
resources, including informational data appropriately classified;
B. Gather documentary evidence, illustrations, photographs and other
appropriate materials regarding historic resources for inclusion in any
inventory of the Township's historic resources;
C. Create an awareness of the history of the Township from the Native
Americans to the present day, including cultural, agricultural, business,
educational, and religious endeavors;
D. Research and record the history of the Township;
E. Prepare appropriate reports for the Board of Supervisors, as well as
reports which may be requested by the Board of Supervisors;
F. Cooperate with and advise the Board of Supervisors, the Planning
Commission, and all Township officials and agencies in relation to the
preservation and restoration of significant historic properties, natural
resources and natural features in the Township and recommend certain
procedures and/or regulations to be implemented in order to protect
and preserve such historic resources;
G. With the prior approval of the Board of Supervisors, apply for technical
and financial assistance from appropriate local, county, state, federal or
other entities for the preservation of significant architectural, natural,
and historic resources within the Township;
H. Prepare and submit a yearly report and budget to the Board of
Supervisors for sums deemed necessary to carry out the objectives;
I. Cooperate with all Township officials regarding the possible acquisition
and use of significant historic structures and sites, including their
research and nomination to the National Register of Historic Places in
accordance with the provisions of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended;
§ 1-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 3-2
1:8
§ 3-3. Membership; terms of office.
§ 3-4. Meetings.
Meetings and periodic executive sessions shall be held at intervals deemed
appropriate by the Commission. The Commission shall keep records of
its meetings and activities, and submit periodic reports to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 3-5. Assistance and budget.
In order to carry out its responsibilities, the Historical Commission may,
with the prior consent of the Board of Supervisors, utilize any funds,
personnel, or other assistance made available by the Township, county, the
commonwealth, or federal government, or any of their agencies, or from
private sources. The Board of Supervisors may enter into agreements or
J. Perform other related duties as may be delegated by the Board of
Supervisors; and
K. Commit to self-education by attending appropriate conferences and
workshops relating to historic preservation to effectively carry out its
responsibilities.
A. The said Historical Commission shall:
(1) Consist of a minimum of five members who must be residents of the
Township. The membership of the Commission shall include
individuals who have an interest or expertise in history or historic
preservation.
(2) Be appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Serve a term of office for three years except for the initial term,
which shall be two members for two years, and three members for
three years.
(4) Serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses
necessary to conduct the responsibilities of the Commission when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Elect annually a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary, and
other officers as deemed necessary by the Commission.
B. A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by appointment by the
Board of Supervisors for the unexpired term. The Commission may
make recommendations for appointees to the Board of Supervisors for
unfulfilled terms and for full terms. The Commission may have the right
to establish appropriate committees to assist with research, to lend
expertise, and to perform other duties as assigned by the Commission.
Each committee shall be chaired by a member of the Historical
Commission.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:9
contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance
in accordance with Township procedures. The West Goshen Township
Historical Commission shall submit a proposed budget to the Board of
Supervisors during the regular Township budget process.
Chapter 4
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police cooperative agreements — See Ch. 14,
Arts. II, III and IV.
§ 3-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 3-5
4:10
ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
§ 4-1. Declaration of intent.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act2 and other similar
acts by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the "trust") and entering into the Declaration of Trust,
which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this article was adopted.
§ 4-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from
time to time with available funds, and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to
the terms and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 4-1.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of this
governmental unit.
§ 4-3. Official custody.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the trust.
§ 4-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 4-1.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance, subject to the terms and restrictions of the
Declaration of Trust referred to in § 4-1.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments; and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 4-1.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 4-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 4-4
4:11
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the trust.
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements in accordance with the terms
and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 4-1.
G. The trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
§ 4-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 4-4
4:12
ARTICLE II
West Chester Area Council of Governments
[Adopted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003]
§ 4-5. Authorization.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township (the
"Township") is hereby authorized to enter into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with the Borough of West Chester, East Bradford
Township, Thornbury Township, Westtown Township and East Goshen
Township to form the West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCAGOG), in accordance with the terms and conditions authorized by this
article and set forth in the agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto
as Exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference.3 Furthermore, the
appropriate officers of the Township are hereby authorized to do whatever
is necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of the agreement
and this article, and to comply with the purposes and intent of the
agreement and this article.
§ 4-6. Conditions.
The agreement is conditioned upon each member's governing body enacting
an ordinance which authorizes such member to participate in the WCACOG
and to execute the agreement.
§ 4-7. Duration and term.
The WCACOG shall be created for, and the agreement shall have, an initial
term of five years, which term shall commence on the effective date of
the agreement (as defined in paragraph 17 of the agreement). At the
expiration of the initial five-year term, the agreement and the WCACOG
shall automatically renew for successive one-year terms unless a majority
of the members, acting through their delegates, vote to terminate the
agreement.
§ 4-8. Purpose and objectives.
The purposes and objectives of the WCACOG include, but are not limited to
the following:
A. To provide a forum for the discussion of regional issues that affect the
members and their residents;
B. To discuss and study local issues of mutual interest and concern to each
member and its residents and to formulate solutions for common
regional problems;
C. To allow for regional planning and coordination on local government
issues such as, but not limited to zoning, transportation, emergency
3. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-5 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 4-8
4:13
§ 4-9. Manner and extent of financing.
services, geographical information systems (GIS), cable
communications, technological electronic communication and any
other issues which affect the West Chester region;
D. To train municipal officials and employees in various municipal topics
and laws that affect municipalities;
E. To undertake, coordinate and administer programs of regional interest
that benefit some or all of the members;
F. To create an alliance for obtaining more competitive rates on the
purchase of goods and services for the members; and
G. To perform such other activities as the members may mutually agree
may be undertaken through the WCACOG which are related to the
objectives identified above.
A. At the organizational meeting of the Board of Delegates, the Board shall
adopt an annual budget or authorize the prompt creation of an annual
budget for the WCACOG. Thereafter, the Board of Delegates shall
present the proposed annual budget to the members, and the governing
body of each member shall vote to approve or reject the budget prior to
the end of the calendar year. In the event that the proposed annual
budget is not approved by the majority of the members' governing
bodies, the Board of Delegates shall revise said budget in accordance
with the reasons provided by the governing bodies in support of the
rejection. Following the initial year of the agreement, the process for
preparing, presenting and adopting an annual budget shall be
completed by the Board of Delegates and the members' governing
bodies before the end of each calendar year. Until the new budget is
approved by the majority of the members' governing bodies, the prior
years' budget shall remain in effect.
B. Within 60 days following the effective date of the agreement, each
member shall be responsible to make an initial contribution to the
WCACOG of $500, which contribution shall be deposited into an
account established for the WCACOG by its Secretary/Treasurer.
Thereafter, each member shall contribute an equal share to the
expenses of the WCACOG, as determined by the annual budget. Each
member shall contribute its proportional share of the WCACOG's
operational expenses in quarterly intervals or as otherwise determined
by the Board. A member which does not promptly pay its annual
contribution may have its membership in the WOACOG terminated by a
majority vote of the Board of Delegates. In the event of such
termination, the terminated member's delegate and alternate delegate
shall be precluded from voting on any matter or issue voted upon by the
Board of Delegates.
§ 4-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 4-9
4:14
§ 4-10. Organizational structure necessary to implement
agreement.
§ 4-11. Manner in which real or personal property shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of.
The WCACOG is not authorized by the agreement to purchase real property.
If the WCACOG purchases personal property, it shall take title to such
personal property in the name of WCACOG, unless otherwise agreed to by
the Board of Delegates. Upon termination of the agreement, any personal
property owned by the WCACOG shall be distributed to the members,
or sold and the proceeds distributed to the members, as determined by
the Board of Delegates. All other matters pertaining to the acquisition,
management, licensing or disposal of personal property by the WCACOG
shall be decided by a majority vote of the Board of Delegates.
§ 4-12. Authority to enter into contracts of policies of group
insurance and employee benefits.
The WCACOG is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits including social security for any
employees of the WCACOG. No such employees are anticipated by the
members and a majority of the Board of Delegates must first vote to hire
any such employees and approve any such contracts.
C. In the event that the WCACOG undertakes a specific program or
activity that does not involve all of the members, only the members
which participate in such program or activity shall be liable for the
expenses related to such program or activity.
A. The WCACOG shall be governed by a Board of Delegates which shall
consist of one delegate and an alternate delegate from each member.
The delegates and alternate delegates shall be appointed by the
governing body of each member to serve in such capacity for a two-year
term. Each delegate and alternate delegate shall be an elected official
of the member.
B. Within 60 days after the effective date of the agreement, the Board of
Delegates shall conduct an organizational meeting. At the
organizational meeting the Board shall elect the officers of President,
Vice President, and Secretary/Treasurer and adopt bylaws, or authorize
the prompt preparation of bylaws for future adoption, which shall
govern the day-to-day affairs of the WCACOG.
C. Each member shall be entitled to one-vote in the WCACOG, which vote
shall be cast by the delegate in attendance at the Board of Directors'
meetings.
§ 4-9 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 4-12
4:15
Chapter 7
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 7-1. Office created; word usage.
§ 7-2. Appointment and removal.
The Township Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a
majority of all members of the Board of Supervisors and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and shall be subject to removal by the
Supervisors by majority vote.
§ 7-3. Qualifications; residency.
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his
office as herein outlined. He need not be a resident of the township or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment,
but during the tenure of his office he may reside outside the township
only with the approval of the Board of Supervisors. In the event that the
Supervisors fail within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days after the
appointment, to approve the Manager's residence outside the township, he
must immediately become and, during his tenure, remain a resident of the
township.
§ 7-4. Bond. [Amended 4-5-1967 by Ord. No. 2-1967]
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
township with approved surety to be approved by the Board of Supervisors
in the sum of $10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the
township.LeftCorner="§ 7-5"RightCorner="§ 7-6"
§ 7-5. Compensation. [Amended 3-5-1970 by Ord. No.
3-1970;12-28-1982 by Ord. No. 9-1982]
The annual salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed annually by
resolution of the Supervisors and shall be set forth in the budget, the actual
amount to be as fixed in the budget at the beginning of the year or by
subsequent resolution of the Supervisors in the event that the Manager
is hired after the adoption of the budget. In the event of the dismissal or
resignation of the Manager at the request of the Supervisors, the Manager
shall be entitled to severance pay computed as follows: one weeks' pay
A. The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of
West Goshen.
B. Throughout this chapter, reference to the masculine pronoun "he" shall
be construed to include the female pronoun "she." [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 6-1994]
§ 4-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 7-5
7:16
for each full year's service. Such severance pay shall be in addition to any
earned vacation due or pay in lieu of such vacation. In like manner, the
Supervisors shall annually fix the salary to be paid the Assistant Township
Manager in accordance with the procedure set by this section.
§ 7-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
township, and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a
whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
township. The powers and duties of administration of all township
business shall be vested in the Township Manager, except for any
legislative powers and duties, and all duties hereby delegated shall be
subject to recall at any time by the Board of Supervisors. This
delegation shall not include any powers and duties expressly imposed
or conferred by statute upon other township officers.
B. Subject to the general supervisory and recall powers of the Board of
Supervisors and its legislative discretion to amend the provisions of this
chapter, the Township Manager's powers and duties shall include the
following: [Amended 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994]
(1) Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments and their employees; provided that the Chief of Police
shall have and retain direct supervisory control over the operations
of the Police Department and all police officers serving under the
Chief, but the Chief of Police shall report directly to the Township
Manager as the chief administrative and executive officer of the
township. As to all municipal departments, the Township Manager
shall have and retain supervisory responsibility for the
administration of all fiscal matters pertaining to all municipal
departments without exception. [Amended 7-25-2001 by Ord.
No. 9-2001]
(2) Hire and promote and, when necessary or appropriate, discipline,
demote, suspend or discharge any township employee, except
uniformed members of the Police Department, whose terms of
employment, suspension and termination shall be subject to the
direct supervisory authority of the Board of Supervisors, subject to
provisions of the Pennsylvania Police Tenure Act4 and any other
applicable statutes and laws of the commonwealth. All such
administrative actions taken by the Manager shall be promptly
reported to the Board of Supervisors in writing.
(3) He shall have the power to fix wages and salaries of all personnel
under his supervision, within a range previously determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 811 et seq.
§ 7-5 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 7-6
7:17
(4) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors before the
close of each fiscal year a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the
Manager or an officer designated by him shall obtain from the head
of each department, agency or board or any qualified officer
thereof estimates of revenues and expenditures and such other
supporting data as he requires. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the
Board of Supervisors.
(5) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) He shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly budget,
develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to
be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for its review
and adoption.
(7) He shall hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time
direct.
(8) He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussions, and he
shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and its committees.
(9) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(10)He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct
of township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
township finances and such other reports as the Board of
Supervisors requests; and make such recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors as he deems advisable.
(11)He shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances
and the administrative activities of the township for the preceding
year.
(12)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the township are observed.
(13)He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
in connection with any of the functions of the township.
(14)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon
some other township officer.
§ 7-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 7-6
7:18
§ 7-7. Procedural limitations on Board of Supervisors.
Neither the Board of Supervisors, its members nor its committees shall
dictate or influence or attempt to dictate or influence the hiring of any
person to or his discharge from municipal employment by the Manager or in
any manner take part in the hiring, suspending or discharging of employees
in the administrative service of the township, except as required by any civil
service provision of state law and except for the appointing or discharging
of all department heads and other employees whose appointments by the
Board of Supervisors are provided for in the ordinances of the township;
provided, however, that the general supervision of such department heads
and employees shall be the duty of the Township Manager. Other than for
the purposes of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors or any of its members or
any of the committees or their members shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the Township Manager, and neither the Board of
Supervisors nor any of its members nor any of its committees or their
members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the
Manager.
§ 7-8. Assistant Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the township, the
Assistant Manager shall perform the duties of the Manager during his
absence or disability.
Chapter 10
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
(15)He shall see that all money owed the township is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the township's claims.
(16)He shall be the purchasing officer of the township. He shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Township Code,
all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the township. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by the
Board of Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. He shall
also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, governing the procurement of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
(17) All complaints regarding township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He or an officer designated by him shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints.
§ 7-6 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 10-1
10:19
§ 10-1. Board created. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992]
There is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board to be known as the
"West Goshen Township Park and Recreation Board" which, for purposes
of this chapter, shall be referred to herein as the "Board." The term
"Supervisors" as used in this chapter shall mean the Board of Supervisors
of West Goshen Township.
§ 10-2. Membership; terms; vacancies. [Amended 4-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 6-1989]
The Board shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors and shall serve for terms of five years or until their
successors are appointed, except that the members of such Board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of not more
than two members shall expire annually thereafter. Members of this Board
shall serve without pay. All persons appointed shall serve their full terms
unless voluntarily resigned or removed by the Supervisors for dereliction
or neglect of duty. Vacancies on such Board occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments.
§ 10-3. Officers.
The members of the Board established pursuant to this chapter shall elect
their own Chairman and Secretary and select all other necessary officers,
to serve for a period of one year.
§ 10-4. Powers. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992; 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 8-1996]
The Board shall have power to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to
the conduct of its business and meetings. The Board may recommend to the
Supervisors the adoption of rules and regulations pertaining to the use by
the public of park and recreation land owned by the township, but adoption
of such regulations shall be within the jurisdiction of the Supervisors under
Chapter 57 of this Code. The Board shall recommend to the Supervisors
the employment or discharge and shall supervise all recreation personnel,
but their salary and benefits shall be set by the Supervisors, provided
that neither full- nor part-time employees who perform the duties of park
maintenance shall be construed as recreation personnel. The Board of
Supervisors shall also appoint an alternate member to serve an initial term
of five years, and his successors shall thereafter be appointed for five-year
terms. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in this section for members. The
alternate member shall have the power to vote on all matters coming before
the Park and Recreation Board when authorized by the Board's Chairperson
in the absence of a regular member of the Board.
§ 10-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 10-5
10:20
§ 10-5. Authority; obligations. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
7-1992]
Subject to the approval of the Supervisors, the Board shall have the
authority to equip, supervise and maintain parks, recreation areas and
facilities and to conduct recreation programs thereon, provided that the
Board shall have no jurisdiction to enter into any contract nor to incur any
obligation which is binding upon the township other than current obligation
contracts to be fully executed within the then-current fiscal year, subject to
approval of the Supervisors, and within the budget appropriations made by
the Supervisors.
§ 10-6. Funds. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992]
§ 10-7. Meetings.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times and at such places as shall
be determined by the rules and regulations of the Board.
§ 10-8. Reports. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Board to submit an annual report to the
Supervisors, including an analysis of the township's parks, recreation areas,
facilities and recreation programs, with particular reference to the extent
and adequacy of the programs and effectiveness in view of the public
expenditures involved and the public needs to be met. The Board shall make
such other and additional full and complete reports to the Supervisors at
such other times as the Board shall deem necessary or when requested by
the Supervisors.
§ 10-9. Statutory powers. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992]
All powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be provided by
statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the ordinances of West
Goshen Township relating to the development and operation of park and
recreation systems and public parks and playgrounds shall be and remain
vested in the Supervisors, except as otherwise herein provide.
Chapter 12
A. All funds appropriated by the Supervisors and budgeted for operation
of the Board shall be disbursed only by the fiscal disbursing officer of
West Goshen Township upon vouchers issued by the Board, approved by
the Supervisors and within the budget appropriations made.
B. Any funds received by the Board from sources other than budget
appropriations shall be deposited by the Supervisors to the credit and
for the use of the Board and disbursed as the above budget funds are
disbursed, provided that funds received by gift, bequest or otherwise
shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest
or the terms of the acceptance thereof.
§ 10-5 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 10-9
10:21
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72. Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 12-1. Creation.
There is hereby created and reconstituted the West Goshen Township
Planning Commission.
§ 12-2. Members; appointment. [Amended 7-13-1976 by Ord. No.
4-1976; 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1-1996; 4-24-2002 by Ord. No.
4-2002; 5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
The Planning Commission shall consist of not more than nine members
(hereafter collectively "members") each of whom shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may in its discretion, by
resolution, establish compensation for members. Members shall also be
reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses upon approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 12-3. Terms of office. [Amended 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 8-1996;
5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
The terms of each of the members shall be four years. An appointment to fill
a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 12-4. Qualifications, powers and duties. [Amended 2-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 1-1996]
The qualifications, powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be
as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, Act 209 of 1990 and Act 131
of 1992, Sections 201 through 211 inclusive,5 (the "PaMPC"), as the same
may be further amended from time to time, provided that the Board of
Supervisors may assign to the Planning Commission such other duties as
it deems appropriate which are not inconsistent with or contrary to the
powers and duties provided for in the PaMPC.
§ 12-5. Obligations and expenditures.
The Commission shall not have the power to obligate the Township or
expend Township funds without the expressed consent, in writing, of the
Board of Supervisors.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10211.
§ 10-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 12-6
10:22
§ 12-6. Ratification of previous acts.
All acts of the existing Planning Commission done heretofore are hereby
expressly approved, ratified and confirmed in all respects.
Chapter 14
POLICE
§ 12-6 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 12-6
10:23

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[The current Police Pension Plan and all amendments thereto are
on file in the Township offices. ]
§ 14-1. through § 14-15. (Reserved)
§ 14-1 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 14-1
10:25

ARTICLE II
Police Cooperative Agreement: Borough of West Chester
[Adopted 3-11-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
§ 14-16. Agreement authorized.
Under the authority of the Acts of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to wit, the Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103,
Article VII, Section 702, Clause XL, as amended, and the Act of July 12,
1972, No. 180,6 the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township is
hereby directed and authorized to enter into a police cooperative agreement
with the Borough of West Chester, Chester County, Pennsylvania. The
conditions of the agreement between the Township of West Goshen and the
Borough of West Chester shall be as hereinafter provided.
§ 14-17. Conditions.
The conditions of the agreement shall be as follows:
§ 14-18. Financing.
The manner and extent of financing the agreement shall be as follows:
A. In case of an emergency, either the Township of West Goshen or the
Borough of West Chester may request police protection and assistance
from the other. Either political subdivision may comply with the request
of the other, or any part thereof, as each may determine in its own
discretion. In the event that either political subdivision furnishes
assistance to the other, it may withdraw its participation in that
assistance at any time.
B. Each municipality shall furnish to the other a list of that official or those
officials in the respective municipality who shall have the authority to
request police assistance or to withdraw permission for the same.
C. The requesting municipality shall direct the actions of the requested
policemen while they are performing their duties in the requesting
municipality pursuant to a request; provided, however, that the
requested policemen shall be ultimately responsible to the municipality
by which they are employed. While in the requesting municipality, the
requested policemen shall have all of the powers and authorities
conferred by law upon the requesting police.
A. The requested policemen shall remain employees of their respective
municipalities and will be deemed to be acting on a detached-service
basis. The requested policemen will continue under the retirement
program of their respective municipalities, and matters such as wages
and other benefits would be subject to the laws, ordinances and
regulations of the requested policemen's respective municipalities.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 14-16 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 14-18
10:27
§ 14-19. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement between West Goshen
Township and the Borough of West Chester are to provide police protection
and assistance to each other in case of an emergency in the requesting
municipality and only in those instances when the requesting municipality
determines such a request to be necessary and proper. The municipality
offering assistance as the requested municipality may withdraw its
permission or participation in that assistance at any time and for any reason
in its sole discretion.
§ 14-20. Term of agreement; termination.
The agreement between West Goshen Township and the Borough of West
Chester shall be for an indefinite term, and either party to the agreement
may terminate the agreement upon 60 days' written notice to the other
party.
§ 14-21. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of the
agreement between West Goshen Township and the Borough of West
Chester shall be the respective police departments of each municipality.
However, the political subdivision which, at the time of an injury to
a policeman acting pursuant to the terms of the police cooperative
agreement, exercises control and direction over the policeman is
responsible for any compensation which may be due and payable to the
policeman under the Pennsylvania Worker's Compensation Act.
B. A temporarily disabled policeman who receives benefits pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Worker's Compensation Act shall be paid by the
municipality exercising control and direction over the policeman any
difference between the amount paid pursuant to workmen's
compensation and the policeman's weekly salary. Weekly salary shall be
construed to mean salary paid to the officer by his respective
municipality for a forty-hour workweek at the rate of pay prevailing for
him at the time of his injury and any salary increments accruing to him
during the period of his disability.
C. It shall be presumed that the requesting municipality is exercising
control over the requested policemen when they have, in fact, been
requested and are also within the geographic boundaries of the
requesting municipality.
D. The requesting municipality shall be responsible for property damage
incurred by the requested policemen, including property belonging to
the requested municipality, within the requesting municipality's
geographic boundaries, unless said property damage was caused by the
requested policemen's negligence.
§ 14-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 14-21
10:28
ARTICLE III
Police Cooperative Agreement: Westtown Township and West
Whiteland Township
[Adopted 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. 6-1977]
§ 14-22. Agreement authorized.
Under the authority of the Acts of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to wit, the Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103,
Article VII, Section 702, Clause XL, as amended, and the Act of July 12,
1972, No. 180,7 the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township is
hereby directed and authorized to enter into a police cooperative agreement
with Westtown Township, West Whiteland Township, both of Chester
County, Pennsylvania, and such other municipalities as the Board of
Supervisors shall from time to time direct (hereinafter known as the
"designated municipality"). The conditions of the agreement between the
Township of West Goshen and the designated municipality shall be as
hereinafter provided.
§ 14-23. Conditions.
The conditions of the agreement shall be as follows:
§ 14-24. Financing.
The manner and extent of financing the agreement shall be as follows:
A. In case of an emergency, either the Township of West Goshen or the
designated municipality may request police protection and assistance
from the other. Either political subdivision may comply with the request
of the other, or any part thereof, as each may determine in its own
discretion. In the event that either political subdivision furnishes
assistance to the other, it may withdraw its participation in that
assistance at any time.
B. Each municipality shall furnish to the other a list of that official or those
officials in the respective municipality who shall have the authority to
request police assistance or to withdraw permission for the same.
C. The requesting municipality shall direct the actions of the requested
policemen while they are performing their duties in the requesting
municipality pursuant to a request; provided, however, that the
requested policemen shall be ultimately responsible to the municipality
by which they are employed. While in the requesting municipality, the
requested policemen shall have all of the powers and authorities
conferred by law upon the requesting police.
A. The requested policemen shall remain employees of their respective
municipalities and will be deemed to be acting on a detached-service
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 14-22 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 14-24
10:29
§ 14-25. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement between West Goshen
Township and the designated municipality are to provide police protection
and assistance to each other in case of an emergency in the requesting
municipality and only in those instances when the requesting municipality
determines such a request to be necessary and proper. The municipality
offering assistance as the requested municipality may withdraw its
permission or participation in that assistance at any time and for any reason
in its sole discretion.
§ 14-26. Term of agreement; termination.
The agreement between West Goshen Township and the designated
municipality shall be for an indefinite term, and either party to the
agreement may terminate the agreement upon 60 days' written notice to
the other party.
basis. The requested policemen will continue under the retirement
program of their respective municipalities; and matters such as wages
and other benefits shall be subject to the laws, ordinances and
regulations of the requested policemen's respective municipalities.
However, the political subdivision which, at the time of an injury to
or death of a policeman acting pursuant to the terms of the police
cooperative agreement, exercises control and direction over the
policeman and is responsible for any compensation or other benefits
which may be due and payable to the policeman, his beneficiaries and
heirs under the Pennsylvania Worker's Compensation Act.
B. A temporarily disabled policeman who receives benefits pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Worker's Compensation Act shall be paid by the
municipality exercising control and direction over the policeman any
difference between the amount paid pursuant to workmen's
compensation and the policeman's weekly salary. Weekly salary shall be
construed to mean salary paid to the officer by his respective
municipality for a forty-hour workweek at the rate of pay prevailing for
him at the time of his injury and any salary increments accruing to him
during the period of his disability.
C. It shall be presumed that the requesting municipality is exercising
control over the requested policemen when they have, in fact, been
requested and are also within the geographic boundaries of the
requesting municipality.
D. The requesting municipality shall be responsible for property damage
incurred by the requested policemen, including property belonging to
the requested municipality, within the requesting municipality's
geographic boundaries, unless said property damage was caused by the
requested policemen's negligence.
§ 14-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 14-27
10:30
§ 14-27. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of the
agreement between West Goshen Township and the designated municipality
shall be the respective police departments of each municipality.
§ 14-27 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 14-27
10:31

ARTICLE IV
Drug Task Force
[Adopted 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 6-1993]
§ 14-28. Intent.
West Goshen Township, by the adoption of this article, evidences its intent
to participate in Municipal Drug Task Force activities in cooperation with
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
which is designed to interdict the illegal use of and trafficking in narcotics
and other illegal drugs and substances within its municipal boundaries and
within the municipal boundaries of nearby communities with which it is
authorized to cooperatively act pursuant to the Act.8
§ 14-29. Authorization and contents of agreement.
West Goshen Township is hereby authorized to enter into a Municipal Drug
Task Force agreement with the Office of the Attorney General and the
Bureau of Narcotics Investigation and Drug Control of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (the "agreement"), subject to approval of the form and
content of the agreement by the Board of Supervisors. This agreement may,
when approved by the Board of Supervisors, include intergovernmental
cooperative activities with adjacent and nearby municipal governments as a
part of a regional effort to interdict illegal drug activities.
§ 14-30. Use of Police Department services.
West Goshen Township is hereby authorized to utilize the services of the
West Goshen Township Police Department for such Municipal Drug Task
Force activities as are approved by the Board of Supervisors, with the
advice and consent of the West Goshen Township Chief of Police, under the
terms and conditions set forth in the agreement and in compliance with the
Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, Act of June 15, 1982, P.L. 512, No. 141, as
amended, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8951 et seq.
§ 14-31. Establishment of procedures; amendments of agreement.
Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, which, upon its execution, shall
be considered incorporated herein by reference, West Goshen Township,
acting through its Chief of Police, shall establish appropriate procedures
to comply with the agreement and relevant regulations, direction and
guidance from the Office of the Attorney General. The agreement may
be amended from time to time, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, which agreement, as amended, shall automatically be
incorporated as a part hereof without the necessity of amendment of this
article.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 14-28 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 14-32
10:33
§ 14-32. Term of agreement.
The term of the agreement authorized by this article shall commence on the
date it is completely executed by all parties thereto and may be terminated
by West Goshen Township and any other party to the agreement at any
time subject to 30 days' prior written notice to the other parties to the
agreement.
§ 14-33. Purposes and objectives; financing.
The purposes and objectives of this article and the agreement authorized
to be made and executed hereby include region-wide coordination of
municipal police activities for the purpose of combating illegal narcotics,
substance and drug, trafficking. The agreement shall be financed with
funds provided by the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, subject to the appropriation and availability of funds for
Task Force purposes. West Goshen Township shall have no financial
responsibility or liability to provide funds to finance activities of the Task
Force or any of its police officers participating in Task Force activities.
Expenditure of Township funds shall be solely within the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 14-34. Supervision of police.
West Goshen Township shall retain control and responsibility over the
management, activities, control and direction of its police officer employees
when involved in Municipal Drug Task Force activities, and all such police
officer employees shall remain under the specific direction and control of
the Chief of Police of West Goshen Township except as he shall otherwise
direct during operations of the Task Force.
§ 14-35. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof. It is hereby declared as the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included herein.
§ 14-36. When effective.
This article shall be effective five days after enactment as by law provided.
§ 14-32 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 14-36
10:34
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 14, Art. I.
§ 18-1. Legislative intent.
It is the considered opinion of the Board of Supervisors that the extension
of the social security system to employees of West Goshen Township will
be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the township by providing
that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the
old-age and survivors insurance system, but will also be of great benefit to
West Goshen Township by enabling it to attract and retain in employment
the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 18-2. Coverage extended to employees.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"9 which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the "state agency"
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said oldage
and survivor insurance system. The Board of Supervisors of West
Goshen Township is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the state
agency a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section 6 of said
enabling Act and the Social Security Act,10 to extend coverage to employees
and officers of West Goshen Township and do all other necessary things
to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the old-age and
survivors insurance system.
§ 18-3. Payroll deduction system established.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction to be matched by payment by West Goshen Township, to be made
into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the office of
the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from
which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of West Goshen
9. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
§ 14-36 (RESERVED) § 18-3
16:35
Township. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions
of the law and regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal
Security Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear
interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as payments are
made.
§ 18-4. Appropriation; agreement with state agency.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of West Goshen
Township in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan, or
plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the Chairman and the Secretary
of West Goshen Township to enter into an agreement with the state agency,
which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with Section
218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that
the participation of this Township of West Goshen shall commence as of
January 1, 1955.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 22
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 26, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 59, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 22-1. Statement of authority; purpose; findings.
A. Statement of authority and purpose.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township
Code to prohibit nuisances and to promote the health, cleanliness,
comfort and safety of the citizens of West Goshen Township; and to
regulate the time of opening and closing and the conduct which
occurs in places of public entertainment, amusement and
recreation, as well as, the sale, distribution, display and exhibition
of and activities concerning obscene and other sexual material as
provided for in 18 P.S. § 5903(k) and as upheld by the United States
District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in Brown v.
Pornography Commission of Lower Southampton Township, 620 F.
Supp. 1199 (1985), the Board enacts this chapter for the following
purposes:
§ 18-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-1
22:36
(a) To minimize and control the adverse effects of adult
entertainment businesses and thereby protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township;
(b) To protect the citizens of the Township from increased crime
associated with adult entertainment businesses;
(c) To preserve the quality of life of the citizens of the Township;
and
(d) To preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods and deter the spread of blight.
(2) The Board has determined that location criteria alone does not
adequately protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the Township and that licensing is a legitimate and
reasonable means of accountability to insure that operators of
adult entertainment businesses comply with reasonable
regulations and to insure that operators do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(3) The Board does not intend this chapter to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution, but instead to enact a content-neutral ordinance
which addresses the secondary effects of adult entertainment
businesses.
B. Findings. The Board makes the following findings and pursuant to the
authority in City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters. Inc. 475 U.S. 41 (1986),
adopts by reference the results of reports and studies conducted by
other municipalities and states concerning and documenting the
adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses:
(1) The adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses
raise substantial governmental concerns;
(2) Adult entertainment businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns;
(3) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the adult entertainment businesses;
(4) A licensing procedure will provide an incentive for operators of
adult entertainment businesses to see that the adult entertainment
business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
Township;
(5) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
§ 22-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-1
22:37
§ 22-2. Definitions.
The defined terms as contained in Chapter 84, titled, "Zoning," § 84-8 are
hereby adopted by reference in this chapter. As used in this chapter, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this
subsection:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary community
standards in this chapter, "community" means "the state."
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or representation,
in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse when it:
KNOWING — Having general knowledge of, reason to know or belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the
character and content of any material or performance described therein
which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the person charged with
violation of this chapter.
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a license, and in the case of an employee,
a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment
in an adult entertainment business.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing, or any
figure, visual representation or image, including any drawing, photograph,
picture, videotape or motion picture.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters;
(6) Requiring licensees of adult entertainment businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and preventing minors from working in such
establishments; and
(7) The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
Township will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of
minors;
A.
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
B.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational
or scientific value for minors.
C.
§ 22-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-2
22:38
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or in
a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual bestiality; and, patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when is a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a child; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity;
sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of other states or countries for which:
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this chapter; and
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
A.
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
B.
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any
twenty-four-month period. The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application or a person
residing with the applicant.
C.
§ 22-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-2
22:39
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — When referring to an adult
entertainment business, such term shall mean and include any of the
following:
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premise or place used for
or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air, rail,
motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft, railroad
cars, buses and air, boat railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 22-3. License required.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate an adult entertainment business without
a valid adult entertainment business license issued by the Township
pursuant to this Chapter.
(2) For any person who operates an adult entertainment business to
employ a person to work for the adult entertainment business who
is not licensed as an adult entertainment business employee by the
Township pursuant to this chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with an adult entertainment
business without having secured an adult entertainment business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
B. Applications.
(1) All applicants for business and employee licenses must be qualified
according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may
request, and the applicant shall provide, such information
(including fingerprints) as to enable the Township to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter. The application for a license must be made on a form
provided by the Township and shall contain the following
supporting information and/or documents:
(a) If the applicant is:
[1] An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name
and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18
years of age;
§ 22-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-3
22:40
[2] A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete
name and the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any; or
[3] A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete
name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state
of incorporation and qualified and authorized to conduct
business in Pennsylvania, the names and capacity of all
officers, directors and principal stockholders, the name of
the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.
(b) If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment
business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or
she must:
[1] State the adult entertainment business' fictitious name;
and
[2] Submit the required registration documents.
(c) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant
has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved
and the date, place and jurisdiction of each;
(d) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant
has had a previous license under this chapter, or other similar
adult entertainment business ordinance from another
municipality or county, denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the adult entertainment
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant or person residing with
the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the adult entertainment business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation;
(e) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant
holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar
adult entertainment business ordinance from another
municipality or county, and if so, the names and locations of
such other licensed businesses;
§ 22-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-3
22:41
(f) The specific classification of adult entertainment use (as
defined herein or in Chapter 84) for which the applicant is
requesting a license;
(g) The location of the proposed adult entertainment business,
including a legal description of the property, street address
and telephone number(s), if any;
(h) The applicant's mailing address and residential address;
(i) A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
(j) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number
and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification
number, or if a corporation, the federally issued tax
identification number; and
(k) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business; the sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches; and
(2) If an applicant wishes to operate an adult entertainment business
which shall exhibit on the premises in a viewing room or booth of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes, other
video reproductions or live entertainment which depict specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the applicant shall
also comply with all applicable sections of this Code.
(3) If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license
as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an adult
entertainment business is other than an individual, each individual
who has a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under the following section, and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
C. Before the Township will issue an adult entertainment business
employee license, the applicant and/or employee shall submit to the
Township, on a form to be provided by the Township, the following
information:
(1) The employee's name or any other name (including stage names) or
aliases used by the individual;
(2) The employee's age and date and place of birth;
(3) The employee's height, weight, hair color and eye color;
(4) The employee's present residence address and telephone number;
§ 22-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-3
22:42
§ 22-4. Issuance of license.
(5) The employee's present business address and telephone number;
(6) The date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information for the employee;
(7) The employee's social security number;
(8) Proof that the employee is at least 18 years of age;
(9) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by any
police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant;
(10) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate in this or any other county, municipality,
state or country any business, or has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended; in the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension; a copy of any order or denial, revocation or suspension
shall be attached to the application; and
(11) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.
A. Within 30 days after receipt of a complete adult entertainment business
license, the Township shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to
an applicant. Upon the filing of a complete application for an adult
entertainment business license or adult entertainment business
employee license, the Township shall refer the application to the
appropriate Township official and/or consultant for an investigation to
be made on such information as is contained in the application. The
investigation process shall be completed within 30 days from the date
the completed application is filed. The Township shall approve the
issuance of a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(2) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
§ 22-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-4
22:43
§ 22-5. Fees.
(3) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been denied a license by the Township to operate an adult
entertainment business within the preceding 12 months or whose
license to operate an adult entertainment business has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months;
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this
chapter;
(5) The premises to be used for the adult entertainment business has
not been approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official as
being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
(6) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; or
(7) The applicant fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 22-5 of this chapter.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
adult entertainment business and the specific classification of adult
entertainment use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult
entertainment business so that they may be easily read at any time.
D. The Fire Marshal and the Building Official shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Township.
E. An adult entertainment business license shall be issued for the specific
classification of adult entertainment use as permitted by ordinance and
applied for.
A. Every application for an adult entertainment business license (whether
for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in an
amount of $1,000 or as amended by the Board by resolution.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every adult entertainment business that is granted a license (new or
§ 22-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-5
22:44
§ 22-6. Inspections.
§ 22-7. Expiration of license.
§ 22-8. Suspension of license.
The Township shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
§ 22-9. Revocation of license.
renewal) shall pay to the Township an annual nonrefundable license fee
of $750 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for an adult entertainment business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual $250 nonrefundable application,
investigation and license fee.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Township,
including the Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer or other official and/or
consultant, to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment business
at any time it is occupied or open for business for the purpose of
insuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable federal, state or Township law.
B. A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this chapter if he refuses to permit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 22-3 above. An
application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date of the license.
B. When the Township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If subsequent to
denial, the Township finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became
final.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
C. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
entertainment business premises.
A. The Township shall revoke a license for the following reasons:
§ 22-5 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-9
22:45
§ 22-10. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of a license at
any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 22-11. Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment
business which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150
square feet of floor space a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other
video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) If a cause of suspension in § 22-7 occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months;
(2) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the licensed premises;
(4) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the licensed
premises;
(5) A licensee has knowingly operated the adult entertainment
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended; or
(6) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the licensed premises.
B. When the Township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If subsequent to revocation of a license, the Township finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
C. After denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an application or
suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. Upon application for an adult entertainment license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and
the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
§ 22-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-11
22:46
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram
in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The Township may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
B. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
C. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Township.
D. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one
licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
E. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding the restrooms. Restrooms may not contain videoreproduction
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required
in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
F. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area required
in Subsection E above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and at
all times to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will
not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Subsection A of
this section.
G. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
H. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less that 5.0 footcandles as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure
that the illumination required herein is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
§ 22-11 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-11
22:47
§ 22-12. Escort agencies.
§ 22-13. Nude model studios.
§ 22-14. Public nudity.
I. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces with no rugs or carpeting.
J. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of or permanently covered by
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition
board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the
floor.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this chapter if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open
to public view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in
a state of nudity or depict specified sexual activities in an adult
entertainment business within the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in
a seminude condition in an adult entertainment business within the
Township unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall
be at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least
two feet from the floor.
C. It shall be unlawful for an employee, while seminude in an adult
entertainment business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron
§ 22-11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 22-14
22:48
§ 22-15. Prohibition against children in adult entertainment
business.
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly allow a person under the age
of 18 years on the premises of an adult entertainment business.
§ 22-16. Hours of operation.
No adult entertainment business may remain open at any time between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
§ 22-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon a
finding of guilt in a civil action before any District Justice, pay a fine not to
exceed $1,000, attorney fees and costs of suit.
or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity
to any employee while said employee is seminude in an adult
entertainment business.
D. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this § 22-14 that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure, as defined by this Code and within the C-I Zoning
District:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;
(b) Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
§ 22-14 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES § 22-17
22:49
Chapter 23
AIR RIFLES AND PISTOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 59.
§ 23-1. Possession or sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons, firm
or corporation to store, sell, offer or expose for sale at retail or have in
their possession with intent to sell at retail or have in their possession on
any public street, alley, place, yard or lot within the limits of the Township
of West Goshen any air rifle or air pistol, commonly known as a "BB gun,"
"slingshot" or any similar device. The term "a sale at retail" shall mean any
sale of less than one dozen such articles or any sale to anyone who is not a
bona fide dealer therein.
§ 23-2. Seizure by police.
The Chief of Police of the Township of West Goshen or any member of the
Police Department of the township is hereby authorized to seize, remove
and destroy any air rifle or air pistol, commonly known as a "BB gun,"
"slingshot" or similar device, which is held and possessed within the
Township of West Goshen in violation of this chapter.
§ 23-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to such offenses as can be
prosecuted under the provisions of any state law nor shall they apply to
guns or pistols having rifled barrels and being commonly used for target
practice and the shooting of small game. For the purposes of this chapter,
such articles shall be deemed to be a deadly weapon and subject to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with respect to the sale and use
thereof.
§ 23-4. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the County Prison for a term of not more than
30 days. Each provision of this chapter that is violated shall constitute a
separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this
§ 22-17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-4
23:50
chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which
violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District
Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs
of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the County Prison for a term of not more than
30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 25
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire alarm systems — See Ch. 41.
§ 25-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALARM SUPPLIER — The business, by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system, or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system, in or on any building, structure or
facility.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or
battery operated, arranged to signal the occurrence of a holdup, burglary
or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police units are
expected to respond.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees, in
attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and have the
duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a
trunkline to the communications center of the Police Department.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building, structure or facility and emits a warning
signal audible outside the building, structure or facility and is designed
to attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other emergency
requiring police to respond.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to transmit a signal by a voice or coded
message that indicates that an emergency condition exists and the need for
an emergency response is required.
§ 23-4 ALARM DEVICES § 25-1
25:51
CENTRAL STATION — A protective system or group of such systems
operated privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation which
accepts recorded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central
station having operators and guards in attendance at all times, who have
the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message,
including the relaying of messages by trunk line to the communications
center of the Police Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The administrative head of the West Goshen Township
Police Department.
FALSE ALARM —
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message,
either directly or indirectly, by an automatic dialing device.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the Township
upon payment of the required fee.
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police communications room
and other rooms which house communications equipment and the police
radio dispatcher.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of West
Goshen.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Township of West Goshen.
An emergency alarm activated by inadvertence, negligence or
unintentional acts, including the malfunction of the alarm system, to
which the West Goshen Township Police Department responds. The
definition excludes alarms caused by malfunctions of the indicator
at the alarm board if such alarm is directly connected to the alarm
board; testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment
outside the premises; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood,
windstorm, thunder or lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which
there is visible evidence; a robbery in progress; and in the case of
an emergency medical alarm, an actual medical emergency requiring
police and/or emergency medical personnel. If doubt exists as to the
cause of the false alarm, the Chief of Police or his designee shall make
a decision regarding the circumstances of the activations.
A.
Multiple alarms received by the Police Department before the system
can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be
considered a single alarm.
B.
The definition of a false alarm also includes the intentional activation
of a holdup alarm for other than a holdup in progress, the intentional
activation of a burglary alarm for other than a burglary and/or the
intentional activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical
emergency.
C.
§ 25-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-1
25:52
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Goshen, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the communications center of
the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling calls on a personto-
person basis and which is identified by a specific listing among the white
pages in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company.
§ 25-2. Alarms without timing mechanisms prohibited.
After the enactment of this chapter, owners or users of audible alarms must
equip such audible alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage
the audible alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms
without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township and
must be disconnected by the owner or user within 60 days from the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 25-3. Audible alarms.
Alarm systems with audible alarms on location may be installed in Township
residences and business establishments so long as they are registered and
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 25-4. Direct keying of automatic dialing devices.
§ 25-5. Indirect keying of automatic dialing devices.
A. No automatic protection device installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be keyed directly to the Chester County Department of
Emergency Services radio room or the Pennsylvania State Police radio
network.
B. After the effective date of this chapter, all automatic dialing devices that
transmit recorded messages directly to the Police Department shall be
keyed to the Township Police Department radio network.
C. Within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, existing
automatic dialing devices in the Township that transmit message to the
Chester County Department of Emergency Services radio room or the
Pennsylvania State Police radio network shall be keyed to the West
Goshen Township radio network.
D. After the effective date of this chapter, no one except an alarm supplier
holding a valid permit from the Township shall install any alarm system
within the confines of the Township.
E. Exception. Automatic alarm systems which transmit an alarm directly
to the alarm panel at the Chester County Department of Emergency
Services may be continued; however, they must be listed with the
Township Police Department and fees paid as required in § 25-8 of this
chapter.
§ 25-1 ALARM DEVICES § 25-5
25:53
§ 25-6. Listing of installations to be furnished by supplier.
A. Any person who has an automatic dialing device in the Township may
arrange to have such device keyed to an intermediary authorized to
relay emergency messages to the Police Department.
B. The relay of messages by authorized intermediaries shall be over a
trunk line as designated by the Chief of Police.
C. Automatic protection devices keyed to an authorized intermediary may
also be keyed to another telephone which is available to the owner or
user of the automatic dialing device or his representative at some other
location.
D. Penalties provided for false alarms that are relayed or transmitted by an
intermediary shall be the responsibility of the owner or user of the
alarm system.
A. Within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter, every alarm
supplier who has keyed an automatic dialing device in the Township to
the Police Department shall furnish to the Chief of Police a current list
of such installations, which list shall include the following information:
(1) The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or user.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number at that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a central station or
any other person or firm who is authorized to respond to an
emergency and gain access to the address where the device is
installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, other than the alarm supplier, who is
responsible for maintenance and repair of the automatic dialing
device.
(5) The type of message contained on the prerecorded message, i.e.,
holdup, burglary or medical emergency.
B. By the fifth working day of each month following the submission of the
initial list, every alarm supplier shall furnish the Police Department
with a supplemental list of any additional installations such supplier has
keyed to the trunk line, along with any corrections to or deletions from
lists previously furnished. An alarm supplier who enters into the
business after the effective date of this chapter shall furnish a list
containing the information specified in Subsection A by the fifth
working day of the month following a first installation and shall
thereafter furnish supplemental lists as required by this section.
C. Users of automatic dialing devices whose devices were installed prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall, within 60 days after such
§ 25-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-6
25:54
§ 25-7. Permit required for installation of devices.
No alarm system shall be installed without a permit. Application for a
permit to install an alarm system shall be made to the Police Department
of the Township. The Police Department shall establish the information to
be contained in such application and may establish a form upon which
applications are to be made. If a form is established by the Police
Department, then all applications shall be made on that form. A separate
permit shall be required for each separate installation of an alarm system.
Upon proper application being made and upon payment of the fee required,
the Police Department shall issue a permit for the installation of an alarm
system.
§ 25-8. Permit fees; availability for inspection; contents; exception;
late charge; registration of preexisting alarms.
enactment, supply the Chief of Police with the information specified in
Subsection A.
D. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Police Department only.
A. The initial fee for an alarm system permit shall be $25, and said permit
shall be obtained from the Police Department prior to the installation of
the alarm system. This initial fee will include an alarm user's permit for
the balance of the calendar year. When the initial application is filed
after July 1 of any calendar year, the fee shall be $12.50 (one-half-year
fee) for the balance of the year. No refunds shall be made under any
circumstances. At the beginning of each year subsequent to the year of
installation, an alarm user's permit shall be renewed at the Police
Department. The fee for such renewal shall be $10 per year.
B. The permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and be valid
for the period specified on same. The permit shall be physically present
upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for
inspection by the Police Department.
C. The permit shall contain:
(1) The address of the property.
(2) The name of the business, if applicable.
(3) The name of the owner, tenant or agent responsible for the
property.
(4) The alarm company responsible for maintaining the system, if
applicable.
(5) The type of alarm (burglar, holdup or medical).
(6) How the alarm signal will be received by the communications
center (tape, central station, etc.).
§ 25-6 ALARM DEVICES § 25-8
25:55
§ 25-9. Certain alarm users exempt from permit requirements.
(7) At least two alternate emergency numbers of persons to be
contacted to secure the property.
(8) Any additional information as may be determined to be necessary.
D. Exception. An alarm user who is over the age of 65 and is the primary
occupant of a residence, and if no business is conducted at the
residence, may obtain a user's permit from the Township without
paying the above-stated permit fee.
E. Users who fail to obtain a permit within 60 days after the effective date
of this chapter or who are delinquent 60 days or more in renewing a
permit shall be liable to pay a late charge penalty of $20.
F. Alarm users who have had an alarm system installed or who have
themselves installed an alarm system prior to the enactment of this
chapter shall be required to register their alarm system with the Police
Department within 60 days the enactment of this chapter. Registration
of preexisting alarms shall be made on the same form used as an
application to install a new alarm system. The initial fee for registration
of a preexisting alarm system shall be $10. Upon proper application
being made and upon payment of the fee required, the Police
Department shall issue a user's permit valid for the balance of the
calendar year in which such application is received.
A. An alarm user who installs a battery powered (nine volts, 11.2 volts or
similar voltage) audible alarm system or an electrically energized
audible alarm system whose sole purpose is to notify the occupants of
that location of an emergency situation is exempt from obtaining a
alarm user's permit if all of the following conditions exist:
(1) The alarm is not connected to any mechanical or electrical device
that automatically notifies a person or agency outside that location
that the alarm system is activated.
(2) The audible alarm does not sound outside the location (no external
speakers).
(3) The internal signal emitted by the audible alarm does not exceed 90
decibels.
(4) The internal alarm does not cause undue annoyance or alarm to
occupants of adjoining premises.
B. Alarm users who are not required to pay a fee (§ 25-8D) or who are
exempt from obtaining an alarm user's permit as above shall,
nevertheless, be subject to the penalty provisions prescribed in §§ 25-19
and 25-20 of this chapter.
§ 25-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-10
25:56
§ 25-10. Permit for alarm systems required; registration.
All locations in the Township of West Goshen equipped with alarm systems,
except as stated in § 25-9 of this chapter, must secure and possess a valid
permit for same and must register and maintain such registration with the
Police Department as prescribed in this chapter.
§ 25-11. Operational requirements.
Automatic dialing devices installed in the Township that are keyed to a
trunk line shall meet the following requirements:
§ 25-12. Information to be furnished to buyer or lessee.
Each alarm supplier who, after the effective date of this chapter, sells
or leases in the Township an automatic dialing device which is keyed to
a trunk line shall furnish operating instructions, a circuit diagram and a
maintenance manual to the buyer or lessee.
§ 25-13. Service responsibilities of supplier.
A. The type and content of recorded messages must be intelligible and in a
format approved by the Chief of Police as appropriate for the type of
emergency, said approval to be obtained prior to installation.
B. No more than one call shall be made over a trunk line to the Police
Department as a result of a single activation of the automatic dialing
device.
C. The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed 15
seconds.
D. Recorded messages may be repeated during one call, but the interval
between each recorded message shall be no less than four seconds.
E. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic dialing
device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of intrusion so
that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to fleeting pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the rattling or vibrating of
doors and windows, vibrations to the premises caused by the passing of
vehicles or any other force not related to genuine alarms.
F. All components comprising such a device must be maintained in good
repair by the owner or user to assure maximum reliability of operation.
A. Each alarm supplier who sells or leases an automatic dialing device in
the Township shall make service available directly or through an agent
on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days a week, to repair such
devices and to correct malfunctions as they occur. Such service shall be
made available to any person using an automatic dialing device at such
user's expense. Any person using an automatic dialing device shall
§ 25-10 ALARM DEVICES § 25-13
25:57
§ 25-14. Disconnection of defective devices.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements as set forth in this chapter are received by the Township
and the Township concludes that the automatic dialing device sending such
messages should be disconnected in order to relieve, the Township Police
Department of the burden of responding to false alarms, the Township
may require that the owner or lessee of the device, or his representative,
disconnect the device until it is made to comply with said operational
requirements. If disconnection of the defective device is not accomplished
promptly and the Township determines that the malfunctioning device is
repeatedly sending false alarms without any intermittent valid alarms, the
Township may then take any action necessary to terminate the receiving of
alarms.
§ 25-15. Inspection of devices.
make arrangements for service to be available for such device on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis.
B. At the time of installation, an alarm supplier shall furnish to any buyer
or lessee using a repair service written information as to how service
may be obtained at any time, including the telephone number of the
automatic dialing device supplier or agent responsible for such service.
The buyer or lessee and the alarm supplier or agent supplying a service
shall be responsible for having the device disconnected or repaired
within 48 hours after notice that the automatic dialing device or alarm
system is not functioning properly.
A. The public safety requires that the incidence of false alarms and
malfunctioning automatic dialing devices be kept to a minimum so as to
reduce unnecessary calls to the Police Department and to increase the
effectiveness of properly functioning automatic dialing devices. In order
to enforce this chapter and to reduce the incidence of false alarms and
malfunctioning automatic dialing devices, it is necessary that
appropriate Township officials have the right to inspect the installation
and operation of any alarm system installed in the Township.
B. Application for a permit for the installation of an alarm system and
subsequent installation of such a system pursuant to a permit issued or
the continuance of the installation of any alarm system already installed
at the effective date of this chapter shall constitute consent by the
owner or lessee thereof and authorization for the inspection of any such
installation and/or operation by the Chief of Police, Township Zoning
Office, Township Building Inspector or any other designated agent of
the Township.
C. All such entries upon the premises in which an alarm system is installed
and all such inspections of the installation and operation of alarm
systems shall be at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice,
except in emergency situations.
§ 25-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-16
25:58
§ 25-16. Additional standards.
Every alarm supplier selling, leasing or furnishing to any user, or a user who
privately installs, an alarm system, except those covered in § 24-9, which is
located on premises within the Township shall:
§ 25-17. Notice requirements for testing or demonstrations.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any automatic dialing
device or other alarm system without first notifying the shift supervisor
of the Township police radio network, unless the system is keyed through
an intermediary, in which case no such notification is necessary unless the
alarm or signal is to be relayed to the Police Department.
§ 25-18. Copies of chapter to be furnished by suppliers.
Automatic protective device suppliers and installers shall furnish at their
own expense, at or prior to the time of contracting, a copy of this chapter to
owners, lessees or users of the equipment or services to be supplied.
§ 25-19. False alarms.
A. Be required to notify the communications center of alarm activations on
the proper trunk line only.
B. Be permitted to install only equipment that is listed by Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc., as being electrically safe and which will meet the
Township requirements for the alarm system. Wiring for the alarm
system must conform with all applicable Township codes.
C. Be required to cause each alarm system installed to be provided with
standby battery power which shall automatically and immediately take
over in the event of a power failure.
D. Be required to install equipment in such a way as to neutralize
electrical surges on the alarm system.
E. Be required to provide an automatic audible alarm cutoff within 15
minutes of initial activation of any audible alarms installed to any and
all alarm systems and, further, be required to disable the audible signal
if the alarm is in a runaway condition, that is, if the audible alarm
activates and resets at continuing and unspecified periods.
F. Be required to deactivate any alarm system within a reasonable period
of time when multiple false alarms are received.
A. Consent to pay costs; schedule of costs. [Amended 10-11-1988 by
Ord. No. 8-1988; 4-14-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
(1) For the purposes of defraying the costs to the Township of
responding to false alarms, the owner, lessee or user of any alarm
system or automatic dialing device, persons using the services of
an intermediary, users of audible alarms and users of any other
§ 25-16 ALARM DEVICES § 25-19
25:59
kind of alarm systems or any other kind of direct or indirect
connection with the police communications center, except persons
using the two-way live voice communication by telephone, shall,
as a condition to installation and continued operation of such
equipment or service, execute a consent in such form as may be
prescribed by the Township that such owner, lessee or user shall
pay the Township for all false alarms (as defined in § 25-1 of this
chapter) following the first one, according to the following schedule
for each false alarm originating from the owners, lessee's or users
premises:
(a) First false alarm, per calendar year: a warning; provided,
however, that if the Township responds to a false alarm at any
location which is not registered and for which a valid permit
for the alarm system has not been secured in violation of
§§ 25-7 and 25-10, as a condition of registration of the alarm
system, the owner, lessee or user shall pay the Township a fee
of $50.
(b) Second false alarm through the third false alarm in any
calendar year: $50 for each such alarm.
(c) Fourth false alarm through the seventh false alarm in any
calendar year: $100 for each such alarm.
(d) Eighth false alarm and for each false alarm thereafter in any
calendar year: $200 for each such alarm.
(2) Each such payment provided for in Subsection A(1) of this § 25-19
shall be a civil claim by the Township and is in addition to and shall
not affect the penalty provisions prescribed by § 25-20 hereof.
B. Failure to comply. Any such owner, lessee or user who fails to execute
the consent described in Subsection A within 90 days from the effective
date of this chapter shall, within the ninety-day period, disconnect the
alarm system, automatic dialing device or any other kind of direct or
indirect connection with the police communications center and shall
discontinue using the services of any intermediaries.
C. Any owner, lessee or user of an alarm system may revoke or refuse to
consent as set forth in Subsection A above only by disconnecting the
alarm system. With respect to such systems installed at the effective
date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user can refuse or revoke the
aforesaid consent by disconnecting such automatic protection device
within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter.
D. Any police officer responding to an alarm which is determined to be
false shall promptly notify the Chief of Police of such alarm, and he
shall, within 30 days, have notification of such false alarm sent via
United States mail to the person in whose name the alarm is registered.
[Amended 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 8-1988]
§ 25-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-19
25:60
§ 25-20. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended
10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 8-1988; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
§ 25-21. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or of any other part.
E. By submitting an application for permit for the installation of an
emergency medical alarm system and the subsequent installation of
such a system or by the continuation of the use of a medical emergency
alarm system already installed at the effective date of this chapter, the
owner, lessee or user thereof shall agree that such permit application
constitutes a waiver by such person of the right to bring or file any
action, claim or complaint whatsoever against any police officer or
medical emergency personnel who make or makes a forced entry in
response to such an alarm into the premises on which such an alarm is
installed. In the event that the owner of such premises is a person other
than the permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee or other user
not the owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed, such
permit application shall constitute an indemnification agreement by the
applicant to hold harmless any such police officer or medical
emergency personnel from any and all damages whatsoever claimed by
the lessor or owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed.
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys
fees, incurred by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure.
B. Any person found liable of misuse, false activation or continual
activation of an alarm system shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a
District Justice, pay a fine for each such violation in an amount not less
than $100 and not more than $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys fees, incurred by the Township. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 25-19 ALARM DEVICES § 25-22
25:61
§ 25-22. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after adoption as prescribed
by law.
§ 25-23. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 4-1975, adopted by the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township on June 10, 1975, and now Chapter 25 of the Code of the
Township of West Goshen, is repealed in its entirety on the effective date of
this chapter.
Chapter 26
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment businesses — See Ch. 22.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 59, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 25-22 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 25-23
26:62
ARTICLE I
Nudity or Sexual Conduct in Establishments Dealing in Alcoholic
Beverages
[Adopted 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-2003]
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE —
ESTABLISHMENTS DEALING IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any
business or commercial establishment (whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement),
including those licensed by the commonwealth for sale and/or service of
alcoholic beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant; night
club; country club; cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious, social,
fraternal or similar organization; business or commercial establishment
where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served, or provided with
the knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be or is intended
to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or combination with
an alcoholic beverage on the premises of said business or commercial
establishment; or business or commercial establishment where the
consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. A private residence,
whether permanent or temporary in nature, is not an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages.
PERSON — A natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause prescribing or imposing a fine, imprisonment or both, the term
Any liquor, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which
is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all
drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, and reused,
recovered or redistilled denatured alcohol usable or taxable for
beverage purposes which contain more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by
volume.
A.
Any malt or brewed beverage, beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar
fermented malt beverage containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by
volume, by whatever name such beverage may be called.
B.
Any whiskey or alcoholic distillate from a fermented mash of grain
capable of being used for beverage purposes.
C.
§ 26-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 26-1
26:63
"person" as applied to association shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporation, shall mean the officers thereof,
except as to incorporated clubs, the term "person" shall mean such
individual or individuals who, under the bylaws of such club, shall have
jurisdiction over the possession and sale of alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 26-2. Nudity and sexual conduct prohibited.
A. Exposure prohibited.
(1) No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, including
without limitation the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if covered, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage, buttocks, or any simulation thereof, in an establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
(2) For purposes of this Subsection A, "buttocks" shall include the area
at the rear of the body which lies between two imaginary lines
running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first
or top of such line drawn at the top of the cleave of the nates (i.e.,
the prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of
the hip to the back of the leg) and the second or bottom line drawn
at the lowest visible point of this cleavage or the lowest point of the
curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is lower, and
between two imaginary lines on each side of the body, which lines
are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above, which perpendicular lines are drawn through the
point at which the nates meet the outer side of each leg. This article
would be violated, therefore, if any portion of this area is visible
from any vantage point.
B. No female shall expose to public view any portion of the breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or
simulation thereof, in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, opaque leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not
exposed or visible in whole or in part.
C. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to
public view his or her genitals, including without limitation the human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered, pubic area,
vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks as defined in Subsection
A hereinabove, or any simulation thereof, within the establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
D. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to
expose to public view any portion of her breasts as defined in
§ 26-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 26-2
26:64
§ 26-3. Violation and penalties.
Any person who or which has violated or permitted the violation of any of
the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of
not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence
or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. In the event that any such person against
whom a judgment has been rendered by the District Justice neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of
this article shall be paid over to the Township of West Goshen.
Subsection B hereinabove, or any simulation thereof, within the
establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
E. No person shall engage in, and no person maintaining, owning or
operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer
or permit, any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, the
touching, caressing, or fondling of the female breast as that term is
defined in Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks as that term is defined in
Subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including without
limitation the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered, or the simulation thereof, within an establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages.
F. No person shall cause, and no person maintaining, owning or operating
an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit,
the exposition or availability of any graphic presentation, including
photographs, pictures or projection of film, which depicts human
genitals, including without limitation the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if covered, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage, buttocks as that term is defined in Subsection A
hereinabove, female breast as that term is defined in subsection B
hereinabove, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation, any sexual act prohibited by law, the touching,
caressing or fondling of the female breast as that term is defined in
Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks as that term is defined in
subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including without limitation
the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered,
scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to
depict or drawings are employed to portray any of the prohibited
activities described in Subsections A through F inclusive hereinabove,
or any simulation thereof, within any establishment dealing in alcoholic
beverages.
§ 26-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 26-3
26:65
Chapter 28
BUILDING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 54.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 26-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 26-3
26:66
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)11
§ 28-1. through § 28-5. (Reserved)
11.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 28, Building Construction, adopted 5-13-1998 by Ord. No.
7-1998, was repealed as follows: Art. I, Building Code was repealed 5-26-2004 by Ord. No.
7-2004 (For current provisions, see Ch. 32, Construction Codes, Uniform.); Art. II, One
and Two Family Dwelling Code, was repealed 5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004 (For current
provisions, see Art. II, Residential Code, of this chapter.).
§ 28-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 28-1
26:67

ARTICLE II
Residential Code
[Adopted 5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
§ 28-6. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
A, B, D, F, as now and as hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended and
revised, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than
three copies of the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, have been
and now are filed in the Office of the Secretary of West Goshen Township,
and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
§ 28-7. Amendments and additions.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section R101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words, "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section R103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following: "SECTION R103 ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section RI 03.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
R103.1. General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution,
appoint a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code
Official shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of
this Code. The Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or
more building officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under
the Act. The Building Code Official and building officials shall be
referred to in this Code as "Code Officials."
D. Section R108.2 shall be amended to state as follows:
R108.2 Fee schedule. Fees for each plan examination and building
permit, including the moving or demolition of buildings and structures,
shall be paid in advance in accordance with the fee schedule
established by resolution duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors
of West Goshen Township, as the same may from time to time be
amended.
E. Section R112, Board of Appeals, shall be deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No.
§ 28-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 28-7
26:69
05-2012; 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No.
8-2015]
SECTION R112
BOARD OF APPEALS
R112.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
F. Table R301.2(1) shall be amended by inserting the following:
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speeds
(mph)
Seismic
Design
Category
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth Termite Decay
Winter
Design
Temp.
Ice
Shield
Underlayment
Required
Flood
Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp.
30 90 B Severe 36 M-H S-M 10 Yes 11/20/
96
1,000 52.6
G. A new Section 304.5 shall be added which shall read as follows:
304.5 Minimum residential living area. No one-story dwelling
hereafter erected on any lot shall have a projected first floor living area
of less than 1,100 square feet; and no one-and-one-half-story dwelling
hereafter erected on any lot shall have a projected first floor living
area of less than 950 square feet; and no two-story dwelling hereafter
erected on any lot shall have a projected living area of less than 700
square feet. In determining square footage of living area, there shall
be excluded all porches (whether enclosed or unenclosed), garages,
breezeways, utility rooms or similar areas.
H. Section P2603.6.1 shall be amended by replacing the words,
"[NUMBER]" with "36 inches" in both blanks.
I. Section P3103.1 shall be amended by replacing the words "[NUMBER]"
with "12 inches" in both blanks.
§ 28-7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 28-7
26:70
Chapter 29
BUILDINGS, EXISTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 54.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 29-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Existing Building Code, 2003 Edition, as now and as hereafter
supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., with Appendices A and B. Not fewer than
three copies of the International Existing Building Code, 2003 Edition, have
been and now are filed in the Office of the Secretary of West Goshen
Township, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein.
§ 29-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, insertions and changes are hereby
made to the International Existing Building Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words, "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following: "SECTION 103 ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section 103.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
§ 28-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 29-2
26:71
103.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more building
officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official and building official shall be referred to in this
Code as "Code Officials."
D. Section 106.2 shall be amended to state as follows:
108.2 Fee schedule. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution,
adopt a schedule of fees which shall be kept on file by the Township
Secretary and shall be reviewed and revised as necessary by the Board
of Supervisors.
E. Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
SECTION 112
BOARD OF APPEALS
112.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
F. Section 113.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision
of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building
Official, or of a permit or use and occupancy permit issued under
the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a summary offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, plus costs
and attorney's fees, and, upon default of the payment of the fine and
costs, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
G. Section 1201.2 shall be amended by deleting the words, "[DATE TO BE
INSERTED BY JURISDICTION"] and replacing them with "October 4,
1967."
§ 29-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 29-2
26:72
Chapter 31
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Garbage and recycling — See Ch. 45.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 57.
§ 31-1. Burning prohibited.
It is unlawful to burn or to authorize another to burn any materials, natural
or man-made, including but not limited to, leaves, twigs, trees, brush,
lumber, building materials, construction waste materials, municipal waste,
recyclable materials and any commercial or industrial by-product waste
materials of any kind, outdoors anywhere within West Goshen Township.
§ 31-2. Extinguishment of dangerous fires.
Any fire on public or private property may be extinguished by the local fire
company having jurisdiction, either with or without consent of the property
owner or person in charge thereof if, in the opinion of the West Goshen
Township Fire Marshal, a West Goshen Township police officer or Township
Codes Enforcement Officer, such fire constitutes a danger to persons or
property or is in violation of this chapter.
§ 31-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not
more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 29-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 31-3
26:73
Chapter 32
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 25.
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 54.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 32-1. Administration and enforcement.
The Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the Act and the
regulations promulgated under the Act which are found at 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 (the Regulations) as the same are amended
from time to time, as the Township's Building Code. The Township shall
notify the Department within 30 days of adoption of this chapter that the
Township has elected to administer and enforce the Act in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 32-2. Adoption of standards.
A. By electing to adopt, administer and enforce the Act, the Township
hereby adopts and incorporates as fully as if set out at length herein
Chapters 1-29 and 31-35 of the International Building Code, 2003
Edition, (IBC 2003) as now and as hereafter supplemented, reissued,
amended and revised and its successor building codes, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., as the Township's Building Code.
Not fewer than three copies of the International Building Code, 2003
Edition, have been and now are filed in the office of the Township
Secretary and may be examined there without charge. If any provision
in Chapter 1 of the IBC 2003 which governs administration of the
Building Code is inconsistent with the Regulations, the provisions in the
Regulations shall govern the administration and enforcement of the
Building Code.
B. The Township hereby adopts and incorporates as fully as if set out at
length herein all Appendices of the IBC 2003, as now and as hereafter
supplemented, reissued, amended and revised and its successor
appendices as published by the International Code Council, Inc.
§ 31-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-3
26:74
§ 32-3. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following sections of the IBC 2003 are hereby amended and revised as
follows:
A. Section 101.1 is amended by the insertion of "West Goshen Township"
in the "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" blank.
B. The title to Section 103 shall be amended to read as follows:
"SECTION 103 BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL."
C. Section 103.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Board of Supervisors
shall, by resolution, appoint a Building Code Official who shall be
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official shall be responsible for administration and
enforcement of this Code. The Building Code Official shall be assisted
by one or more Building Officials who shall also be appointed by
the Board of Supervisors and certified by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania under the Act.
D. Section 103.2 shall be deleted.
E. Section 103.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
103.3 Deputies. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint such number
of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as
shall be necessary for the administration of this Code. The Board may
designate one or more deputies who shall and may exercise all of the
powers of the Building Code Official during the temporary absence or
disability of the Building Code Official.
F. Section 108.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees for each plan examination
and building permit, including the moving or demolition of buildings
and structures, shall be paid in advance in accordance with the fee
schedule established by resolution duly adopted by the Board of
Supervisors of West Goshen Township, as the same may from time to
time be amended.
G. Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
§ 32-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-3
26:75
SECTION 112
BOARD OF APPEALS
112.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
H. Section 113.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended to read as follows:
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates or permits the
violation of any provision of this chapter or who shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct,
alter or repair any building or structure in violation of either an
approved plan, a directive of the Building Official or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty
of a summary offense and shall be subject to the payment of a fine
of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated
shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof
in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute
a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a
separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or upon default
of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment
in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and
penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer.
I. Section 1612.3 is amended by the insertion of "West Goshen Township"
in the "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" blank and "November 20, 1996" in
the "[DATE OF ISSUANCE]" blank.
J. Section 1805.2.1 shall be amended by adding the following sentence at
the end of the existing section: "For purposes of this Code, the frost line
shall be 36 inches below ground surface level."
K. Section 3410.2 is amended by the insertion of "October 4, 1967" in the
"[DATE TO BE INSERTED BY THE JURISDICTION]" blank.
§ 32-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-4
26:76
§ 32-4. Enforcement official; appointment.
The Building Code shall be administered and enforced by the Building Code
Official who shall be appointed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 32-5. Provisions of existing Building Code which shall remain in
effect.
Pursuant to Section 104(d)(1) of the Act, the Township may keep in full force
and effect any provisions of the Township's existing Building Code which
were in effect on or before July 1, 1999, or reenactments of simultaneously
repealed ordinances which were originally adopted before July 1, 1999,
provided that such provisions meet or exceed the Act. Under such authority,
the Township intends to keep in full force and effect the following provisions
in its existing Building Code and Fire Prevention Code which meet or
exceed the standards in the Act:
A. A new Section 105.3.1 shall be added which shall read as follows:
105.3.1. Additional application requirements. In addition to the
requirements in Section 105.3 above, each application shall be
accompanied by:
(1) A description of any and all easements and/or deed restrictions
affecting the land on which the construction is proposed to occur.
In addition, such application shall be accompanied by a written
certification, signed by the landowner specifically describing any
and all easements and/or deed restrictions affecting the land or, if
there are none, a certification so stating.
(2) A description of the water supply facilities and sewer facilities
necessary to service the proposed construction.
(3) No building permit shall be issued until the applicant supplies proof
of and the Building Official has confirmed:
(a) That the water supply facilities have been certified as adequate
by the appropriate governmental health agency having
jurisdiction; and
(b) Either public sewers are available or a permit for their
construction has been issued by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection or other agency having
jurisdiction, in which case no occupancy permit shall be issued
until public sewers are available, or that the Chester County
Health Department has issued a permit for on-site sewage
disposal facilities for the type and extent of development
contemplated by the building permit application.
(4) A copy of the approved subdivision plan in accordance with the
West Goshen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance or, in the alternative, in the event no such plan is
§ 32-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-5
26:77
required, the applicant shall submit a written certification of
nonapplicability thereof.
B. A new section 912 titled, "Additional Provisions regarding Fire
Protection" shall be added which shall read as follows:
912.1 Automatic sprinkler equipment required throughout
certain buildings. Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed
and maintained throughout buildings of the types set forth below
hereafter erected, converted or substantially altered:
(1) High-hazard occupancy buildings.
(2) Sanitoriums, nursing homes, convalescent homes and homes for
the aged and housing bed or ambulatory patients.
(3) Bowling alleys.
(4) Non-fire-resistive buildings used as places of public assembly,
motion-picture theaters and auditoriums used for theatrical,
operatic or musical performances.
(5) Fire-resistive buildings having an undivided floor area of 10,000
square feet or more per floor, used in whole or in part for the
manufacture, storage or sale of combustible goods, wares or
merchandise, including, inter alia, stores, restaurants and
supermarkets.
(6) Fire-resistive buildings having an undivided floor area of 10,000
square feet or more per floor, used for the housing of automobiles,
not including open-deck garages unless the same are over two
stories in height.
(7) Non-fire-resistive buildings having an undivided floor area of 6,000
square feet or more per floor, used for the housing of automobiles.
912.2 Automatic sprinkler equipment required in certain
parts of certain buildings.
(1) Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in cellars, subcellars, basements, subbasements,
storage rooms, major kitchens and chutes of buildings of the
types set forth below, hereafter erected or substantially
altered:
(a) Hotels and motels.
(b) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(c) Schools, dormitories and other buildings used for
educational purposes; provided, however, that in such
buildings, automatic sprinkler equipment shall also be
installed and maintained in stairways and corridors.
(d) Public buildings.
§ 32-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
26:78
(e) Churches and chapels.
(2) Automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in all cellars and basements of buildings hereafter
erected or substantially altered, which cellars and basements
have an undivided area of 2,500 square feet or more and
are used for the manufacture, storage or sale of combustible
goods, wares or merchandise or for the housing of
automobiles.
912.3 Dry standpipe fire lines required in certain buildings.
Dry standpipe fire lines shall be installed and maintained in
buildings more than 25 feet in height, in accordance with the
standards set forth in NFPA No. 14; provided, however, that dry
standpipe fire lines shall not be required in the following:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Single-family or two-family dwellings converted into
apartment houses, dormitories, office buildings, schools or
stores after the effective date of this Code.
912.4 Location and size of sprinkler heads, valves and pipes
and water supply. The location and size of sprinkler heads, pipes
and other fire-extinguishing equipment, appliances and devices
shall comply with the standards set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association Standard No. 13. Such equipment shall
be connected to an adequate water supply, as determined by an
approved rating bureau and the Fire Marshal.
912.5 Approval of plans. Before any automatic sprinkler
equipment is installed or altered in any building, detailed plans
thereof shall first be submitted to and approved in writing by an
approved rating bureau, and thereafter the said plans shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Fire Marshal. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to prevent the installation
of other types of automatic fire-protection equipment than those
specified herein, when such equipment is approved in writing by
an approved rating bureau and the Fire Marshal.
912.6 Exemptions. Nothing herein contained shall be construed
to require the installation of automatic sprinkler equipment in:
(1) Safe deposit or other vaults.
(2) Rooms or buildings used for the sale, manufacture or storage
of aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphide,
metallic sodium, potassium, quicklime, magnesium powder,
sodium peroxide or like substances to which the application of
water will cause or increase the fire hazard.
§ 32-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-5
26:79
(3) Any other location where the installation of such equipment
may, in the opinion of an approved rating bureau and the Fire
Marshal, increase the hazard to life or property or for any
other reason be impractical due to existing conditions.
912.7 Fire protection equipment.
(1) Standpipe systems. In all buildings in which standpipes are
required, they shall be carried up as the construction
progresses in such a manner so that they will always be ready
for Fire Department use on the topmost floor that has been
installed.
(2) Detailed requirements for standpipes shall be as follows:
(a) Class of system: dry.
(b) Number and location of risers: one riser per fire tower.
(c) Number and location of outlets.
[1] There shall be one outlet valve at each floor level,
including the basement and subbasement located in
each fire tower. The roof outlets shall be at the
direction of the Fire Marshal.
[2] All outlets shall be two-and-one-half-inch N.S.F.H.T.
male couplings equipped with caps or plugs and
chains.
[3] All standpipe risers shall be interconnected at their
base.
[4] The number and location of the Fire Department
siamese connections shall be as directed by the Fire
Marshal.
[a] The Fire Department siamese connections shall
be located approximately two feet above ground
level or as otherwise directed by the Fire
Marshal.
[b] Each Fire Department siamese connection shall
be provided with a conspicuous durable and
permanently legible sign reading, "Dry
Standpipe for Fire Department Use Only."
[c] The Fire Department siamese connections shall
be equipped with two-and-one-half-inch N.S.T.
male couplings with caps or plugs equipped
with chains and clapper valves.
912.8 Fire protection equipment: minimum requirements
for fire alarm systems.
(1) The following minimum requirements for an approved fire
alarm system are hereby established, but additional
requirements may be imposed by the Fire Marshal when more
stringent regulations are deemed necessary:
§ 32-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
26:80
(a) All exposed wiring must be installed in approved metallic
raceway or armored cable [BX]. The source of current
for fire alarm systems shall be taken from the service
side of the main switch and shall terminate in a fused
safety switch prominently stenciled "FIRE ALARM." The
fused switch shall be located within three feet of the main
switch.
(b) Automatic fire-detecting equipment shall be installed at
the top of the basement or cellar stairway and throughout
all parts of the basement or cellar. Combination rate-ofrise
and fixed-temperature detectors shall be used and
shall be installed on the ceiling. A sufficient number of
sounding devices approved by the Fire Marshal shall be
installed on each floor of the building and be so arranged
that they may be heard in all parts of the building above
all other normal sounds.
(c) One hammerless break-glass station shall be installed on
the first floor of the building within 10 feet of the primary
exit. A spare glass and a key for the same shall be kept at
the fire alarm control box.
(d) An inspection certificate from an approved rating bureau
showing that the installation has been inspected and
approved shall be supplied to the Fire Marshal by the
company which installed the approved fire alarm system.
(2) After-ring fire alarm. All coded fire alarm systems required by
the Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth,
except pre-signal systems, shall be provided with a relay that
will sound all alarm devices automatically and continuously
after the code cycle is completed and until the system is
turned off manually at the main control panel.
912.9 Fire protection equipment: regulations applying
solely to private fire hydrants.
(1) Private fire hydrants connected to sufficient water supply for
fire-fighting purposes shall be provided in new or existing real
estate subdivisions, on new and existing streets, in shopping
centers, educational institutions, apartment complexes and
similar occupancies at the direction of the Fire Marshal, who
shall consult with an approved rating bureau directing such
installations. When new streets are taken over and made
public by the Township, all private fire hydrants on such
streets become public, and thereafter water rental charges for
the same are borne by the Township.
§ 32-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-5
26:81
(2) Private fire hydrants shall adhereto the following
specifications: four-and-one-half-inch V.O. A-24009-17
hydrants, with two two-and-one-half-inch N.S.T. couplings, one
four-and-one-half-inch Pumper Nozzle F-547, one ninesixteenths-
inch pent nut open right and either a six-inch hub
shoe or a six-inch mechanical-joint shoe.
912.10 Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Used as fuel for space heaters for drying and winter protection
during construction work.
(a) Only Department of Transportation shipping cylinders not
exceeding 100 pounds' capacity shall be used as
containers for liquefied petroleum gas. In addition, the
valve on the cylinder shall be protected when in storage
or transportation by a protective cap or other device
approved by the Fire Marshall in order to give adequate
protection against valve damage.
(b) Each cylinder in use shall be adequately supported in an
upright position. Where the space heater and cylinder are
located on the same floor, not more than one cylinder
shall be used for each 400 square feet of floor space to
be heated. For concrete protection only where cylinders
are placed on the floor below where heaters are in use,
not more than one heater shall be used for each 200
square feet of floor space to be heated. Under certain
climatic conditions, additional heaters may be used when
approved by the Fire Marshal.
(c) Each heater shall have installed thereon a one-hundredpercent-
shutoff safety valve.
(d) Only two-braid neoprene hose shall be used for
connecting the supply cylinder to the heater. Such hose
shall be fitted at each end with threaded hose unions, and
the hose with fitting shall withstand a prepressure test of
250 pounds per square inch. The length of the hose shall
not exceed 20 feet and shall be protected from damage.
(e) Heaters shall be placed at least six feet from any cylinder
or any combustible material in any horizontal direction
and at least 10 feet from any tarpaulin cover. They shall
not be placed on unprotected wood flooring nor used in
any unventilated areas.
§ 32-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
26:82
(f) No excess storage of liquefied petroleum gas is permitted
in the same area where heaters are being used. Excess
cylinders shall be stored in a separate storage structure
satisfactory to the Fire Marshal. Such structure shall be
kept securely locked when not in actual use and shall
be provided with fire extinguishers in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 10. All
cylinders empty or full shall be treated alike and handled
in the same manner.
(g) Signs shall be installed at the storage areas reading
"Keep Open Flames and Fires Away" and "No Smoking in
This Area" and in other locations as directed by the Fire
Marshal.
(h) Oxygen cylinders shall not be stored in the same storage
area with liquefied petroleum gas cylinders.
(i) The placement and operation of the heaters shall be
under the supervision of two persons whose names are to
be registered with the Fire Marshal.
(j) All cylinders shall be stored and used in an upright
position.
(k) Not more than 300 pounds of liquefied petroleum gas
shall be connected to one manifold inside a building.
If more than one manifold is required, they shall be
separated by 50 feet.
(l) Suitable means for fire extinguishment shall be provided
on each floor where the heaters are used. At least threefourths-
inch hose with running water to reach all points
or six water pails (protected from freezing) for each 5,000
square feet or approved-type nonfreezing fireextinguishing
equipment shall be provided.
(2) Used for temporary space heating in field offices, shanties,
trailers or similar enclosures in connection with construction
work and temporary tents.
(a) Cylinders in use shall be adequately supported and
braced in an upright position outside the structure
wherein the liquefied petroleum gas is being used.
(b) Cylinders shall be adequately protected from extreme
weather conditions, mechanical injury or adjacent
sources of heat and also by a permanent protective cap
or other device approved by the Fire Marshal, in order to
give adequate protection against valve damage.
(c) Cylinders shall be of a type complying with United States
Department of Transportation Specifications for the
Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases and of a container
capacity not to exceed 100 pounds.
§ 32-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-5
26:83
(d) Only two-braid neoprene hose shall be used for
connecting the supply cylinder to the heater. Such hose
shall be fitted at each end with threaded hose unions, and
the hose with fitting shall withstand a prepressure test of
250 pounds per square inch. The length of the hose shall
not exceed 20 feet and shall be protected from damage.
(e) Low-pressure regulators shall be of a type approved by
the Underwriters' Laboratories or the American Gas
Association.
(f) When field office trailers are constructed with the heating
equipment as an integral part, including copper tubing,
the liquefied petroleum gas supply shall be connected
to the copper tubing protruding from the trailer with a
threaded fining in accordance with the requirements of
Subsection 912.10(1)(d).
(g) No excess storage of liquefied petroleum gas will be
permitted in the same area where heaters are being used.
Excess cylinders shall be stored in a separate storage
structure satisfactory to the Fire Marshal. Such structure
shall be kept securely locked when not in actual use
and provided with fire extinguishers in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 10. All
cylinders, empty or full, shall be treated alike and handled
in the same manner.
(h) Signs shall be installed at the storage areas reading
"Keep Open Flames and Fires Away" and "No Smoking in
This Area" and in other locations as directed by the Fire
Marshal.
(i) Oxygen cylinders shall not be stored in the same storage
area with liquefied petroleum gas cylinders.
(j) The method of manifolding two cylinders with highpressure
copper tubing (short lengths) factory-coupled
to the automatic gas regulator is acceptable to the Fire
Marshal.
(k) Fire extinguishers shall be installed in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 10.
912.11 Liquefied petroleum gas: used as a fuel for heating
tar kettles.
(1) Only Department of Transportation shipping cylinders not
exceeding 100 pounds' capacity shall be used as containers for
the liquefied petroleum gas.
(2) The connecting of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders to tar
kettle units shall be conducted outdoors.
§ 32-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
26:84
(3) Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders in use shall be adequately
supported in an upright position and safeguarded against
damage or heat.
(4) No excess cylinders shall be stored on the job site without
permission of the Fire Marshal.
(5) Each portable tar kettle unit shall be provided with an
extinguisher of the carbon-dioxide or dry-chemical type
containing at least four pounds of extinguishing agent.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or use
a kindled tar kettle:
(a) In any building or on roofs of any structure unless the roof
is of noncombustible construction.
(b) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(c) On or within two feet of the surface of any asphalt
pavement except for the purpose of repairing, removing
or constructing the same.
(d) Without a pressure regulator and excess-flow check valve
approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories and also
provided with a shutoff valve at the cylinder.
912.12 Restaurants; kitchen protection.
(1) All institutional and commercial kitchen hood and exhaust
duct systems shall be protected against grease fires by a
pressure-operated Underwriters' Laboratories listed
automatic dry-chemical or Underwriters' Laboratories listed
automatic carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing system.
(2) The system shall also have a manual control so that the
plenum area behind the filters and the exhaust duct system
can be flooded with a high concentration of dry chemical
or carbon dioxide to eliminate the possibility of fire being
sustained and expanded.
(3) The exhaust fan in said duct system shall be either
automatically turned off when the system is activated or
allowed to continue operating in accordance with the
recommendation of the manufacturer and approval of the Fire
Marshal.
(4) After the effective date of this Fire Code, all future
installations of fire-extinguishing systems shall be extended
to include the deep-fat fryers if the kitchen is equipped with
the same. In the event that the deep-fat fryers are gas-fired,
an automatic gas shutoff valve shall be installed that will
automatically stop the flow of gas when the fire-protection
system is activated.
912.13 Restaurants.
§ 32-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-5
26:85
(1) Approval of plans. Before any automatic fire-protection
equipment is installed or altered in any restaurant kitchen,
detailed plans thereof shall first be submitted to and approved
in writing by an approved rating bureau, and thereafter said
plans shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
Fire Marshal. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
to prevent the installation of other types of automatic fireprotection
restaurant equipment than those specified herein,
when such equipment is approved, in writing, by an approved
rating bureau and by the Fire Marshal.
(2) Inspection and tests. At least annually, all automatic fireprotection
systems in restaurants shall be thoroughly
inspected and checked for proper operation by a competent
engineer or inspector. Regular service contracts with the
manufacturer or installing company are desirable and
recommended. The goal of such inspections and testing shall
be not only to ensure that the system is in full operating
condition but also to indicate the probable continuance of
that condition until the next inspection. Attention to each
inspection shall be given to any extension of the hazard
protected by the system.
(a) Suitable discharge tests shall be made when any
inspection indicates their advisability. The engineer's
report with recommendations shall be filed with the
owner. Between the regular service contract inspection or
tests, the system shall be inspected visually or otherwise
by approved or competent personnel following an
approved schedule.
(b) At least semiannually, the contents of all expellent gas
containers shall be checked by pressure or weight as
stipulated by the manufacturer against the required
minimum. Also, at least semiannually, the dry chemical in
the system shall be examined to determine whether it is
in freely running powdery condition.
(3) Maintenance. All automatic fire-protection systems in
restaurants shall be maintained in full operating condition
at air times. Impairment and restoration of the system must
be reported promptly to the Fire Marshal. Any difficulties
or impairments shall be corrected at once by competent
personnel.
(4) Instruction. All persons who inspect, test, maintain or operate
automatic fire-protection systems in restaurants shall be
thoroughly trained and kept thoroughly trained in the
functions they are expected to perform. Training programs
approved by the Fire Marshal shall be established for this
purpose.
§ 32-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
26:86
Chapter 33
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
§ 33-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Cigarette Vending Machines'
Regulatory Ordinance."
§ 33-2. Purpose.
The General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by duly
adopted legislation, prohibited the sale of cigarettes to minors (Act of
December 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No. 334, Section 1, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6306). It
is determined by the Board of Supervisors that the use of tobacco products
by minors poses a danger to their health, safety and welfare and that of
the general public and that minors illegally purchase or have the ability to
purchase cigarettes by means of cigarette vending machines. Therefore, the
Board determines that regulating cigarette vending machines to prevent
their use by minors will significantly reduce consumption of cigarette
tobacco products by minors and will benefit their health, safety and welfare
and that of the general public.
§ 33-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIGARETTE — Any roll of tobacco for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco or a roll of tobacco in a wrapper or cover made of any substance
or material other than tobacco, regardless of the size or shape of the roll
or whether the tobacco is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient.
C. The Township shall keep in full force and effect the following
requirements in its building code which provisions were in effect as of
July 1, 1999: [Added 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]
(1) All repairs and alterations to residential buildings shall comply with
the Township's building code adopted on May 26, 2004, and any
successor code adopted by the Township pursuant to Act 45 of
1999.
(2) Construction, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair,
removal and demolition of utility and miscellaneous use structures
which are greater than 500 square feet in area shall comply with
the Township's building code adopted on May 26, 2004, and any
successor code adopted by the Township pursuant to Act 45 of
1999.
§ 32-5 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 33-3
33:87
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical device, whether
automatic or manually operated, controlled by the insertion of legal tender
from which cigarettes are dispensed, whether separately or in a pack of
cigarettes.
PACK OF CIGARETTES — A package, box or container in which cigarettes
are dispensed.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, whether incorporated or
unincorporated, firm, association or other legal entity whatsoever. The term
includes the person who owns a cigarette vending machine, the person in
whose place of business any cigarette vending machine is placed or located
or used by the general public and the person having control over such
machine.
§ 33-4. Prohibitions and restrictions.
§ 33-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by officers of the West
Goshen Township Police Department and any Township Codes Enforcement
Officer, each of whom is authorized to bring prosecutions for violations of
this chapter.
§ 33-6. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date
of the determination of violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation of § 33-4B, C or D is permitted to occur shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to operate
any cigarette vending machine.
B. No cigarette vending machine shall be located, displayed or operated at
any location unless said location prohibits minors from its premises or
permits minors only with adult supervision.
C. Cigarette vending machines shall be placed in locations only where the
machine and its operation are directly visible at all times to the owner
or operator of the premises or his agent, servant or employee.
D. Cigarette vending machines shall not be placed in patron rest rooms or
rest room areas.
§ 33-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 33-6
33:88
Chapter 34
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 59.
§ 34-1. Curfew established; hours; exceptions. [Amended 2-24-1987
by Ord. No. 2-1987]
It shall be unlawful for any minor who has not attained the 18th anniversary
of the date of his birth to remain in or upon any street, public place or
any establishment in the Township of West Goshen between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, prevailing time, except that
on Fridays and Saturdays and all nights between June 15 and September
15, inclusive, the hours shall be 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., provided that this
section shall not apply to any minor accompanied by a parent, guardian or
an adult 21 years of age or over responsible for the care and custody of
the person of such minor or to a minor upon an errand or other legitimate
business directed by such minor's parent or guardian or to any minor who
is engaged in gainful, lawful employment during the curfew hours, provided
that said minor carries identification and evidence in writing to this effect.
§ 34-2. Responsibility of parent.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to
permit any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in or upon any public
place, street or any establishment between the hours specified under § 34-1
hereof, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or any adult 21 years of
age or over, responsible for the care and custody of the minor or unless such
is engaged in gainful employment during the curfew hours.
§ 34-3. Responsibility of operators of establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any establishment or their agents
or employees knowingly to permit any minors under the age of 18 years to
remain upon the premises of said establishment during the hours restricted
under § 34-1.
§ 34-4. Role of Police Department; notice to parent. [Amended
2-24-1987 by Ord. No. 2-1987]
Any police officer who finds a minor under the age of 18 years violating
the provisions of this chapter shall obtain information from such minor as
to his name and address, his age and the name of his parent, guardian or
other person having custody of the minor. The minor shall thereupon be
instructed to proceed to his home forthwith. The information obtained from
the minor shall be transmitted to the Chief of Police, who shall cause a
§ 33-6 CURFEW § 34-4
34:89
written notice by certified mail to be sent to the parent, guardian or other
person having custody of the minor advising of the violation of the chapter
and that any subsequent violation of this chapter shall result in prosecution
under § 34-5 hereof.
§ 34-5. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 2-24-1987
by Ord. No. 2-1987; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not
more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 34-6. Intent; interpretation.
It is declared to be the intention of the chapter that its provisions shall be
liberally construed so as to curb or reduce juvenile delinquency.
Chapter 36
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs in parks — See Ch. 57. Peace and good order — See Ch. 59.
§ 36-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Includes every person having a right of proprietorship or
ownership in a dog and every person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it
in his care and any person who permits a dog to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him.
§ 34-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 36-2
34:90
§ 36-2. Restrictions of dogs.
§ 36-3. Running at large. [Amended 7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989;
4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 02-2012]
§ 36-4. Continuous barking prohibited. [Added 5-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 5-2006]
No person shall own, possess, harbor or control any dog which howls or
barks continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes
such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any
person at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether the dog is
situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that at the time
the dog is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening to
trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for
any other cause which teased or provoked the dog.
A. The owners of every dog within the Township of West Goshen shall at all
times keep such dog either:
(1) Confined within an enclosure from which it cannot escape;
(2) Firmly secured by means of a collar and chain; or
(3) Under the reasonable control of some person.
B. No person shall permit a dog which is under his or her custody or
control, either by leash, restraint, verbal command or otherwise, to
deposit feces upon any public property, including but not limited to
sidewalks, pathways, streets, parking lots, parks, waters or other public
property of any kind. All persons exercising custody or control of dogs
shall be required to immediately cleanup and properly dispose of any
animal feces resulting from the dog's presence on any such public
property. [Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 11-1996]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to permit such
dog to run at large in West Goshen Township. Any such dog found to be
running at large, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall be subject to
seizure, detention and disposition by the West Goshen Township Police
Department or agency employed by the Township to carry out such
seizure, detention or disposition in accordance with the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Dog Law,12 as amended from time to time.
B. "Running at large" shall be defined as being upon any public highway,
street, alley, park or other public land, and not being on a leash and
accompanied by or under the control of the owner or any other person
having custody of said dog.
12.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 36-2 CURFEW § 36-5
34:91
§ 36-5. Issuance of warnings. [Added 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
Upon notification that a person is violating § 36-4, the Township Police,
Code Enforcement Officer or Zoning Officer may issue a warning to the
owner of the dog. The warning shall be hand-delivered or sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and shall include a copy of § 36-4 and
a notice that a fine will be imposed for the second and all subsequent
violations in accordance with § 36-6C.
§ 36-6. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-1-1960;
7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 11-1996;
7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter, except § 36-4, shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a District
Justice, pay a fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $50
and not more than $200, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, incurred by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
B. Any person who is found liable for any second or subsequent offense for
a violation of any provision of this chapter, except § 36-4, shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine for
each such violation in an amount not less than $200 and not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred
by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure.
C. Violation of § 36-4.
(1) Any person who violates or permits the violation of § 36-4 of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a
District Justice, pay a fine in the following amounts, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys fees, incurred by the
Township:
(a) First violation: Warning issued.
(b) Second violation in any calender year: fine of $25.
(c) Third violation in any calendar year: fine of $50.
§ 36-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 36-6
34:92
Chapter 37
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
West Chester Area Council of
Governments — See Ch. 4, Art. II.
Police — See Ch. 14.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
§ 37-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall for the purposes of this chapter, and as
used elsewhere in the Code, have the meanings shown herein.
APCO — Associates Public-Safety Communications Officials International.
CCDES — Chester County Department of Emergency Services.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
NABER — National Association of Business and Education Radio.
NPSPAC — National Public Safety Planning Advisory Committee.
PCIA — Personal Communications Industry Association.
§ 37-2. General provisions.
(d) Fourth and subsequent violations in any calendar year: fine of
no less than $100 and no more than $600.
(2) No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of
a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
A. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, alter,
refit, change the use of, or provide an addition of more than 20% of the
existing floor area to any building or structure, or any part thereof, or
cause the same to be done, which fails to support adequate radio
coverage for CCDES, the West Goshen Fire Department, and the West
Goshen Police Department. For the purposes of this section, adequate
radio coverage shall include all of the following: [Amended 8-12-2015
by Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
(1) A minimum signal strength of -95dBm available in 95% for the area
of each floor of the building;
(2) A minimum signal strength of -95dBm received at the closest
CCDES radio communications site when transmitted from 95% of
the area of each floor of the building;
§ 36-6 CURFEW § 37-2
34:93
§ 37-3. Amplication systems allowed. [Amended 8-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of radio
coverage as specified in § 37-2 above shall be equipped with either a
radiating cable system or an internal multiple-antenna system with or
without FCC-type accepted bidirectional 700/800 MHz amplifiers as
needed. If any part of the installed system or systems contains an
electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of operating
on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least
12 hours without external power input. The battery system shall charge in
the presence of an external power input.
§ 37-4. Testing procedures.
(3) The frequency range which must be supported shall be between
763 MHz and 861 MHz;
(4) A 90% reliability factor; and
(5) Signal strength measurements, for the purpose of measuring the
performance of a bidirectional amplifier, shall be based on one
input signal adequate to obtain a maximum continuous operating
output level.
B. The provisions of this § 37-2 shall become applicable upon notification
to the property owner that unacceptable performance levels exist. The
property owner shall have 90 days from the date of his or her receipt of
the written notification from the Township to enhance radio coverage
and bring it within the acceptable limits as required by this § 37-2.
A. Acceptance test procedure.
(1) When an in-building radio system is required, and upon completion
of installation, it will be the building owner's responsibility to have
the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each
floor of the building is a minimum of 95%. Each floor of the building
shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A
maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test.
In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be more
statistically accurate, the floor may be divided in 40 equal areas. In
such event, a maximum of four nonadjacent areas will be allowed to
fail the test. After the forty-area test, if the system continues to fail,
the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the
coverage requirement of 95%. The test shall be conducted using
the most current portable radio or its equivalent, available to the
West Goshen Township Police and/or Fire Department, talking
through the CCDES as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid
area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to
verify two-way communications to and from the outside of the
§ 37-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 37-4
34:94
§ 37-5. Exemptions.
building through CCDES. Once the spot has been selected,
prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be
permitted. [Amended 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015;
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
(2) The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner
so that the measurements can be verified each year during the
annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become
lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance
test to reestablish the gain values.
B. Annual tests. When an in-building radio system is required, pursuant to
§ 37-3 above, the building owner shall test all active components of the
system, including but not limited to amplifiers, power supplies and
backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall
be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial
installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power supplies shall
be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will
properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the one-hour
test period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the battery exhibits
symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional one-hour
periods until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the battery.
All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are
operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended
purpose.
C. Five-year tests. In addition to the annual test, required by § 37-4B
above, the building owner who is required to install an in-building radio
system pursuant to § 37-3 above, shall perform a radio coverage test a
minimum of once every five years to insure that the radio system
continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance test. The
procedure set forth in § 37-4A above shall apply to such tests. A copy of
accepted tests shall be provided to the Township and to the Chester
County Emergency Services Engineering Department.
D. Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests shall be conducted,
documented and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC
technician license, or a current technician certification issued by the
APCO, NABER, or the PCIA. All test records shall be retained at the
building which was inspected and a copy thereof shall be submitted to
the West Goshen Township Fire Marshal and the West Goshen Police
Department.
E. Field testing. Police and fire personnel, after providing reasonable
written notice to the property owner or his representative, shall have
the right to enter into buildings or structures within the Township to
conduct field testing to be certain that the required level of radio
coverage as required by this chapter is available.
§ 37-4 CURFEW § 37-5
34:95
§ 37-6. Existing buildings and structures.
Any building or structure which is not exempt pursuant to the provisions of
§ 37-5 above, which is: existing as of the date of adoption of this chapter;
under construction as of the date of adoption of this chapter; or for which
a building permit application is pending or has been approved as of the
effective of this chapter, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
if the CCDES, West Goshen Fire Marshal or West Goshen Police Department
determine that adequate radio coverage, as defined in § 37-2 above, does
not exist in the building or structure. The owner of the building or structure
shall be notified in writing that adequate radio coverage, as defined in
§ 37-2, is not provided. The owner shall have a period of 90 calendar days
from the date of his or her receipt of written notice to bring his or her
building into compliance with this chapter by enhancing radio coverage and
bringing it into the acceptable limits of this chapter.
§ 37-7. Appeals.
If an owner of a building or structure receives written notice from the
Township pursuant to § 37-6 above, he or she may file an appeal to the
West Chester Area Council of Governments Board of Appeals (the "Board
of Appeals"). The appeal shall be filed with the Township Engineer within
30 days of receiving written notice from the Township that the building or
structure does not provide adequate radio coverage. The appeal shall state
the following: the property owner's name and address; the address of the
building or structure which does not provide adequate radio coverage; a
brief description of the property; and the reasons why the property owner
can not comply with the terms of the Chapter. Upon receipt of an appeal, the
Board of Appeals shall schedule a public hearing where the applicant shall
be entitled to present evidence and testimony as to why he or she cannot
bring his or her building or structure into compliance with this chapter.
Following the public hearing, the Board of Appeals shall render a written
decision as to whether or not the applicant is entitled to a waiver from the
provisions of this chapter. A copy of the Board of Appeals' written decision
shall be mailed to the applicant by first class mail, postage prepaid. The
applicant shall have the right to appeal the Board of Appeals' decision to
A. As long as none of the following buildings make use of any metal
construction or any underground storage or parking areas, the
following structures and buildings are exempt from complying with the
standards in §§ 37-2, 37-3 and 37-4:
(1) Structures in Use Groups R-2 and R-4.
(2) Any building constructed of wood frame.
(3) Any building thirty-five feet high or less.
B. For purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are
included in the definition of "building" and stair shafts are included in
the definition of "all parts of a building" but elevators may be excluded.
§ 37-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 37-7
34:96
the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with the provisions of the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 751 et seq.
Chapter 38
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 38-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Energy Conservation Code, 20U3 Edition, as now and as
hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended and revised, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., with the Appendix and related tables
cited therein. Not fewer than three copies of the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2003 Edition, have been and now are filed in the office
of the Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same is hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 38-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Energy Conservation Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101 .1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
§ 37-7 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 38-2
38:97
Chapter 39
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 25.
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 39-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen Township
Electrical Code."
§ 39-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 5-26-2004
by Ord. No. 10-2004]
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Electrical Code — Administrative Provisions, 2003 Edition, as
now and as hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as
published by the International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than three
copies of the International Electrical Code, 2003 Edition, are filed in the
office of the Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 39-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED ELECTRICAL INSPECTION AGENCY — An individual or entity
that has been licensed and certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to perform electrical inspections and plan reviews.[Amended 5-26-2004
by Ord. No. 10-2004]
ELECTRICAL WORK — Any installation, construction, alteration, assembly
of any device, equipment, apparatus or any other object which is used or
intended to be used for the transmission of an electrical energy or impulse,
except when performed by or on behalf of any regulated public utility
or any regulated radio or television transmission system on equipment,
cables, wires or equivalent facilities or on electrical circuits connected to
or supported by such equipment or facilities if the use of the equipment
or facilities is required in the operations of or services rendered by the
regulated entity. It shall not include the manufacturing of any device,
equipment, apparatus or other object used or intended to be used for the
§ 38-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 39-3
38:98
transmission of an electrical energy or impulse but shall include electrical
wiring systems connected to air-conditioning equipment, protective
signaling devices (fire and burglar) and swimming pools.
§ 39-4. Supplementary provisions.
The National Electrical Code is hereby supplemented by providing that
whenever electrical work is to be done in connection with a gas or oil burner
installation in any existing building or structure or in the construction,
reconstruction, alteration or repair of buildings and structures, there shall
be installed an emergency shutoff switch with a red plate thereon marked
"oil burner" or "gas burner," as the case may be, at the entrance to the
basement or heating room.
§ 39-5. Additions, deletions and modifications to standards. [Added
5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-200413]
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the ICC Electrical Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section 202 shall be amended by deleting the definition of "approved
agency" and replacing it with the following definition:
APPROVED ELECTRICAL INSPECTION AGENCY. An individual or
entity that has been licensed and certified by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to perform electrical inspections and plan reviews.
C. The heading of Section 301 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following: "SECTION 301 ENFORCEMENT."
D. Section 301.1 shall be amended to state as follows:
301.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more Building
Officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Officials and building official shall be referred to in this
Code as "Code Officials."
E. Section 302.5 shall be amended to read as follows:
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 39-5, Conformance required.
§ 39-3 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 39-5
38:99
302.5 Inspections and tests.
A. Inspection and tests to determine whether the provisions of the
International Electrical Code, 2003 Edition, and this chapter have
been complied with shall be made by the Building Code Official
and/or his deputy building officials and an approved electrical
inspection agency. Upon completion of any electrical work, a
certificate of inspection and approval issued by an approved
electrical inspection agency shall be furnished to the Building
Code Official no later than 15 days after completion of the
installation of the electrical work.
B. All decisions as to whether or not electrical work complies with
the provisions of the International Electrical Code and this chapter
shall be made by an approved electrical inspection agency which is
hereby authorized to stop any electrical work in process and order
the removal thereof if it determines that such work is not being
installed in conformity with the provisions of the International
Electrical Code and this chapter.
C. The Building Code Official is hereby authorized to waive
inspection of all or that portion of electrical work for which he
shall have received a duplicate record of approval from an
approved electrical inspection agency certifying that such work
complies with the provisions of the International Electrical Code
and this chapter. Notice of such waiver of inspection shall be
given to the applicant so that the approved work can thereafter be
concealed.
F. Section 401.3 shall be amended by adding the following exemptions:
6. Minor repair work, such as but not limited to the replacement of a
receptacle, switch or a lighting fixture.
7. The connection of any portable electrical appliance to any
permanently installed electrical receptacle.
8. Central police station supervised alarm systems.14
G. Section 404.2 shall be amended to state as follows:
404.2 Permit fees. The fee for the permit for electrical work shall
be paid in accordance with the fee schedule approved and adopted
by the Board of Supervisors, which schedule shall be available for
public inspection at the office of the Secretary of the Township of West
Goshen. The fee schedule shall be reviewed and revised as necessary
by the Board of Supervisors.
H. Section 1003.1 shall be amended to state as follows:
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 25, Alarm Devices.
§ 39-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 39-5
38:100
§ 39-6. (Reserved)15
§ 39-7. (Reserved)
§ 39-8. Right of entry; unsafe conditions; notice of violation.
1003.1 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or,
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Code Official,
or of a permit or use and occupancy permit issued under the provisions
of this Code, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine
of not more than $1,000 per day, plus costs and attorney's fees, and,
upon default of the payment of the fine and costs, imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
I. Chapter 11, Means of Appeal, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
CHAPTER 11
BOARD OF APPEALS
1101.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
A. In order to safeguard persons and property against the hazards and
perils of existing defective electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment,
the approved electrical inspection agency, upon written request from
the Building Code Official, is hereby given the authority and the duty to
inspect, at reasonable times, any building, structure (including
swimming pools) or premises in the Township, to determine whether
any electrical work theretofore installed therein is defective or unsafe.
B. If the Building Code Official, with the recommendations of an approved
electrical inspection agency, shall determine that any building,
structure (including swimming pool) or premises is in an unsafe and
dangerous condition or not in compliance with the provisions of the
International Electrical Code or this chapter, the portion of the existing
15.Editor's Note: Former § 39-6, Inspection and tests, and former § 39-7, Exemptions, were
repealed 5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004.
§ 39-5 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 39-8
38:101
§ 39-9. Violation and penalties; enforcement provision.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter or the National Electric Code adopted by § 39-2 of this chapter
or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
fails to comply with any directive, order or requirement of the Building
Official or other Codes Enforcement Officer shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense,
and shall be subject to the payment of a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
prison for a term of not more than 30 days. Each section or provision of this
chapter that is violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or
portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable
by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000, plus the cost of prosecution, or upon default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the
county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and penalties
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Township
Treasurer.
Chapter 40
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of air rifles and pistols — See Ch. 23.
§ 40-1. Statement of intent.
Due to the density of the population in West Goshen Township, it is
necessary that the use of firearms be regulated for the protection of the
public health and safety and that the unauthorized discharge of firearms be
prohibited.
work which is defective or unsafe shall be discontinued and made to
comply with the provisions of the International Electrical Code and this
chapter. He shall serve notice upon the owner or occupant thereof,
stating the nature of the violation and that compliance with all
requirements shall be achieved within the period of time specified in
the notice. The notice may also prescribe a course of remedial action.
C. If, at the expiration of the time allowed for compliance, the violation has
not been corrected, the Building Code Official shall institute
proceedings, as provided in § 39-9 hereof, to collect from the owner or
occupant the fines or penalties specified for violations of this chapter.
§ 39-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 40-2
38:102
§ 40-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 6-1991]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
FIREARM — Any weapon which discharges a projectile by means of
gunpowder, air pressure or any other explosive force.
SHOOTING — The discharge or release of a projectile, whether bullets,
slugs, pellets or a pointed arrow, discharged from any weapon.
TARGET RANGE — A place for shooting weapons, having a natural or
artificial barrier of sufficient size and density to stop any projectile fired
into it and which is approved and designated of record by the West Goshen
Township Chief of Police as an approved target range.
WEAPON — Any shotgun, rifle, automatic weapon, pistol, revolver, air gun,
air pistol, pellet gun, bow used to propel a pointed arrow or any weapon
similar to any of the foregoing of whatever caliber or type.
§ 40-3. Unlawful discharge or use of weapons. [Amended 9-24-1991
by Ord. No. 6-1991]
Except as provided in § 40-4C hereof, it shall be unlawful and a violation of
this chapter for any person to fire or discharge any weapon in West Goshen
Township. The violator shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 40-7.
§ 40-4. Exceptions.
A. The use of firearms is permitted when employed by any duly appointed
law officer in the course of his/her official duty.
B. The use of firearms is permitted when necessary for the preservation of
human life, as authorized in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
C. The use of weapons is permitted when hunting in conformity with the
Game Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any and all
regulations promulgated thereunder, all other applicable laws of the
commonwealth and the ordinances of this township; provided, however,
that no person shall hunt upon or discharge any weapon upon the land
of another unless such person has on his or her person a certification
signed and dated by the landowner, certifying that the bearer of the
certification has been instructed by the owner concerning the
topography, traffic conditions and natural and artificial hazards, if any,
existing upon his land and the location of all buildings and structures on
and within 150 feet of the property and stating that such person,
identified by name and current hunting license number, has been
granted permission to hunt upon the land. The date of the certification
must be a date within the period for which the license is valid.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 6-1991]
D. The use of firearms shall be allowed on target ranges, indoor or
outdoor, under the supervision of the owner or occupant of that land or
his or her duly appointed representative, provided that:
§ 40-2 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 40-4
38:103
§ 40-5. Improper use prohibited. [Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No.
6-1991]
The careless, reckless or improper use of any weapon which tends to imperil
or cause danger or harm to personal security or to endanger the person or
the property of any person within West Goshen Township is prohibited. Any
such careless, reckless or improper use shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of § 40-7.
§ 40-6. Posting of signs. [Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 6-1991]
Legible signs giving public notice of the essential provisions of this chapter
shall be posted at or near the public highways at the boundaries of West
Goshen Township; provided, however, that it shall not be a defense to any
prosecution for violation of this chapter that the violator did not see or
understand any such sign or that any such sign did not contain sufficient
description of the provisions of this chapter to adequately warn the violator.
§ 40-7. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 9-24-1991
by Ord. No. 6-1991; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not
more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
(1) All target ranges shall be constructed and operated in a safe and
prudent manner. If standards, regulations or recommended
procedures for operation are established or promulgated by any
recognized body, such as the National Rifle Association or the
American Trap Shooting Association, then such standards,
regulations or procedures shall be adhered to.
(2) Such range is registered as such with the township by the owner or
occupant of the land on which the range is located, which
registration shall specify the area or areas designated for target
range purposes.
§ 40-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 40-7
38:104
Chapter 41
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 25.
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 31.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fireworks — See Ch. 42.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Fire prevention in mobile home parks — See
Ch. 51.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 54.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 41-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 5-26-2004
by Ord. No. 15-2004]
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township the International Fire Code, 2003 Edition, as now and as
hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as published by
the International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than three copies of the
International Fire Code, 2003 Edition, have been and now are filed in the
office of the Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 41-2. (Reserved)16
§ 41-3. Modification of standards. [Amended 5-26-2004 by Ord. No.
15-2004]
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Fire Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
16.Editor's Note: Former § 41-2, Administration and enforcement, was repealed 5-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 15-2004.
§ 40-7 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 41-3
38:105
SECTION 103
FIRE MARSHAL
103.1 The Fire Marshal and assistants. The Fire Marshal of West
Goshen Township, hereinafter called the "Fire Marshal," shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors and shall serve for such period
and upon such terms and conditions as the Board shall direct. The
Board may from time to time appoint an assistant or assistants to
the Fire Marshal, and said assistants shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board. The Fire Marshal and his assistants shall receive such
compensation as the Board may from time to time direct.
103.2 Duties of the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal shall be the
chief enforcement officer of the Township Fire Code and shall have the
power and responsibility of enforcing the Fire Code with respect to:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
(3) The installation of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fireextinguishing
equipment.
(4) The regulation of fire escapes, the means and adequacy of exits in
case of fire from factories, schools, apartments, hotels, lodging
houses, mental and other hospitals, churches, halls, theaters and
other places in which persons work, live or congregate from time to
time for any purpose.
103.3 Monthly report. The Fire Marshal shall prepare and
submit written periodic reports to the Board at least monthly
and to such other agencies and at such times as may by law be
required.
C. Section 108, Board of Appeals, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
SECTION 108
BOARD OF APPEALS
108.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
§ 41-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 41-3
38:106
D. Section 109.1 shall be amended by adding the following sentences at
the end of the existing sentence: "It shall also be unlawful for any
person to willfully permit water from a fire hydrant to be wasted or to
damage or break a fire hydrant or to hinder or obstruct any fireman or
any vehicle of the Fire Department from passing along the streets to
and from a fire or from conducting fire-fighting operations at a fire. It
shall also be unlawful to draw water from a fire hydrant for any purpose
other than to extinguish a fire or to cope with an emergency posing an
immediate danger to life and property.
E. Section 109.3 shall be amended to state as follows:
109.3 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall violate an approved plan or
directive of the Fire Marshal, shall be guilty of a summary offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, plus costs
and attorney's fees, and, upon default of the payment of the fine and
costs, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Section 111.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 109.3.
G. Section 202 shall be amended by adding the following definitions:
APPROVED RATING BUREAU. An insurance inspection bureau,
department or organization, including the American Insurance
Association, Factory Insurance Association, Associated Factory Mutual
Fire Insurance Companies and any other such organization hereafter
duly approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
FIRE-RESISTIVE BUILDING. A building in which the walls are of
approved masonry or reinforced concrete and the structural members
of which have fire-resistance ratings sufficient to withstand the hazard
involved in the occupancy, but not less than a four-hour rating for
bearing walls, fire walls, party walls, isolated piers, columns and wallsupporting
girders; a three-hour rating for walls and girders other than
above specified and for beams, floors and roofs; and two-hour rating
for fire partitions; and in which all floor openings are protected by
effective fire-resistant enclosures.
§ 41-3 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 41-3
38:107
§ 41-4. (Reserved)17
HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY BUILDING. A building or structure
used for the storage, manufacture or processing of highly combustible
or explosive products or materials which are likely to burn with
extreme rapidity or which may produce poisonous fumes or explosions;
storage or manufacture involving highly corrosive, toxic or noxious
alkalines, acids or other liquids or chemicals involving flame, fume
or explosive, poisonous, irritant or corrosive gases; and the storage
or processing of any materials involving explosive mixtures of dust
or which result in the division of matter into fine particles subject to
spontaneous ignition.
MAJOR KITCHEN. A kitchen with an area of 500 square feet or more
in any building except a single-family or a two-family dwelling.
SUBSTANTIALLY ALTERED. Any substantial structural alteration in
or addition to the supporting or structural members of a building,
such as bearing girders, provided that a substantial alteration shall
not include, inter alia, repairs to roof, walls or interior; exterior or
interior painting or redecoration; elimination, moving or construction
of new partitions within an existing building; air-conditioning repairs
or replacement of heating systems; modernization of kitchens or
bathrooms, including moving or replacement of utility lines, gas,
water, sewer and electricity; and installation or replacement of kitchen
or bathroom equipment. A structural alteration not increasing the
square footage of a building more than 20% shall not be considered a
substantial alteration.
H. Section 3204.3.1 .1 shall be amended by adding the following sentence:
"Except where prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance, there are no
geographic limits in the Township where the storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited."
I. Section 3404.2.9.5.1 shall be amended by adding the following
sentence: "Except where prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance, there are
no geographic limits in the Township where the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited."
J. Section 3406.2.4.4 shall be amended by adding the following sentence:
"Except where prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance, there are no
geographic limits in the Township where the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited."
K. Section 3804.2 shall be amended by adding the following sentence:
"Except where prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance, there are no
geographic limits in the Township where the storage of liquified
petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas."
17.Editor's Note: Former § 41-4, Deletions, was repealed 5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2004.
§ 41-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 41-5
38:108
§ 41-5. Designation of fire lanes.18
Whenever the Fire Marshal, in conjunction with the Chief of Police, shall
determine that the parking of motor vehicles upon any public or private
street, lane, alley or shopping center is liable to interfere with the operation
of the Fire Department or seriously hamper egress of occupants from
buildings in case of fire, he shall designate the areas to be established as
fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be of sufficient width to permit the ingress, egress
and mobility of emergency fire equipment. In the case of shopping centers,
within 10 days from the notice of such designation of fire lane or fire lanes
to the shopping center owner or the owner of any buildings located within
the shopping center, the owner shall post the areas so designated with signs
identifying the areas as fire lanes and specifically prohibiting all parking
within these fire lanes. The parking of any vehicle within the emergency
fire lanes established herein shall be and is hereby expressly prohibited.
No person shall park, allow to be parked or leave standing any vehicle
within any fire lane established and created pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. Any vehicle parked within such emergency fire lane at any time
shall be subject to a parking ticket and may be removed by towing at the
order and under the direction of the Chief of Police or any uniformed police
officer. The Fire Marshal shall also have the power to issue parking tickets
for violations of this chapter.
§ 41-6. Violations and penalties; appeals; remedies. [Amended
5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2-004]
A. Appeals. Appeals from the decisions, actions, orders or other
requirements of the Fire Marshal shall be taken to the WCACOG Board
of Appeals established under the West Goshen Township Building
Code.19
B. Abatement. Any building or structure erected, altered or converted
contrary to the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code or this chapter is
hereby declared to be a common or public nuisance and shall be
abatable as such.
C. Violation and enforcement provision.
(1) Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of
this chapter or the International Fire Code or who fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who fails to comply with
any lawful directive of the Building Official or Fire Marshal shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to
the payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof,
18.Editor's Note: For additional vehicles and traffic regulations, see Ch. 78, Vehicles and
Traffic.
19.Editor's Note: See also § 41-3C.
§ 41-5 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 41-6
38:109
the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
prison for a term of not more than 30 days. Each section or
provision of this chapter violated shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this
chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each
of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed
by the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the
county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and
penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer.
(2) Any person who violates or permits the violation of any of the
provisions of § 41-5 of this chapter as it pertains to parking
violations in designated fire lanes shall be issued a notice of
violation and be ordered to pay a fine of $35, payable to West
Goshen Township within seven days of the issuance of such notice,
provided that, if the fine is paid within 72 hours of the date and
time appearing on the face of the notice, the fine shall be $15. Said
fine and payment instruction shall be included on the parking ticket
or notice of violation served on such person by attachment to the
vehicle or by mail or other legal method of service. Such person
shall be liable for the payment of all costs of towing and storage of
any vehicle removed as a result of a violation of § 41-5 of this
chapter. Any person failing to timely respond to the notice of
violation by payment of the fine shall be issued a citation as
authorized by the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. In any prosecution
thereunder, such person shall be liable to a fine of $35 and all costs
of prosecution. In the alternative, any person who violates or
permits the violation of any of any of the provisions of § 41-5 of this
chapter as it pertains to parking violations in designated fire lanes
or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
fails to comply with any lawful directive of a police officer, the
Building Official or Fire Marshal shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be subject to the payment of a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution. In
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30
days. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate
fine imposed by the District Justice of not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or upon default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment
in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines
and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid
to the Township Treasurer.
§ 41-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 41-7
38:110
§ 41-7. Responsibility under permits.
Issuance of a permit does not excuse the permit holder from responsibility
for actions by the holder taken pursuant to the permit or for fires caused
thereby.
§ 41-8. Word usage.
Wherever the word "shall" is used in this chapter, its use shall be deemed to
be taken in the mandatory sense.
§ 41-9. Interpretation. [Amended 5-26-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2004]
In interpreting any of the provisions of this chapter or the International Fire
Code hereby adopted, the following principles shall apply:
Chapter 42
FIREWORKS
§ 42-1. Authority and intent.
The chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted pursuant to Act
43 of 2017, which adopted House Bill No. 542 of 2017, amending the
Tax Reform Code of 1971, codified in 72 P.S. §§ 9401 through 9416, and
pursuant to the authority to regulate fireworks as set forth in the Second
Class Township Code at 53 P.S. § 66534. This chapter is adopted with the
intent to comply with such fireworks laws, properly regulate the use of
fireworks within the Township, and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
A. This chapter and the International Fire Code shall not supersede any
provisions of any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of any
regulation promulgated by any department or agency of the
commonwealth by authority of law, where such law or regulation is in
conflict with or identical to this chapter and the code herewith adopted;
provided, however, that any provision of the code herewith adopted that
is stricter than or in addition to any state law or regulation governing a
particular subject or activity shall be in effect and shall be enforced
within the Township of West Goshen, subject to the penalties herein
prescribed for violation of the code hereby adopted.
B. Mention in or regulation by this chapter or the code hereby adopted of
any specific use or property or of any business or industry shall not in
itself authorize such use of the property or the establishment or
carrying on of any such business or industry in the Township of West
Goshen. It is hereby declared the intent of the Board that permitted or
prohibited uses of property shall be as governed by Chapter 84, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of West Goshen, as amended or
supplemented.
§ 41-7 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 42-2
38:111
§ 42-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the
meanings set forth below:
ACT 43 OF 2017 — The Pennsylvania Fireworks Law20 as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania General Assembly with an effective date of
October 30, 2017, and as amended.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition or
any substance or combination of substances which is intended to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public,
complies with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety Commission
in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any successor regulation
and complies with the provisions for "consumer fireworks" as defined in APA
87-1 or any successor standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall
be permitted throughout this commonwealth. The term does not include
devices such as ground and hand-held sparkling devices, novelties or toy
caps in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale, possession and use of
which shall be permitted at all times throughout this commonwealth.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
NFPA 1124 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124,
Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.
§ 42-3. Use, sale and storage of consumer fireworks.
The use, sale and storage of consumer fireworks within the Township shall
comply with Act 43 of 2017, as amended, which includes the following
provisions related to use:
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
C.
A. Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the
requirements of this chapter may purchase, possess and use consumer
fireworks.
20.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 42-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 42-3
38:112
§ 42-4. Permits and use provisions for display fireworks.
B. Prohibitions. A person may not intentionally ignite or discharge:
(1) Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner.
(2) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw
consumer fireworks or sparkling devices from, a motor vehicle or
building.
(3) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle
or building or at another person.
(4) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug.
(5) Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
(6) Consumer fireworks upon any Township roadway or Township
property.
(7) Consumer fireworks within 100 feet of any combustible material.
(8) Consumer fireworks such that the sparks or any portion of the
fireworks will land upon the property of another without the
owner's express permission.
A. The possession and use of display fireworks within the Township shall
comply with Act 43 of 2017 and the Township's Fire Code.21 Display
fireworks may be possessed and used by a person (age 21 or older)
holding a permit from the Township at the display covered by the
permit, or when used as authorized by a permit for any of the following
additional activities:
(1) For agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops
and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage.
(2) By railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination.
(3) In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use.
(4) In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a public show or theater.
(5) For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
(6) By military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of
the armed forces of the United States.
B. Bond. The Township shall require a bond deemed adequate by the
Board from the permittee in a sum not less than $50,000 conditioned on
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 41, Fire Prevention.
§ 42-3 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 42-4
38:113
§ 42-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity that uses or sells consumer fireworks in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be prosecuted in accordance with Act
43 of 2017. Any person or entity selling display fireworks in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be prosecuted in accordance with Act 43 of
2017.
the payment of all damages which may be caused to a person or
property by reason of the display fireworks and arising from an act
of the permittee or an agent, an employee or a subcontractor of the
permittee. The bonding requirement may be deemed unnecessary or
reduced in amount by the Board of Supervisors for the additional
activities listed immediately above.
C. Extension of permit.
(1) Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the use of
display fireworks for which a permit has been granted does not
occur at the time authorized by the permit, the person to whom the
permit was issued may within 24 hours apply, in writing, for a
request for extension to the Township. The requested continuance
of the permit shall be not later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
(2) Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the
payment of an additional fee and without requiring a bond other
than the bond given for the original permit, the provisions of which
shall extend to and cover all damages which may be caused by
reason of the display occurring at the extended date and in the
same manner and to the same extent as if the display had occurred
at the date originally designated in the permit.
D. Display fireworks in Township's public parks and recreation areas.
Display fireworks may only be permitted in a Township public park or
recreational area by special permit issued by the Township as provided
for under Chapter 57, Parks and Recreation Areas, of the Township
Code, and subject to the rules and regulations of Chapter 57, and any
additional regulations as set forth by the Park and Recreation Board.
§ 42-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 42-5
38:114
Chapter 43
FUEL GAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 43-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition, as now and as hereafter
supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., with Appendices A, B, C and D. Not fewer
than three copies of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition, have
been and now are filed in the office of the Secretary of West Goshen
Township, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein.
§ 43-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following: SECTION "103 ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section 103.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more building
officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official and building officials shall be referred to in this
Code as "Code Officials."
§ 42-5 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 43-2
38:115
Chapter 45
WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 53. Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
D. Section 106.5.2. shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. The Board of Supervisors shall, by
resolution, adopt a schedule of fees which shall be kept on file by the
Township Secretary and shall be reviewed and revised as necessary by
the Board of Supervisors.
E. Section 106.5.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
F. Section 106.4 shall be amended to state as follows:
108.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
Building Official, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by
a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, plus costs and attorney's fees,
and, upon default of the payment of the fine and costs, imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
G. Section 108.5 shall be amended by the deletion of the words
"[AMOUNT]" and the replacement thereof with "$100" and "$1,000."
H. Section 109, Means of Appeal, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEALS
109.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
§ 43-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 45-1
38:116
§ 45-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Waste and Recycling
Ordinance."
§ 45-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1988.22
ALUMINUM — Used cans comprised of one-hundred-percent aluminum.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
BULK WASTE — Any discarded items that are of a size such that they can
not be placed in a standard size municipal waste container. Bulk waste shall
not include construction debris, hazardous materials, automotive parts,
tires or leaves.
CARTON — An empty, light, box container, typically made of paper board
and polyethylene (plastic), in which drinks or foodstuffs are packaged, such
as milk, juice, soup, broth, or wine.[Added 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
CLEAR GLASS — Empty bottles, jars, food or beverage containers made
of clear transparent glass. Expressly excluded are nonglass items, such
as plate glass, blue, green or brown glass, porcelain and ceramic
products.[Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008]
COLORED GLASS — Empty bottles, jars, food or beverage containers made
of green, brown or other colored glass.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — All properties/
establishments used for commercial or industrial purposes.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Customary, nonhazardous waste building
materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition
operations.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or structure, or part thereof, designed
to be occupied as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.[Added
8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste which consists in any part of a chemical,
compound, mixture, substance or article designated by a federal agency,
including the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or
commonwealth, county or Township agency to be hazardous, toxic or
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 45-1 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 45-2
38:117
dangerous, as those terms are defined by or pursuant to federal, state,
county or local law.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as white ledger paper; and computer
paper.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment
engaged in service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MIXED PAPER — Paper products to include junk mail, telephone books,
catalogs, white paper, magazines, flattened boxes (cereal boxes or any box
which does not come in direct contact with food), noncorrugated cardboard
(cannot contain ripples between the cardboard layers), and envelopes
(which include window envelopes). Newspaper, as defined, can be included
within this mixed paper definition.[Added 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 17-2004]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof,
which contains more than one dwelling unit.[Added 8-6-2017 by Ord. No.
6-2017]
MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Occupied multifamily dwellings
having four or more dwelling units per structure. Dwelling units above
or attached to a commercial use are included in this category.[Amended
8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY/ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building
owned or operated by a local government or county government, local
government or county government authority, state government or agency or
federal government or agency.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source separation and collection
program for municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials or
a program for designated dropoff points or collection centers for recycling
municipal waste or centers for recycling municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials that is operated by or on behalf of a
municipality. The term includes any source separation and collection
program for composting yard waste that is operated by or on behalf of
a municipality. The term shall not include any program for recycling
construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage treatment plants or
water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act23 from a municipal, commercial or
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 45-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 45-2
38:118
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest, specifically excluding magazines and
periodicals.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association or institution.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Occupied residential single-family or
multifamily dwellings having fewer than four dwelling units per
building.[Amended 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
SEPARATION/SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS —
Materials that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin
for the purpose of recycling. Those items include clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel, and bimetallic cans, mixed paper, newsprint, corrugated
cardboard, noncorrugated paper, cartons and plastics Nos. 1 through
7.[Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 17-2004; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No.
8-2008; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLING — The act of co-mingling all sourceseparated
recyclable materials in a single recycling container for collection
by the Township pursuant to this chapter. The Township shall have the right
to include additional materials for recycling in a single stream upon notice
to the Township residents.[Added 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008]
§ 45-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or
bury or permit another to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or bury in or
upon any parcel of land, lot, street, highway, gutter or in any alley or in any
water or stream or in any quarry or ditch within the limits of the Township
of West Goshen any municipal waste.
§ 45-4. Storage and collection of municipal waste.
The storage and collection of all municipal waste from residential, multi-unit
residential, commercial, municipal and institutional properties shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may
from time to time be adopted by resolution of the Township Supervisors.
§ 45-5. Mandatory recycling program established.
On and after September 26, 1990, and under the regulations and schedules
issued by the Township in accordance with the terms of this chapter, there
is hereby established a mandatory recycling program in which Township
residents and property owners shall participate and which requires the
recyclable materials generated within the Township and set forth in § 45-7
§ 45-2 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 45-5
38:119
to be separated from other municipal waste materials stored on the
premises where generated until collection.
§ 45-6. Applicability. [Amended 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
The provisions of this chapter establishing a mandatory recycling program
shall be applicable as follows:
§ 45-7. Recyclable materials. [Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
17-2004; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No.
6-2017]
A. To residential property which is required to have municipal waste
collected by or on behalf of the Township pursuant to § 45-8A of this
chapter.
B. With respect to multiunit residential properties, the owner shall be
required to establish a collection system at its sole cost and expense.
The collection system must include suitable containers for the
commingling of the recyclable materials in easily accessible locations.
The owner must provide written instructions to the occupants of such
units stating the materials to be recycled, how the materials are to be
prepared and how to use the collection system. The owner must provide
for collection of the recyclable materials at least once per month.
C. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall develop,
implement and maintain a recycling program and provide, at their sole
cost and expense, for the commingling, storage and collection of the
recyclable materials. Owners, operators or administrators of such
establishments shall inform and instruct all employees, patrons and
residents on the features and requirements of the recycling program.
Persons occupying commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments may obtain an exemption from the recycling
requirements in this chapter only in accordance with § 1501(c)(1)(iii) of
Act 101 of 1988.24
A. All residential properties which are required to have municipal waste
collected by or on behalf of the Township shall utilize single-stream
recycling. The Township shall have the right to include additional
materials which must be recycled in a single stream upon sending
notice to all Township residents.
B. All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall be
required to collect, for recycling, high-grade office paper, corrugated
paper, cartons, aluminum, steel, bimetallic cans, and plastics Nos. 1
through 7.
C. All residential properties shall separate leaf and yard waste from
municipal waste. Leaf and yard waste may be mulched and/or
24.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(c)(1)(iii).
§ 45-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 45-7
38:120
§ 45-8. Designation of haulers. [Amended 3-18-2009 by Ord. No.
02-2009; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
§ 45-9. Authorization of haulers. [Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No.
8-2008; 3-18-2009 by Ord. No. 02-2009]
Only a person or entity authorized by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Act 90 of 2002, the Waste
Transportation Safety Act, 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq., may collect
municipal waste within the Township. Authorized haulers shall comply with
the reporting requirements in § 45-10 of this chapter.
§ 45-10. Reporting requirements for authorized haulers. [Amended
3-18-2009 by Ord. No. 02-2009]
All persons authorized to collect municipal waste or recyclables under
§ 45-9 shall submit an annual report to the Township of West Goshen on
forms provided by the Township.
composted by residents, or placed out for separate collection by the
Township in biodegradable paper bags or containers. Branches shall be
no longer than four feet in length and must be bundled, weighing no
more than 50 pounds.
D. All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall
separate leaf and yard waste from municipal waste and must dispose of
the leaf and yard waste in an approved manner.
A. All municipal waste and materials designated by the Township to be
recycled shall be collected from residential properties only by the
collector/hauler selected by the Township as the successful bidder
determined through competitive bidding, as allowed by 53 P.S.
§ 4000.304(c).
B. Multiunit residential properties, as well as commercial, municipal, and
institutional establishments, shall contract at their sole cost and
expense for the collection of municipal waste and the required
recyclables. Such establishments may select any collector/hauler
authorized by the commonwealth to collect waste.
A. The report shall contain a list of the establishments in West Goshen
Township, including street addresses, for which the authorized hauler
collected municipal waste or recyclables.
B. The report shall give the total weight of municipal waste and the total
weight of each recyclable material collected by the authorized hauler in
the Township.
C. The report shall be submitted to the Township each year no later than
January 15 and shall include the information required by Subsections A
and B for the immediate preceding calendar year.
§ 45-7 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 45-10
38:121
§ 45-11. Residential collection fees. [Amended 7-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 12-1997; 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000; 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No.
6-2017]
There is hereby imposed a fee upon each separate dwelling unit in a
residential property to which collection services are available or are
provided by or on behalf of the Township, together with interest and
penalties, as herein specified, for the collection of municipal waste,
recyclables and leaves, as provided in this section.
D. Failure to file the required report in a timely manner shall subject the
authorized hauler to the penalties provided for in § 45-17 of this
chapter.
A. The amount of the collection fee shall be set, and may be amended from
time to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Collection fees shall be paid quarterly, and quarterly billings for
collection fees shall be made by bills dated on the first day of January,
April, July and October of each year, for the quarterly calendar period
immediately preceding the date of the bill. All bills for collection fees
shall be due and payable on their respective dates, subject to the
following:
(1) If paid in full by the last day of the month in which the bill is dated,
the face amount of the bill.
(2) If not paid in full by the last day of the month in which the bill is
dated, the bill shall be subject to a penalty of 10%, which penalty
shall be added to the face amount of the bill. If the quarterly
installment and penalty are not paid prior to the end of the second
month after the date on which the bill is issued, to the aggregate
amount thereof there shall be added, due and payable an additional
penalty equal to 3/4 of 1% per month or fraction thereof on the
unpaid balance thereof until paid.
C. Where payment is made by mail, if the payment bears a United States
postmark, the date of payment shall be deemed to be the postmarked
mailing date.
D. Bills for waste and recycling fees and charges shall be paid by the title
owner of the real property to which waste and recycling collection
services have been provided or are made available and shall be mailed
or e-mailed by the Township to that address or e-mail address, unless
and until a different address or e-mail address is specified, in writing,
by the owner of such property with acknowledgement by the Township
of receipt thereof. Failure of the owner to receive a bill as a result of an
incorrect address, e-mail address or otherwise shall not excuse
payment of waste and recycling fees or extend the time for payment
thereof. It shall be incumbent upon all persons receiving these services
§ 45-10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 45-11
38:122
§ 45-12. Residential collection schedule. [Amended 11-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 8-2008; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
§ 45-13. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
to provide the Township with the correct billing address or e-mail
address, as well as any changes thereto.
E. The penalties provided for herein shall be concurrent with all other
remedies available to the Township for collection of waste and recycling
fees. All such unpaid collection fees and charges, together with
penalties thereon, and costs incurred in connection therewith shall be
and constitute a municipal claim and, when filed of record, shall
constitute a lien on the real property for which the collection fee has
been imposed. Interest at the rate of 9% per annum is hereby imposed
and shall be collected on all waste and recycling fees and charges from
the date of the filing of a municipal lien therefor in the proper public
office, as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Lien
Act.25 In addition, the Township may collect all unpaid waste and
recycling fees, penalties, interest and other authorized costs and
charges, together with interest thereon, in any manner and by any
proceeding otherwise provided for by law.
A. Municipal waste, recyclables and leaves shall be collected curbside
from each separate dwelling unit of each residential property which
qualifies to have collection made by or on behalf of the Township in
conformance with the following:
(1) Municipal waste: twice each week.
(2) Recyclables: once each week on one of the municipal waste
collection days.
(3) Leaves: three times during the leaf season.
(4) Yard waste: eight times per year.
(5) Bulk waste: once per week on one of the municipal waste collection
days.
(6) Christmas trees: once per year.
B. The scheduled days for the collections in Subsection A above shall be
set by the Township, and the collection routes shall be set by the
collector/hauler in accordance with § 45-8A of this chapter. Notice to
residents of the scheduled collection days shall be the responsibility of
the Township. Regulations regarding the preparation and placement of
materials for collection shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 45-11 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 45-13
38:123
§ 45-14. Public information and education program.
Every six months after the initiation of this recycling program, the Township
shall notify all persons occupying residential, commercial, institutional and
municipal premises within its boundaries of the requirements of this
chapter and of the features of the recycling program. The Board of
Supervisors may, in its discretion as it deems necessary and appropriate,
place an advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the municipality,
post a notice in public places where public notices are customarily posted,
include a notice with other official notifications periodically mailed to
residential taxpayers or utilize any combination of the foregoing.
§ 45-15. Compliance with rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors and the preparation for collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials by property owners and residents of the Township shall
be made in compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the Board of
Supervisors of West Goshen Township to carry out the intent and purpose of
this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors and, when so approved, shall have the same force
and effect as the provisions of this chapter. Said rules and regulations may
be amended, modified or repealed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 45-16. Responsibilities of owners of property. [Amended
3-18-2009 by Ord. No. 02-2009; 8-6-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
A. From the time of the placement of the recyclable materials herein
defined and designated at the curb or other designated place for
collection by the Township pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
and other rules and regulations adopted thereunder, said recyclable
materials shall become and be the property of the Township or its
assigns.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person not duly authorized
by the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any recyclable materials placed at the curb or any other designated
place for collection by the Township pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Any and each unauthorized collection and violation hereof
from one or more residences shall be construed to be separate and
distinct offenses punishable as hereinafter provided.
A. Every person, whether as owner or occupier of a property within the
Township who produces municipal waste, recyclables or like material as
referred to in this chapter or being responsible for the existence or
disposal of such materials, shall be responsible to pay the fees and
other charges as provided for herein and shall be the proper subject of
the enforcement procedures as provided for herein.
B. The Township shall provide to each residential property owner who
qualifies to have waste collected by or on behalf of the Township a
§ 45-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 45-16
38:124
§ 45-17. Violation and enforcement provision.
waste receptacle, limit one per dwelling unit, which must be utilized
for the collection of waste by an automotive waste-hauling vehicle.
The waste receptacle provided to each separate dwelling unit of each
residential property which qualifies to have waste collected by or on
behalf of the Township shall belong to the dwelling unit and not the
owner or occupier of such residential property. Owner(s) and/or
occupier(s) of a dwelling unit of residential property in the Township
who qualify to have waste collected by or on behalf of the Township
shall not remove the waste receptacle provided by the Township from
the dwelling unit upon sale of the residential property or relocation
from the residential property. Should the waste receptacle be removed
from the dwelling unit upon relocation by the owner(s) and/or
occupier(s), the cost of replacing the waste receptacle shall be borne
by the person who removed the waste receptacle from the dwelling
unit. In the event a waste receptacle provided by the Township is lost,
stolen or damaged, the owner(s) of the respective residential property
must replace the same with a waste receptacle to be supplied by the
Township. The cost of replacing the waste receptacle shall be borne by
the owner(s) of such residential property and shall be paid before the
waste receptacle is delivered by the Township.
C. The Township shall provide to each residential property owner who
qualifies to have recyclable materials collected by or on behalf of the
Township a recycling receptacle or receptacles, limit one per dwelling
unit, which shall only be utilized for the collection of recyclable
materials by the Township. The Township shall provide as many
recycling receptacles as necessary to meet the recycling needs of the
property owner. The recycling receptacle(s) provided to each dwelling
unit of each residential property which qualifies to have recyclable
materials collected by or on behalf of the Township shall belong to the
dwelling unit and not the owner or occupier of such residential
property. Owner(s) and/or occupier(s) of a dwelling unit of residential
property in the Township who qualifies to have recyclable materials
collected by or on behalf of the Township shall not remove the recycling
receptacle(s) provided by the Township from the dwelling unit upon
sale of the residential property or relocation from the residential
property. Should the recycling receptacle(s) be removed from the
dwelling unit upon relocation by the owner(s) and/or occupier(s), the
cost of replacing the recycling receptacle(s) shall be borne by the
person who removed the recycling receptacle(s) from the dwelling unit.
In the event a recycling receptacle provided by the Township is lost,
stolen or damaged, the owner of the respective residential property
must replace the same with a recycling receptacle to be supplied by the
Township. The cost of replacing the recycling receptacle shall be borne
by the owner(s) and/or occupier(s) of such property and shall be paid
before the recycling receptacle is delivered by the Township.
§ 45-16 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 45-17
38:125
§ 45-18. Repealer.
All ordinances and provisions thereof inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter shall be and are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency. The third ordinance adopted in 1959, dated October 7,
1959,26 is specifically repealed hereby.
§ 45-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, part, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be
declared invalid by judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
section, subsection, part, clause or phrase shall be deemed to be severable
from the remainder of this chapter.
§ 45-20. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon enactment as provided by law.
Chapter 46
INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil proceeding
commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine for
each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred
by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. [Amended 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
B. Each day's continuance of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. The Township may enforce the terms of this chapter by appropriate
proceedings in law or equity.
D. This penalty provision shall not be construed to prevent prosecutions
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code for violations of § 45-18 of this
chapter.
26.Editor's Note: Said ordinance comprised former Ch. 45, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 45-17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 46-1
38:126
§ 46-1. Certificate and compliance required.
No insurance company, association or exchange doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for
fire damage to a structure located within West Goshen Township under
the terms of Section 508(a) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as
amended, 40 P.S. § 638(a), unless the insurance company, association or
exchange is furnished with a certificate pursuant to § 46-2 of this chapter
and unless there is compliance with the procedures set forth in §§ 46-3 and
46-4 of this chapter.
§ 46-2. Fire loss certificate.
A. The Township Manager or his/her designee shall, upon the written
request of the named insured specifying the tax description of the
property, name and address of the insurance company, association or
exchange and the date agreed upon by the insurance company,
association or exchange and the named insured as of the date of the
receipt of a loss report of the claim, and the payment of a certification
fee in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors to cover the administrative expense of processing the
request and copying, furnish the insurance company, association or
exchange either of the following within 14 working days of the request:
(1) A certificate or, at the discretion of the Township, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insured to
the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
the property (sewer and refuse charges) and that, as of the date of
the Manager's certificate or verbal notification, the Township has
not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the Township for
the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on
the property; or
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges (sewer and refuse charges)
against the property as of the date specified in the request that
have not been paid as of the date of the certificate and also
showing, as of the date of the Manager's certificate, the amount of
the total costs, if any, certified to the Manager or his/her designee
that have been incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property. For the
purposes of this subsection, the Township Manager shall certify the
total amount, if any, of such costs. For the purposes of this chapter,
a tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at
the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed
against the property by the Township under applicable law or
ordinance.
B. Upon receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section,
the insurance company, association or exchange shall pay the claim of
§ 46-1 ENERGY CONSERVATION § 46-2
38:127
§ 46-3. Establishment of municipal fire insurance escrow.
When the loss agreed to between the named insured and the company,
association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits
of liability on all fire policies covering the building or other structure,
the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds to the Township Manager or his/her designee the
amounts required by and in accordance with the procedures set forth
in 40 P.S. § 638(c). Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the
Township shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. The
named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure after the
transfer, and the Township Manager or his/her designee shall return the
amount of the fund in excess of the estimate to the named insured if the
Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or
other structure. The Township Manager or his/her designee shall carry out
the duties of this section.
§ 46-4. Disposition of escrow proceeds.
Upon receipt of the proceeds by the Township as authorized by § 46-3,
the Township Manager or his/her designee shall place the proceeds in
a separate fund to be used solely as security against the total cost of
removing, repairing or securing incurred by the Township. When
transferring the funds as required in § 46-3, an insurance company,
association or exchange shall provide the Township with the name and
address of the named insured, whereupon the Township shall contact the
named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the
municipality and notify the named insured that the procedures under this
section shall be followed. The fund shall be returned to the named insured
the named insured in accordance with the policy terms, unless the loss
agreed to between the named insured and the company, association or
exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on
all fire policies covering the building or other structure. In the case
of such a loss, the insurance company, association or exchange, the
insured property owner and the Township shall follow the procedures
set forth in §§ 46-3 and 46-4 of this chapter.
C. Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection A(2) of
this section, the insurance company, association or exchange shall
return the bill to the Manager or his/her designee and transfer to the
Manager or his/her designee an amount from the insurance proceeds
necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs
shown on the bill. In the case of a loss subject to §§ 46-3 and 46-4 of this
chapter, the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer
to the Manager or his/her designee the amount from the insurance
proceeds shown on the bill separately from the amounts transferred
under § 46-3 of this chapter. The Township shall receive the amount and
apply or credit it to the payment of the items shown in the bill.
§ 46-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 46-4
38:128
when repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have
been completed and the required proof received by the Township Manager
or his/her designee if the Township has not incurred any costs for repairs,
removal or securing. If the Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal
or securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid
from the fund, and if excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to limit the ability of the Township to recover any deficiency.
Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Township
and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition
of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 46-5. Costs.
The total costs incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or securing
of a building or other structure under this chapter shall include, but not be
limited to, all administrative, personnel and overhead costs incurred by the
Township in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures.
§ 46-6. Filing of copies.
Upon the enactment of this ordinance,27 the Township Secretary shall file
an exact copy of the ordinance with the Department of Community and
Economic Development, together with the name, position and phone
number of the municipal official responsible for compliance with Section
508 of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended.
Chapter 47
(RESERVED)
Chapter 49
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
27.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 04-2011, adopted 8-10-2011.
§ 46-4 (RESERVED) § 49-1
47:129
§ 49-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township for the purpose of enacting and establishing minimum safety
standards and regulations for the safe installation and maintenance of
certain mechanical equipment situate within the Township, the
International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, as now and as hereafter
supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than three copies of the
International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, have been and now are filed
in the Office of the Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 49-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with "West Goshen
Township."
B. Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following: "SECTION 103. ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section 103.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more building
officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official and building officials shall be referred to in this
Code as "Code Officials."
D. Section 103.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and reserved.
E. Section 106.5.2 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
106.5.2 Fees and inspections/reinspections. The Board of
Supervisors shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of fees which shall
be kept on file with the Township Secretary and shall be reviewed and
revised as necessary by the Board of Supervisors."
F. Section 106.5.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
G. Section 108.4 shall be amended to state as follows:
§ 49-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 49-2
47:130
108.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or permits
the violation of any provision of this Code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter
or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit, shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject
to the payment of a fine of not more than $1,000, plus the casts of
prosecution. Upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a period of not
more than 30 days. Each section or provision of this Code that is
violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion
thereof in which a violation of this Code is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, each of which violation shall be
punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not
more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, and, upon default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in
the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days.
H. Section 108.5 is deleted and replaced with the following:
108.5 Stop-work orders. The fine for violation of a stop-work order
shall be not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imposed and
collected by the procedure specified in Section 108.4 of this Code.
I. Section 109, Means of Appeal, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
§ 49-2 (RESERVED) § 49-2
47:131
Chapter 51
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 66.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 49-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 49-2
51:132
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 51-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Mobile Home Park Ordinance."
§ 51-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein
indicated:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a mobile home park
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
mobile home park, not including streets, off-street parking areas, areas
set aside for public facilities and required setbacks and buffers.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition) and/or a lessee if
he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner
or other person having a proprietary interest in the land.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation, including any addition or accessory structure,
such as porches, sheds, decks or additional rooms.
MOBILE HOME LOT OR SITE — A parcel of land in a mobile home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home, which is leased by the park owner to the owner or occupants of
the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PAD — A concrete pad at least six inches in thickness
with at least six tie-down rings to which the mobile home shall be
secured and equal in length and width to the dimensions of the mobile
home to be placed thereon or twelve-inch diameter by thirty-inch deep
piers placed greater than 10 feet on center under each side of the
lengthwise frame.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
§ 51-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-2
51:133
B. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular. The past tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall"
is always mandatory.
§ 51-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-2
51:134
ARTICLE II
Application Procedure
§ 51-3. Mobile home park development applications.
§ 51-4. Information required.
In addition to the requirements contained in Article IV of the West Goshen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,29 an application
for preliminary or final approval of a mobile home park shall indicate
by drawings, diagram, maps, test, affidavit or other legal instrument the
following:
A. An application for development of a lot or parcel of land for mobile
home park purposes shall be made and approved or approved as
modified before any zoning permit for such use shall be issued.
B. Article IV of the West Goshen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall govern the processing of all applications
for mobile home park development and is accordingly incorporated
herein in its entirety.28
A. That the parcel or lot for which application is made is held in single and
separate ownership.
B. The placement, location and number of mobile home lots and mobile
home pads on a layout map of the parcel at a scale of one inch equals 40
feet.
C. The location and dimension of all driveways, pedestrianways, sidewalks
and access roads with notation as to the type of impervious cover.
D. The location and dimension of all parking facilities.
E. The locale, dimension and arrangement of all areas to be devoted to
lawns, buffer strips, screen planting and recreation.
F. Location and dimension of all buildings existing or proposed to be built
and all existing tree masses and trees of over six-inch caliper, one foot
from the ground.
G. Proposed provisions for handling of stormwater drainage, street- and
on-site lighting, water supply and electrical supply in the form of
written and diagrammatic analysis with calculations and conclusions
prepared by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect.
H. Three copies of the application submitted to the Department of
Environmental Protection for permit approval.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land, Art. IV.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land, Art. IV.
§ 51-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-4
51:135

ARTICLE III
Development Standards
§ 51-5. Area and density regulations.
§ 51-6. Streets.
A. A mobile home park shall have an area of not less than five acres.
B. No mobile home, office or service building shall be closer to a public
street right-of-way line than 50 feet nor closer to the edge of an interior
street than 25 feet nor closer to an adjacent property than 60 feet.
C. There shall be no more than four mobile homes per gross acre.
D. Distance between structures.
(1) Minimum distance between mobile homes shall be 25 feet.
(2) No accessory structure shall be within 10 feet of any other
structure, except that metal accessory structures not blocking
doors or windows or under roof structures may be placed against
mobile homes.
E. At least 20% of the remaining gross area of each mobile home park,
after subtraction of required buffer area, shall be set aside as common
open space for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the mobile
home park. Such common open space shall be substantially free of
structures except for those designed for recreational purposes.
A. The entrance road or area connecting the park with a public street or
road shall have a minimum pavement width of 34 feet for a depth of at
least 100 feet from the public street or road or a divided road with lanes
being 20 feet in width.
B. Street construction and design.
(1) Grades. Grades of all streets within a mobile home park shall be
sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage but shall not be
more than 6%. Short sections of roadway with a maximum grade of
10% may be permitted where necessitated by topography, provided
that traffic safety is assured by appropriate surfacing and
intermittent leveling areas.
(2) Curves.
(a) Horizontal. Whenever an internal street is deflected in excess
of 5°, connections shall be made by horizontal curves having a
minimum center-line radius of 150 feet.
(b) Vertical. At all changes in grade of an internal street where the
algebraic difference exceeds 1%, vertical curves shall be
provided to permit a minimum sight distance of 200 feet.
§ 51-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-6
51:137
§ 51-7. Off-street parking areas and walks.
(3) Within 100 feet of an intersection, intersecting streets shall be at
approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be
maintained between the center lines of offset intersecting streets.
Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
prohibited.
(4) All internal streets and roadways shall be constructed of concrete
or macadam of sufficient bearing strength and design to
accommodate mobile home units. In no case shall any internal
street or roadway have less than 28 feet of paved width. Dead-end
streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround
having an outside radius of not less than 40 feet.
C. Illumination of streets. All mobile home parks shall be furnished with
lighting fixtures so spaced and so equipped with luminaries as will
provide adequate levels of illumination throughout the park for the safe
movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night and to meet the approval
of the Township Engineer.
D. Preservation of sight lines. No structure, fence, tree, shrub or other
planting shall be maintained between a line two feet above the street
level and a plane seven feet above the street level so as to interfere with
traffic visibility across the corner within the triangle bounded by the
intersecting street lines and a straight line drawn between points on
each street 25 feet from the intersection of said street lines.
A. Off-street parking for at least two motor vehicles shall be provided at
each mobile home site. Each parking stall shall be at least 10 feet by 20
feet and shall be of either gravel or macadam construction, which shall
be specified in the plan. Off-site common parking areas may be provided
in lieu of a parking slot at each mobile home site; but, in such case,
parking slots shall be provided at the ratio of two slots for each mobile
home site. The parking slots must be within 100 feet of the home site
with which they will serve. Parking courts may have a twenty-five-foot
paved cartway and shall not be greater than 300 feet in length.
B. Additional off-street parking spaces for vehicles of nonresidents shall be
provided at the rate of five spaces for each 10 units. On-street parking
shall be prohibited on internal roads, and it shall be the duty of the
owner or operator of the mobile home park to enforce this provision.
C. All mobile home parks shall provide safe, convenient, asphalt or
concrete pedestrian walkways of at least four feet, between the park
streets and all community facilities provided for park residents.
D. All mobile home sites shall be connected to common walks and to
streets or to driveways connecting to a paved street.
§ 51-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-8
51:138
§ 51-8. Storm drainage, erosion and sedimentation control.
The provisions of § 72-30 of the West Goshen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance30 shall be applicable to all mobile home park
developments and are accordingly incorporated herein by reference.
§ 51-9. Water supply and sewage disposal.
Public water supply and a public sanitary sewer is required for each mobile
home site.
§ 51-10. Utilities.
All utilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with utility
company specifications regulating such systems and shall be underground.
§ 51-11. Common open space areas and buffers.
A. Standards for location and management.
(1) Common open space areas shall be located and designed as areas
easily accessible to residents of the mobile home park and
preserving natural features. Common open space areas shall
include both active recreation areas for all age groups and,
particularly where the site includes a watercourse or hilly or
wooded areas, land which is left in its natural state.
(2) At least 20% of the open space areas shall be located in an area not
subject to flooding and which is usable for active recreational use.
No such active recreational open space areas shall be less than 1/4
acre in size.
B. Buffers.
(1) Buffered setbacks shall consist of a visual screen of mixed
evergreen plant material of varying species. At the time of planting,
a sufficient amount of evergreen material to visually screen the
property shall be at least six feet in height (after planting), and the
remainder of the plantings may be of varying lesser heights.
(2) The plantings shall be maintained permanently and replaced within
one year in the event of death of any plant material. Plantings shall
not be placed closer than three feet from any property line.
(3) All existing deciduous and evergreen trees above two inches in
caliper and/or six feet in height shall be preserved in the buffer
areas, except where clearance is required to ensure sight distance.
(4) Generally, a minimum of 35% of plant material shall be evergreen
and 10% of flowering material.
30.Editor's Note: See § Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 51-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-12
51:139
§ 51-12. Mobile home pad and skirts. [Amended 5-12-1987 by Ord.
No. 6-1987]
§ 51-13. Fuel supply and storage.
A. Each mobile home is required to be located on a mobile home pad and
have solid all-weather skirting enclosing the area between the ground
and the trailer floor.
B. The anchoring requirements of this Subsection B shall supersede the
six tie-down ring requirements set forth in the definition of "mobile
home pad" for any manufactured home situate or to be placed in a
Flood Hazard District, as that term is defined in Article XIX, Flood
Hazard District, in Chapter 84, Zoning. These regulations shall be
interpreted in accordance with the definitions of this chapter and those
set forth in Article XIX, Flood Hazard District, in Chapter 84, Zoning, of
the Code.
(1) Each manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in
the Flood Hazard District shall be elevated on a mobile home pad
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored in accordance
with Subsection B(2).
(2) Each manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in
the Flood Hazard District shall be anchored to ground anchors by
over-the-top and frame ties so as to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Specifically, each such manufactured home shall
be secured to ground anchors in the following manner:
(a) Over-the-top ties shall anchor the manufactured home at each
of the four corners of the home, with two additional ties per
side at intermediate points, except that manufactured homes
less than 50 feet long shall require only one such additional tie
per side.
(b) Frame ties shall anchor the manufactured home at each of the
four corners of the home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate points, except that manufactured homes less than
50 feet long shall require only four such additional ties per
side.
C. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
D. Any additions to a manufactured home shall be anchored in accordance
with the requirements set forth above.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(1) The design, installation, construction and maintenance of
containers and pertinent equipment for the storage and handling of
§ 51-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-13
51:140
liquefied petroleum gases shall conform to the provisions of the
Act of December 27, 1951, P.L. 1793, as amended,31 and to the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry, its successor or other
governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes,
service buildings or other structures when installed shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and shall include
the following:
(a) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
(b) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home
and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
(c) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile home
shall be well supported and protected against mechanical
injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall
not be conveyed through piping equipment or systems in
mobile homes.
(d) Liquefied petroleum gas vessels shall be no more than 60
United States gallons' gross capacity and shall be maintained
in a vertical position and shall be securely, but not
permanently, fastened to prevent accidental overturning. No
vessel shall be placed any closer to a mobile home exit than
five feet and no closer to any window than three feet.
(e) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or
any other structure.
(f) All pipe connections shall be of a flare-type.
B. Fuel oil supply systems.
(1) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the Township Building Code.32
(2) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile
homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1321 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Building Construction.
§ 51-13 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-13
51:141
§ 51-14. Fire protection.
All mobile home parks shall be provided with fire hydrants to meet the
specifications of the Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania or its
successors, but in any case, in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of
all existing and proposed structures and mobile homes, measured by way of
accessible streets.
§ 51-15. Landscaping.
(3) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(4) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall
not be less than five feet from any mobile home exit and not less
than three feet from any window.
(5) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage and screened from the street.
A. No portions of tree masses or trees with caliper of four inches or
greater shall be cleared unless clearly necessary for effectuation of the
proposed mobile home park development. Applicants shall make all
reasonable efforts to harmonize their plans with the preservation of
existing trees.
B. In addition to plantings for buffered setbacks, a mobile home park shall
be subject to the following landscaping requirements:
(1) Disturbed topsoil shall be stockpiled and replaced after
construction.
(2) Deciduous trees of varying species shall be planted within the
mobile home park at the ratio of two per mobile home. In the event
that a substantial portion of the tract is wooded and a substantial
number of trees remain after development, the governing body may
modify this requirement.
(3) Deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs of varying species shall also be
planted within the mobile home park at a ratio of at least four per
mobile home.
(4) Planting of landscape material shall be in accordance with a plan
prepared by a registered landscape architect and shall be
completed within six months of approval of the final plan, and
failure to carry out the landscaping plan within such time shall
warrant denial of the park's annual license under § 51-16B hereof.
§ 51-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-15
51:142
ARTICLE IV
Permits, Licenses and Inspections
§ 51-16. Permits and license required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or other entity to
construct, maintain, alter, extend or operate a mobile home park within
West Goshen Township unless and until the following are obtained:
(1) A valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in the name of the landowner for the
specified construction, alteration or extension proposed; and
(2) A permit issued by the West Goshen Township Zoning Officer in the
name of the operator, which shall not be issued until a copy of the
Health Department permit has been furnished, all permits for
water supply and sewage systems shall have been obtained and all
other requirements contained herein have been complied with and
final approval of the application has been granted by the governing
body.
B. Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the landowner of the
mobile home park shall apply to the West Goshen Township Zoning
Officer on or before the 15th day of each year for an annual license to
continue operation of the mobile home park. The Zoning Officer shall
issue the annual license upon satisfactory proof that:
(1) The park continues to meet the standards prescribed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) The park meets the standards promulgated by any other state or
county agency having jurisdiction.
(3) The park is in compliance with the standards and provisions of this
chapter.
(4) That the landowner holds a current and valid certificate of
registration issued annually by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for operation of the mobile home park.
C. Fees.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
shall be prescribed by regulations by the governing body of West
Goshen Township.
(2) The fee for the annual license shall be prescribed by regulation of
the governing body and shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer
with the application for the annual license.
D. Inspection.
§ 51-16 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-16
51:143
(1) Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of a
mobile home park, a representative of West Goshen Township may
inspect a mobile home park at any reasonable time to determine
compliance with this chapter.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for annual license and before
issuing such annual license, the Zoning Officer or other designated
representative of West Goshen Township shall make an inspection
of the mobile home park to determine compliance with this chapter.
The Zoning Officer or other representative shall thereafter notify
the licensee of any instances of noncompliance with this chapter
and shall not issue the annual license until the licensee has
corrected all such violations.
§ 51-16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-16
51:144
ARTICLE V
Maintenance
§ 51-17. Responsibility for maintenance of facilities.
The operator and owner shall be responsible for maintaining all common
facilities, including but not limited to roads, parking areas, sidewalks or
pathways, common open space, water supply and sewage disposal systems
and service buildings, in a condition of proper repair, maintenance and
cleanliness in compliance with applicable township ordinances, codes and
regulations. If upon inspection by a Zoning Officer or other representative
it is determined that the mobile home park is not in compliance with this
standard of maintenance, the licensee shall be considered to be in violation
of this chapter, and the Zoning Officer shall notify the operator or licensee
of the particulars of any such violation.
§ 51-18. Correction of violations.
The operator and licensee shall thereafter have 30 days in which to correct
any such violations, except that if the violation is determined by the Zoning
Officer or other representative to constitute a hazard to the health or safety
of the residents of the mobile home park, he shall order that the violation
be corrected forthwith.
§ 51-19. Maintenance bond.
§ 51-20. Register of occupants.
The operator shall maintain a register of all occupants and notify the
governing body of the names and addresses of all new occupants and of
occupants who have departed.
§ 51-21. Installation or removal of mobile homes; permit required.
No mobile home may be installed in or removed from a mobile home park
unless the Zoning Officer has issued a building permit therefor. No such
permit may be issued until the Zoning Officer receives a removal permit
A. The licensee of a mobile home park shall, prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy pursuant to final approval of an application,
post with the township a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor in an amount sufficient to cover, for a period of two
years, the cost of maintenance of all common facilities as defined in
§ 51-17, as determined by the Township Zoning Officer or other
representative. The bond shall remain in effect for the duration of the
operation of the mobile home park.
B. In the event of noncompliance with an order pursuant to § 51-18,
whether a thirty-day order or an order to correct violations forthwith,
the township may forfeit the maintenance bond and use the proceeds
thereof to effect corrections of the violations.
§ 51-17 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-21
51:145
issued by the local Tax Collector demonstrating compliance with the Act of
December 15, 1969, P.L. 362, § 1.33
§ 51-22. Construction performance bond.
Before final approval is given for the construction of a mobile home park,
the landowner must furnish a performance bond to the township in the
amount of 125% of the estimated construction costs for the construction
of all common facilities and improvements, as determined by the Township
Engineer.
33.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5453.617a.
§ 51-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-22
51:146
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 51-23. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 51-24. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Upon repeated violations by the same permittee (or holder), the permittee's
right to the issuance of a permit or to continue operation of the mobile home
park under such a permit may be suspended for a fixed term or permanently
revoked after hearing and notice, subject to the right of appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction as by law provided.
§ 51-25. Violation notices, hearings and orders.
A. Notice of violations of the provisions of this chapter or of any
regulations adopted pursuant hereto is subject to the following
procedures:
(1) Notice of the violation shall be given in writing and shall specify the
violations.
(2) Such notice may be served by certified mail or by personal service,
either of which shall be directed to the landowner (permit holder).
(3) Notice shall contain the specific remedial action necessary to
correct the violations, so as to effect compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and with the regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
(4) Such notice shall specify a period of time within which the remedial
action must be taken in conformity with the provisions of Article V
hereof.
B. Subject to the provisions of Article V hereof, any landowner (permit
holder) issued a notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
have a right of appeal to the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township, provided that such appeal is filed within 10 days from the
date of service of such notice setting forth with particularity the
grounds therefor. A hearing thereon shall be had within 30 days of the
conclusion of such hearing or hearings or, where a transcript of the
proceedings is taken, within 30 days of the Board's receipt of such
§ 51-23 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51-25
51:147
transcript. Upon failure of the landowner (permit holder) to comply
with any order sustaining or modifying the notice of violation, the
license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
C. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decisions
of the Board of Supervisors, together with a copy of every notice and
order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the Township Secretary; however, the notes of testimony of
the hearings held pursuant to such notice need not be transcribed
unless required by the Board or in the event of appeal. Appeal from the
Board's decision shall be as provided by law.
D. Upon submission of any appeal pursuant to the provisions hereof, the
appellant shall deposit with the Township Zoning Officer such sum as is
designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. All costs, fees and
expenses incurred in connection with the appeal shall be charged
against the applicant, including cost of preparation and mailing of
notices of hearings and decisions, cost of legal publication, cost of
appearance fees of court reporters and cost of an original of the
transcript of notes of testimony. If at any time the charge as then made
against the applicant's deposit shall render the balance insufficient to
ensure the payment of all costs, expenses, charges and fees that may
accrue in the disposition of the appeal, the Board of Supervisors may
require additional deposits to be made to assure adequate funds to pay
for the appeal costs and expenses. The Board's failure to demand
additional deposits shall not relieve the applicant of liability for such
costs and charges.
E. Upon the appellant's failure to pay the deposits additionally required
within 10 days or prior to the next scheduled hearing, whichever be the
earlier date, the Board may:
(1) Continue the matter generally until such deposits are paid, in
which event the time within which a decision must be rendered
shall commence to run;
(2) Dismiss the appeal;
(3) Determine the appeal upon the record as it then stands; or
(4) Take such further action as it deems proper under the
circumstances.
§ 51-25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-25
51:148
Chapter 51A
MODEL AIRCRAFT AND AMATEUR ROCKETS
§ 51A-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AMATEUR ROCKET — An unmanned rocket that:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Goshen.
MODEL AIRCRAFT — Any unmanned aerial vehicle, including, without
limitation, model airplanes, remote-controlled aircraft and drones and the
equipment associated with such unmanned aerial vehicle.
OPERATOR — Any person controlling or otherwise operating a model
aircraft or amateur rocket.
OWNER — Any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any
property within the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation, for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — The unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use
of public or private property which causes injury, damage, inconvenience,
annoyance, or discomfort to any person in the legitimate enjoyment of that
person's property.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Goshen.
§ 51A-2. Operation of model aircraft and amateur rockets
regulated.
Is propelled by a motor or motors having a combined total impulse of
889,600 Newton-seconds (200,000 pound seconds) or less; and
A.
Cannot reach an altitude greater than 150 kilometers (93.2 statute
miles) above the earth's surface.
B.
A. No person shall operate a model aircraft, amateur rocket or other flying
objects of a similar nature at an elevation of less than 200 feet over
property not owned by the operator without the permission of the
property owner.
B. Permission from the owner shall be in writing, specifying the name of
the operator, the address of the property over which the model aircraft,
amateur rocket or other flying objects of a similar nature may be
operated, and the permissible dates and hours of operation.
§ 51-25 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 51A-2
51:149
§ 51A-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than
30 days. Each section of this chapter violated shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter
is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations
shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution,
or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 52
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS
C. The operation of a model aircraft, as that term is defined herein, shall
be in compliance with the requirements set forth in § 336(a) of the FAA
Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 (FMRA), as such regulations
may be amended from time to time, which are attached as Exhibit A.34
D. The operation of an amateur rocket, as that term is defined herein, shall
be in compliance with the requirements set forth in Title 14, Chapter 1,
Subchapter F, Part 101, Subpart C of the Code of Federal Regulations,
as such regulations may be amended from time to time, which are
attached as Exhibit B.35
E. The operation of a model aircraft and an amateur rocket, as those terms
are defined above, is prohibited on all Township property and within
Township and PennDOT road rights-of-way, unless specifically approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
34.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
35.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 51A-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51A-3
51:150
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees
[Adopted 7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 18-2004]
§ 52-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen Township
Municipal Attorneys' Fee Schedule Ordinance," as amended and reenacted.
§ 52-2. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006;
2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 01-2013]
The Board of Supervisors determines this fee schedule fair and reasonable
for the services to be rendered by its Solicitor or other Counsel in the
collection of delinquent municipal claims and accounts and hereby directs
that the same be imposed, as applicable, upon the affected property owners
(the owner) and may be imposed and recovered as part of each municipal
claim filed against the affected real property in proceedings to recover
delinquent municipal claims, together with any additional out-of-pocket
costs incurred by the Township for necessary expenses in connection
therewith:
Action Legal Fees
Receive and review lien information;
prepare lien
Hourly rate of Solicitor, as approved
by the Board of Supervisors in the
fee resolution, for 30 minutes of
time
Prepare and file order of
satisfaction, notify property owner
$46.25
Prepare and file writ of scire facias Hourly rate of Solicitor, as approved
by the Board of Supervisors in the
fee resolution, for 30 minutes of
time
Reissue writ $46.25
Prepare and mail correspondence
per Pa.R.C.P. No. 237.1
$46.25
Motion for alternate service $300
Prepare and file default judgment Hourly rate of Solicitor, as approved
by the Board of Supervisors in the
fee resolution, for 1 hour of time
Prepare and file writ of execution for
sheriff sale
$1,000
Attendance at sale; evaluate
schedule of distribution and resolve
issues ancillary to sale
Hourly rate of Solicitor, as approved
by the Board of Supervisors in the
fee resolution, for 2 hours of time
§ 52-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52-2
51:151
Action Legal Fees
Miscellaneous litigation and/or legal
activities
Not to exceed hourly rate of
Solicitor, as approved by the Board
of Supervisors in the fee resolution
§ 52-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL CLAIM — Any claim identified, defined, prescribed or provided
for in the Act.
§ 52-4. Procedure for collection.
A. At least 30 days before assessing or imposing attorneys' fees in
connection with the collection of a delinquent account, the Township
shall, by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, postage
prepaid, mail to the owner the notice required by this subsection.
B. If within 30 days of mailing the notice in accordance with Subsection A,
the certified mail is refused or unclaimed or the return receipt is not
received, then at least 10 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys'
fees in connection with the collection of a delinquent account, the
Township shall, by United States first class mail, mail to the owner the
notice required by this subsection.
C. The notice required by this subsection shall be mailed to the owner's
last known post office address by virtue of the knowledge and
information possessed by the Township and by the county office
responsible for assessments and revisions of taxes. It shall be the duty
of the Township to determine the owner's last post office address known
to said collector and county assessment office.
D. The notice to the owner shall include the following:
(1) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorneys
fees within 30 days of mailing the notice pursuant to Subsection A
or within 10 days of the mailing of the notice pursuant to
Subsection B.
(2) The manner in which the imposition or assessment of attorney's
fees may be avoided by payment of the delinquent account.
§ 52-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 52-4
51:152
Chapter 52A
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 25.
Curfew — See Ch. 34.
Dogs — See Ch. 36.
Fireworks — See Ch. 42.
§ 52A-1. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the
limits of West Goshen Township.
§ 52A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated herein:
COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION — The operation of heavy construction
equipment in construction or demolition projects.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration, remodeling, or similar action, including demolition and removal
of buildings or structures.
CONTIGUOUS LAND USE — Any land use bordering or abutting, whether
divided by real property boundary or by real property boundary and public
street.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound which is static, fluctuating or
intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time in any fifteen-second
interval.
DECIBEL (DB) — A numerical expression of the relative loudness of a
sound.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction, or removal of buildings,
structures or roadways.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
HEAVY CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Trucks with three or more axles,
earthmoving grading equipment.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration with an abrupt onset and
rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time in any fifteensecond
interval.
§ 52-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52A-2
51:153
LAND USE — The actual real use of land and buildings thereon situated
regardless of the zoning or other classification attributed to such land and
buildings.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled except for one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE SOUND — Any sound that can be detected by a person
using his or her unaided hearing facilities.
PURE TONE — Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch
or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this chapter, a pure tone
shall exist if the 1/3 octave band sound pressure level in the band with the
tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two
contiguous 1/3 octave bands by 5 dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and
above, by 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 Hz and 400 Hz and by
15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
RECEIVING LAND USE — The land use which is a contiguous use to the
noise source.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of
sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration,
intensity and frequency.
SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A noise-control device intended to abate
or lessen the noise made by vehicles, equipment or machinery.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of
a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. The sound level
meter used for testing purposes in accordance with this chapter shall meet
the current American National Standard Institute specifications.
§ 52A-3. Administration and enforcement.
The West Goshen Township Police and Code Enforcement Officers shall
have the power to administer the terms of this chapter, investigate
complaints and prosecute violations of this chapter in accordance with
§ 52A-6 of this chapter. When enforcing the terms of this chapter, the Police
and Code Enforcement Officers may retain consultants and engineers with
experience in measuring sound levels with the use of sound level meters.
§ 52A-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 52A-4
51:154
§ 52A-4. Noise standards.
A. Specific prohibited acts. The following actions are specifically
prohibited regardless of the sound level which is emitted, unless
otherwise exempted in this chapter:
(1) No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of
any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument,
cassette player, electronic recording device, sound amplifier or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in
such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. every day of the
week.
(2) No person shall operate or permit the outdoor operation of any
tools, equipment or machinery used for commercial construction,
drilling or demolition, or in the sweeping of parking lots in such a
manner as to be plainly audible across a property line except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday and from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. It shall be
unlawful to operate or permit the outdoor operation of any tools,
equipment or machinery used for commercial construction, drilling
or demolition, or in the sweeping of parking lots in such a manner
as to be plainly audible across a property line on Sundays and legal
holidays (which shall include the following holidays: New Year's
Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas).
(3) No person shall operate or permit the outdoor operation of any
powered tool, equipment or machinery (including but not limited to
electrically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool)
in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a property line
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. every day of
the week.
(4) No person shall load or unload trucks or other motor vehicles or
open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building
materials, garbage cans or other objects in such a manner as to be
plainly audible across a property line except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. every day of the week, except that
municipal trash trucks may operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
until 9:00 p.m. every day of the week.
(5) No person shall own, possess, harbor or control any animal or bird
which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes
such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of
any person at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether
the animal or bird is situated in or upon private property; provided,
however, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise,
§ 52A-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52A-4
51:155
no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private
property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for any
other cause which teased or provoked the animal or bird.
(6) No person shall remove or render inoperative a sound-dissipative
device from motor vehicles, equipment or machinery, other than for
purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement when such motor
vehicle, equipment or machinery is not in use; intentionally move
or render inaccurate or inoperative any sound-monitoring
instrument or other device positioned by or for the Township or
other governmental entity or agent thereof; or use any motor
vehicle, equipment or machinery which has had a sound-dissipative
device or any part thereof removed or rendered inoperative.
(7) No person shall repair, rebuild or test or otherwise work on any
motorcycle, motor vehicle, motorboat or aircraft outdoors in such a
manner as to be plainly audible across a property line except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. every day of the
week.
(8) Except for emergencies, no person shall intentionally sound or
permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense
alarm or any similar stationary emergency signaling device
intended for public notification.
B. General performance standards/noise levels.
(1) In those cases not specifically controlled by § 52A-4 above, no
person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or public
property any source of continuous sound (any sound which is static,
fluctuating or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time
in any fifteen-second interval) in such a manner as to create a
sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land
use category in the following table when measured at or within the
property boundary of the receiving land use. All measurements
shall be made with a sound level meter which is in conformance
with American Standards Association specifications.
(2) Continuous sound levels by receiving land use.
Receiving Land Use
Category Time
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
Residential, public space,
open space, agricultural
or institutional
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
65 dBA
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
60 dBA
§ 52A-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 52A-4
51:156
§ 52A-5. Exceptions.
The following noises are exempted from the provisions set forth in § 52A-4
of this chapter:
Receiving Land Use
Category Time
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
Residential uses
permitted by ordinance in
an industrial or
industrial-commercial
district
At all times 65dBA
Commercial or business 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
65 dBA
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
60 dBA
Industrial At all times 70 dBA
(3) Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which
emits a pure tone, the maximum sound-level limits set forth in the
above table shall be reduced by five dBA. For any source of sound
which emits an impulsive sound (a sound of short duration, with an
abrupt onset and rapid delay and an occurrence of not more than
one time in any fifteen-second interval), the excursions of sound
pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA over the ambient sound
pressure level, regardless of the time of day or night or receiving
land use, using the "fast" meter characteristic of a Type II meter,
meeting ANSI Specification SI.4-1971.
A. Blasting, only if performed in accordance with a permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such blasting
may occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, unless specifically authorized at different times by the
DEP permit.
B. Alarms or other devices used for the purpose of alerting people to the
existence of an actual emergency or devices such as a horn or siren
installed in a motor vehicle and used to warn persons of an imminent
danger.
C. Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public utilities or
restore essential public services, including construction activities
directly related to the abatement of an emergency.
D. Authorized emergency vehicles responding to an emergency.
§ 52A-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52A-5
51:157
§ 52A-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than
30 days. Each section of this chapter violated shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter
is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations
shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution,
or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 52B
E. A snowplow, snowblower or other similar device in operation used to
remove snow or ice.
F. Work or activities performed or sponsored by schools and governmental
agencies or their contractors in the performance of public service.
G. Noises made by bells, chimes, carillons used for religious purposes or in
conjunction with national celebrations or public holidays; existing bells,
chimes and carillons and clock strike mechanisms that are currently in
use for any purpose.
H. Motor vehicle operations shall not exceed the noise levels established in
Chapter 450 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code of Regulations,
Subchapter B, Established Sound Levels.36
I. Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Township.
J. Agriculture.
K. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., industrial uses which
were in existence as of April 25, 2012 (the date of adoption of this
chapter), shall be exempt from all standards in § 52A-4 of this chapter.
Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., industrial uses which
were in existence as of April 25, 2012 (the date of adoption of this
chapter), shall be required to comply with only the general performance
standards/noise levels in § 52A-4B of this chapter. [Added 10-10-2012
by Ord. No. 07-2012]
36.Editor's Note: See 67 Pa. Code § 157.11 et seq.
§ 52A-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 52A-6
51:158
NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning -- See Ch. 84.
§ 52A-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52A-6
51:159

ARTICLE I
Woodlands at Greystone
[Adopted 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
§ 52B-1. Designation of Woodlands at Greystone Neighborhood
Improvement District.
The Board of Supervisors hereby approves the NID Plan, attached hereto
as Exhibit A,37 and hereby designates the area or areas identified in the
NID Plan as a NID. The name of the NID is the "Woodlands at Greystone
Neighborhood Improvement District."
§ 52B-2. Management.
The Board of Supervisors hereby designates the Woodlands at Greystone
Neighborhood Improvement District Management Association as the
NIDMA to administer programs, improvements, and services within the NID
in accordance with the Act38 with duties and responsibilities to be set forth
in a management agreement containing terms and provisions satisfactory to
the Township and the NIDMA.
§ 52B-3. Special assessments.
The Board of Supervisors, pursuant to Section 837 of the Act, hereby
authorizes the imposition by the NIDMA of special assessments on real
property located within the NID in accordance with the rate and method of
apportionment of special assessments set forth in the NID Plan, such rate
and method of apportionment of special assessments being in compliance
with Section 837 of the Act, and such rate and method of apportionment
of special assessments hereby is approved. The special assessments will
provide for the payment of Bonds to be issued by the issuer to finance
certain public infrastructure improvements and related programs and
services to facilitate the residential development known as "Woodlands at
Greystone" which, together with certain adjacent real estate, comprises the
NID, all as provided for within the NID Plan.
§ 52B-4. Further actions.
The Board of Supervisors hereby is authorized to take such further actions
as are necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and purposes of
this article, including, but not limited to, the execution by the Chairman
or Vice Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the NID
management agreement, the funding agreement, the pledge and security
agreement, and other documents and agreements consistent with the Act
and the NID Plan that the Township will need to enter into in furtherance
of this article, in form and substance satisfactory to such officers and the
Township's Solicitor and bond counsel, the execution and delivery of all
37.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
38.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
§ 52B-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 52B-4
51:161
such documents, instruments, agreements and certificates to constitute
conclusive evidence of such satisfaction.
§ 52B-5. No obligation by Township regarding bonds.
This article shall not be deemed in any way to be a pledge of the general
credit of the Township for the payment of the bonds, and this article shall
not be deemed in any way to obligate the Township for the payment of
principal of, or interest on, the bonds, or for any other claim based on
the bonds or any other document, instrument or agreement delivered in
connection with the issuance of the bonds.
§ 52B-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 52B-5
51:162
Chapter 53
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage — See Ch. 45.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
Sewage disposal nuisances — See Ch. 66.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 68.
§ 53-1. Nuisances enumerated.
The following uses of and activities upon real property in the Township
of West Goshen are hereby declared to be nuisances and are hereby
prohibited:
A. The use of any premises as a trash or garbage dump.
B. The depositing or dumping of any amount of trash or garbage upon the
premises of another or upon public property.
C. The burning of or setting fire to trash, rubbish, refuse or garbage
brought upon and accumulated or stored on any premises from any
other location or locations.39
D. The accumulation or storage of junked or wrecked automobiles as an
automobile graveyard.
E. The accumulation or storage of scrap metal or other waste material as a
junkyard.
F. The storing of gasoline, kerosene or other petroleum products in excess
of 5,000 gallons, except by gasoline service stations or petroleum
products companies.
G. Any use of or activity upon property that, by reason of flames, smoke,
odors, fumes, noise or dust, unreasonably interferes with the
reasonable use, comfort and enjoyment of a neighbor's property or
endangers the health or safety of the occupants of a neighboring
property.
H. The excessive or unreasonable accumulation of scrap, junk, trash or
garbage upon any premises causing odors, fumes or unsightly
appearance to neighboring property owners.
I. Unless otherwise permitted by the issuance of a permit by the Township
for construction purposes pursuant to Chapter 70 of the West Goshen
Township Code titled, "Streets and Sidewalks," the placement of any
object, structure or property in a street or sidewalk which will obstruct,
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 31, Burning, Outdoor.
§ 52B-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 53-1
51:163
§ 53-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — The storage of two or more junked or
wrecked automobiles on any premises but shall not include the storage
of wrecked automobiles in a commercial district in connection with an
automobile repair business, where the wrecked automobiles are stored
merely awaiting the repair thereof in the immediate future.
STREET (SYNONYMOUS WITH HIGHWAY OR ROAD) — The entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly or privately maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel, which also includes a roadway open to the use of the public
for vehicular travel on the grounds of a college or university or public or
private school or public, historical or Township park, shopping center or
private roads in subdivisions or land developments utilized as a means of
egress and ingress by members of the traveling public.[Added 9-28-2005
by Ord. No. 12-2005]
TRASH OR GARBAGE DUMP — The accumulation or storage of trash,
refuse, rubbish or garbage which has been brought upon or conveyed to
a premises from sources or locations other than the premises upon which
said trash, refuse, rubbish or garbage is stored or accumulated, whether the
owner of such premises is compensated for said dumping or not.
§ 53-3. Violation and enforcement provisions. [Amended 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant
hinder or delay public travel thereon or constitute a safety hazard.
[Added 9-28-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
J. Vibration that violates Chapter 78B of the Code of Ordinances of West
Goshen Township. In the case of vibration that violates Chapter 78B of
this Code, the violations and penalties provisions of Chapter 78B shall
supersede the violations and penalties provisions of § 53-3 of this Code.
[Added 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 4-2018]
§ 53-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-3
51:164
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not
more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 54
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 54-1. Applicability. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all principal buildings and each
tract, lot or parcel of land and to all streets within the Township of West
Goshen.
§ 54-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building and is used for an
accessory use and is located on the same lot.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Any building or structure erected on a tract, lot or
parcel of land on which any use is carried out, except an accessory building.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.[Added
3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996]
§ 54-3. Assignment of numbers.
A. Street address numbers shall be assigned to each tract, lot or parcel of
land, placed on file in the township office and assigned to the owners or
occupants of such tract, lot or parcel of land by the Township Manager
or by such other person as may be designated by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. Then such property shall thereafter be
designated for all purposes by the number assigned, and, thereafter, all
persons shall take due notice thereof and comply with the provisions of
this chapter, when applicable.
B. The Township Manager or such other person as may be designated shall
have the power and duty of correcting any errors with respect to
assignment of street address numbers, as and when such errors are
discovered. The Board of Supervisors shall have the right and power to
change a street address number or numbers assigned to any property
whenever it may deem such a change necessary and desirable and to
require the owner or occupant thereof to comply with the provisions of
this chapter with respect to such change.
§ 53-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 54-4
54:165
§ 54-4. Application for street address number.
The owner or occupant of each tract, lot or parcel of land to which no
street address number has been previously assigned shall, upon purchase,
acquisition or occupancy thereof or within seven days of discovery that no
such number has been assigned, make application to the Township Manager
or his designated agent for assignment of such number, and, thereupon,
the Township Manager shall assign a correct street address number to the
property.
§ 54-5. Numbering of subdivision lots.
The Township Manager shall be responsible for assigning proper street
address number sequences to each lot which is created as the result of
a subdivision or resubdivision. Said number shall be in proper municipal
sequence in relation to the numbers assigned to other lots fronting on the
same street and shall be properly recorded on the subdivision plan and the
township file.
§ 54-5.1. Street signs. [Added 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996]
Signs designating the name of each street within West Goshen Township
and complying with the requirements of this chapter shall be required from
and after the effective date of this section. The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all streets existing on the effective date of this section and to
all streets laid out and constructed after the effective date of this section.
§ 54-6. Specifications.
A. Street address numbers. In order to comply with this chapter, street
address numbers shall be Arabic in design, shall have a minimum
height of three inches and shall be mounted in a secure fashion to the
principal building's front wall or to a porch or other fixed appurtenance
in front of the principal building in the general vicinity of the main
entryway or main path of travel which leads to the main entrance from
a public street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved
manner upon the face or wall or upon a post or mailbox in the front yard
of the premises. Auxiliary numbers shall be mounted at a height
between four feet and 10 feet upon the adjacent grade or exterior
landing beneath, but never higher than 15 feet above, the adjoining
grade. They shall be sufficiently legible as to contrasting background,
arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of integers so that the
numbers may be read with ease during daylight hours by a person
possessing normal vision if he views the numbers from the center line of
the facing street. The numbers shall be so placed that trees, shrubs and
other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers from the
center of the street to any appreciable degree.
B. Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at the intersection of
each street with another street, whether public or private, and shall at a
§ 54-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 54-6
54:166
§ 54-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord. No.
2-1996]
minimum comply with the following specifications: [Added 3-12-1996
by Ord. No. 2-1996]
(1) The sign shall be made of extruded aluminum, green in color, with
six-inch reflectorized white letters, shall measure a minimum of 24
inches in length and shall be equipped with vandalproof mounting
hardware. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 12-1998]
(2) The post on which the sign shall be mounted shall be galvanized
steel, measuring 2 1/2 inches in outside diameter and shall be a
minimum of 10 feet in length.
(3) The sign shall be installed at least six feet from the edge of the
cartway surface of the street where no curb exists and, on streets
provided with curbing, at least two feet back from the rear edge of
the curb.
(4) The sign shall be connected to the top of the post and shall have an
installed minimum height of seven feet measured from the road
surface. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 12-1998]
A. The absence of street numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of
any integers thereof or the use of any street address number not
assigned by the Township Manager or the failure of a street address
number to meet the elevation or visibility requirements of this chapter
or the failure to erect a required street sign or the erection or
maintenance a street sign that does not comply with the specifications
of this chapter shall be violations of this chapter. Upon discovery of
such violation, a notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail to the
property owner or occupant or shall be served personally on the
property owner or occupant or his agent or shall be posted in a
prominent place upon the property by the Township Manager, his agent
or the township police. Such notice shall specify the specific provision
of the chapter violated and shall require compliance with the provisions
of this chapter within 15 days from the date of service or posting of the
notice of violation.
B. Any person who fails to display upon his/her property the assigned
street address or who fails to comply with the specification
requirements of § 54-6 or who shall fail to comply with the notice of
violation specified in Subsection A of this § 54-7 or who violates or
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the township before a District Justice, pay a fine for each such violation
in an amount not less than $100 and not more than $600 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the township. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
§ 54-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 54-7
54:167
§ 54-8. Authority and enforcement.
The final authority for determining and assigning the street number or
numbers to be used upon any particular property, as well as the
enforcement of this chapter, shall be in the office of the Township Manager,
his agent or such other person as provided for in § 54-3 of this chapter.
Chapter 57
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 10.
§ 57-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for both the present and future
designation of certain township-owned areas as parks or recreation areas
and to provide for the establishment of rules and regulations for the use
thereof by the public.
§ 57-2. Designation of land for park and recreation purposes.
appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. [Amended
6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 9-1992; 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996;
7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
C. Every violator of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day such violation shall continue
and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and
every such offense.
A. All real estate owned by the Township of West Goshen now established
or hereafter designated as parks or recreation areas shall be controlled
by the rules and regulations hereinafter established.
B. The Township Secretary shall maintain a list of all areas designated as
parks or recreation areas, which list shall be open to public inspection
during regular business hours and shall particularly describe that real
estate so designated as parks or recreation areas.
C. All real estate now owned or hereafter acquired by the Township of
West Goshen and designated as parks or recreation areas by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors shall, upon conveyance of title thereto to
the township and without the necessity of further action by the Board of
Supervisors, be governed by the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations established herein.
§ 54-7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 57-2
54:168
§ 57-3. Rules and regulations. [Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No.
9-1996]
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the
management and protection of the township's public parks and recreation
areas (collectively referred to herein as the "parks"). These regulations
apply to all real property, including land, waters, structures, buildings and
all other facilities, owned by West Goshen Township and used, operated and
maintained by it for park and recreation purposes.
D. Any real estate which is to be acquired by the township for parks or
recreation areas shall be deemed by the Board of Supervisors to be
suitable for such purpose, shall be owned by the township and shall not
be dedicated to or acquired for other purposes.
A. Hours of operation. The parks shall be open daily to the public from
sunrise to sundown. At sundown, all activities in the parks, with the
exception of those activities under the direct supervision of the Park
and Recreation Board or by those persons issued validly existing
permits or other written authorization by the township as hereinafter
provided, shall cease; and all unauthorized persons in the parks shall
promptly leave. Except as above provided, no person, other than
authorized township employees, shall be in the parks between the
hours of sundown and sunrise.
B. Protection of park property. No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut,
dig or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs, turf, earth, sand,
buildings, structures, fixtures or other park facilities.
C. Removal of park equipment. No person shall remove any bench, seat or
table or other recreational equipment or facility from the parks or
change the location thereof without the written permission of the Parks'
Superintendent or other authorized representative of the Board or at
his direct instruction in his presence.
D. Disorderly conduct prohibited. No person shall conduct himself within
the parks by making or causing to be made any loud, boisterous or
unseemly noise or disturbance which annoys or has the consequence of
annoying any other person lawfully in the parks. Any person violating
this provision or who violates any provision of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code or any township ordinance proscribing disorderly conduct,
harassment, disturbance of the peace or other crime against persons or
property may be immediately expelled from the parks by the
Superintendent of Parks or his designee or a police officer.
E. Permits required.
(1) No person and no group or organization composed of 25 or more
persons shall hold any meeting, gathering or activity (hereafter
"activity") assembled through public or private advertisement or
notice, whether written, oral or electronic, within the parks without
§ 57-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 57-3
54:169
first having made written application to and having been issued a
valid permit by the Township Manager or his designee. The permit
application shall specify the sponsoring person or organization, the
approximate number of persons attending the activity, the hours for
which the activity is scheduled, the nature of any equipment which
the permittee intends to bring to the park in connection with the
activity, the park facilities requested to be used and and such other
pertinent information as the Township Manager may require. The
application for such permit shall be made at least 72 hours prior
to the time of the planned activity for which the permit is being
requested.
(2) Such permit shall specify location or locations within the park
where such gathering, meeting or activity will be held, which
limitation shall circumscribe the only permitted location thereof.
Use of any park facilities or areas not authorized by the permit
shall constitute sufficient grounds for expulsion of the activity from
the parks. The application for such permit shall be in the name of a
person who shall be responsible for the collection and immediate
removal by the permittee from the park following the activity of all
refuse and other material utilized in connection with such activity.
In the event that containers have been provided by the township
within the park, they may be utilized for disposal of such refuse if
they are sufficiently empty to accommodate the amount of refuse
produced by the activity. In no event shall refuse be allowed to spill
from township-provided containers or left in and around the
containers or at other locations in the park.
F. Police security required. For all activity for which police security is
deemed necessary by the township, such security shall be supplied and
paid for by the sponsor(s) of the activity and shall be a condition of the
issuance of the permit. The township may require a security deposit to
insure payment of the police security.
G. Vehicular restrictions. Except in designated parking areas, with the
exception of motorized wheelchairs, motor vehicles or motorized
equipment of any kind shall not be allowed on park grounds or waters
without prior written permission of the township, provided that this
preclusion shall not apply to township vehicles used for park
maintenance or other necessary activity approved by the township.
H. Sound equipment. Sound-amplification equipment shall be permitted in
the parks only by prior written permission of the township.
I. Sales and structures prohibited. No person shall set up any booth,
table, stand, vehicle or other structure whatsoever within the parks
without the prior written consent of the Park and Recreation Board,
which shall have authority and discretion to refuse such consent in any
instance. No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or
merchandise or any other object of value, whether corporeal or
§ 57-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 57-3
54:170
incorporeal, in the park, unless so specified by a permit which is first
obtained for such purpose from the Township Manager.
J. Disposal of waste materials. No person shall dispose of any organic or
inorganic waste, garbage, hazardous substances or other refuse
(hereafter "waste materials") in the parks, except in the townshipsupplied
receptacles designated for that purpose, provided that no such
waste materials shall be disposed of in such receptacles unless
resulting from activities by persons lawfully using the parks for their
intended purpose. All persons using the parks shall dispose of all such
waste materials left by them in such township-supplied receptacles. No
person shall bring into, leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop or cause to be
discharged into or on the parks or their waters any waste materials or
sick, diseased or dead animals.
K. Restriction of animals. No person shall allow any animal owned by him,
in his custody or under his control to run at large in any park, provided
that a duly licensed dog, when restrained by a leash not exceeding eight
feet in length, may be brought into the parks when in the custody or
control of its owner or another. Any animal not leashed as aforesaid and
found within any park may be seized and taken into custody for
disposition pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law.40 All persons
exercising control of animals in the parks shall be responsible for
immediately cleaning up and disposing of any animal waste resulting
from their presence in the parks.
L. Posted rules and regulations. All persons shall adhere to the rules and
regulations established by the township's Park and Recreation Board
and approved by the Township Supervisors, which are posted by the
township in the parks and which govern and restrict conduct therein.
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rule or regulation
posted at any place within the parks. Any person violating this
subsection shall be subject to expulsion from the parks and to
prosecution, if warranted under the law.
M. Distributing or displaying advertising materials prohibited. No person
shall distribute advertising materials in the parks or post, place or
distribute any handbill, sign, notice, placard or other device on any
tree, fountain, post, railing, fence, building or any other structure in or
surrounding the parks nor display any advertising material of any kind
on any vehicle within the parks.
N. Water facility restrictions. No basin, pool, lake or fountain in any park
shall be fouled by stone, wood or any other substance or waste
materials nor shall any such waters or facilities be used for swimming,
bathing, wading, boating or other similar activity, provided that nothing
herein shall preclude the township from designating any body of water
as suitable for swimming or unmotorized boating, subject to its being
posted by the township as approved for such use.
40.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 57-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 57-3
54:171
O. Setting of fires prohibited. No person shall ignite, start, set or maintain
any fire or perform or conduct any cooking activities in the parks except
in stoves, grills or fireplaces provided and maintained by the township
for that purpose.
P. Certain fireworks prohibited. No person shall fire, discharge or set off
any fireworks or firecrackers of any nature whatsoever; provided,
however, that special fireworks displays may be given under the
auspices and direction of the Township or upon issuance of a special
permit by the Township Manager to a person authorized by state law to
conduct such display, under and subject to such rules and regulations
as the Park and Recreation Board shall attach to any such activity.
[Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
Q. Intoxicating beverages prohibited. Intoxicating, beverages are
prohibited in the parks. No person shall bring any intoxicating
beverages into the parks, either for his own use or for the use of any
other person. Violation of this provision shall subject the violator to
expulsion from the parks.
R. Recreational activities. Activities, such as baseball, football, soccer,
tennis, volleyball and other games and recreational activities, may be
played in the parks in locations designated by the township and posted
for such purposes and subject to such rules and regulations as may be
prescribed by the Park and Recreation Board from time to time.
S. Smoking shall be prohibited in the parks. Violation of this provision
shall subject the violator to expulsion from the parks. [Added
8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 10-200641]
T. Rules and regulations for the use of the Robert E Lambert skatepark.
All persons using the skatepark shall adhere to the rules and
regulations which are set forth on Exhibit A which is attached hereto.42
[Added 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006]
U. Rules and regulations for the use of the dog park at the Robert E
Lambert Park. All persons using the dog park shall adhere to the rules
and regulations which are set forth on Exhibit B which is attached
hereto.43 [Added 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006]
V. Additional regulations. The township's Park and Recreation Board shall
have the authority to establish such additional rules and regulations,
from time to time, as approved by the Supervisors, necessary in its
opinion for the proper governance of the parks. Such regulations shall
become effective when approved by resolution duly adopted by the
Supervisors, without the necessity of inclusion in this chapter.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection S as Subsection V.
42.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 57-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 57-4
54:172
§ 57-4. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1993
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Chapter 59
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment businesses — See Ch. 22.
Air rifles and pistols — See Ch. 23.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 26, Art. I.
Curfew — See Ch. 34.
Dogs — See Ch. 36.
Firearms — See Ch. 40.
Noise — See Ch. 52A.
Park and recreation areas — See Ch. 57.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 60.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 57-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 57-4
54:173

ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 11-4-1953]
§ 59-1. Prohibited conduct.
Any person or persons who shall make or participate in the making of
any riot, noise, disturbance or disorderly assembly in any street, house or
place within the Township limits of the Township of West Goshen or who
shall appear or be on any public street, place or alley under the influence
of intoxicating liquors or who shall engage in the use of any profane or
indecent language on any public street, place or alley within the Township
limits of the Township of West Goshen shall be guilty of disorderly conduct
within the meaning of this article.
§ 59-2. Public assemblies.
Any person or persons to the number of three or more who shall assemble in
any public street, place or alley within the Township limits of the Township
of West Goshen and engage in loud, boisterous or unseemly language or
who shall refuse to disburse themselves immediately after having been
called upon to do so by any police officer of the Township shall likewise be
deemed guilty of disorderly conduct within the meaning of this article.
§ 59-3. Prostitution, lewdness or immoral conduct.
Any person or persons who shall solicit for immoral purposes in any public
street, place or alley or who shall engage or be engaged in prostitution or
who shall be guilty of lewdness or who shall willfully or improperly expose
his or her person in any public place shall be guilty of disorderly conduct
within the meaning of this article.
§ 59-4. Public pornography or obscenity.
If any person or persons shall post any written or printed handbills of an
indecent or immoral character on any fence, building, tree or other place, in
any of the streets or alleys of said Township, or shall paint, write or draw, or
in any other manner make any writing, drawing of figures of like indecent
or immoral character, with paint, chalk or other substance on any fence,
building, tree or other place as above, so as to cause the same to have an
indecent or immoral character or appearance, such person or persons shall
be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct within the meaning of this article.
§ 59-5. Throwing of stones or litter.
Any person or persons who shall throw or in any manner project any stone,
club or other missile, refuse or rubbish in or upon any street or public
alley of said Township or any person who, without the consent of the owner
thereof, shall throw or project any such object on the privately owned
§ 59-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 59-5
54:175
property of any owner of real estate in said Township shall be deemed guilty
of disorderly conduct within the meaning of this article.
§ 59-6. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 7-24-1996
by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this article that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this article is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 59-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-6
54:176
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)44
§ 59-7. through § 59-9. (Reserved)
44.Editor’s Note: Former Ch. 59, Art. II, Disturbing the Peace, adopted 9-7-1966 by Ord. No.
6-1966, as amended, was repealed 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 03-2012. See now Ch. 52A,
Noise.
§ 59-7 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 59-7
54:177

ARTICLE III
Obscene and Other Sexual Material
[Adopted 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003]
§ 59-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this subsection:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary community
standards in this article, community means the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION — Any transfer of signs, signals, writing,
images, sounds, data or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or
in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photo-optical
system, except:
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIALS — Materials which are obscene, or:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or representation
in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
KNOWING — As used in § 59-11A(1) through (6) and (9) and (10), "knowing"
means having general knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or ground
for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of, the character
A. Any wire or oral communication;
B. Any communication made through a tone-only paging device;
Any communication from a tracking device as defined in 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5702.
C.
Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
videotape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
A.
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in Subsection
A, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts
of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and
which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
B.
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest of
minors;
A.
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors; and
B.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational
or scientific value for minors.
C.
§ 59-10 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 59-10
54:179
and content of any material or performance described therein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the person charged with violation
of this article.
KNOWINGLY — As used in § 59-11A(7) and (8), means having general
knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which
warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
MATERIAL — Any literature, including-any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, storypaper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing; any figure,
visual representation, or image, including any drawing, photograph,
picture, videotape or motion picture.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDE or NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or in
a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual bestiality; and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the person
charged with violation of this article; and
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the person charged
with violation of this article made a reasonable bona fide attempt to
ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this article; and
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 59-10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-10
54:180
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SUBJECT LINE — The area of an electronic communication that contains a
summary description of the content of the message.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad cars, buses, and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 59-11. Offenses enumerated.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials or performances
involved, shall, within the Township of West Goshen:
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual materials as
defined in § 59-10 in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display
rack, billboard, display board, viewing screen, motion-picture screen,
marquee or similar place in such manner that the display is visible from
any public street, highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other
public thoroughfare, or in any business or commercial establishment
where minors, as a part of the general public or otherwise, are or will
probably be exposed to view of all or any part of such materials;
B. Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene materials
to any person 18 years of age or older or offer to sell, lend, distribute,
exhibit or give away or show, or have in his possession with intent to
sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show any obscene
materials to any person 18 years of age or older, or knowingly advertise
any obscene materials in any manner;
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene materials;
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
whom, or by what means any obscene materials can be purchased,
obtained or had;
E. Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a
portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity;
F. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this section.
G. Knowingly disseminate by sale, loan, or otherwise explicit sexual
materials to a minor.
H. Knowingly to exhibit for monetary consideration to a minor or
knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to
admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there
§ 59-10 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 59-11
54:181
§ 59-12. Exemption.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, township or town library, any public library, any library of any
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
§ 59-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Township shall enforce the terms of this Article III in a civil
enforcement proceeding before a District Justice. Any person who shall
violate the provisions of this article shall, upon a finding of violation by the
District Justice, pay a fine not to exceed $600, costs of prosecution and
reasonable attorney's fees. Each day that a violation of this article shall
occur shall constitute a separate offense for which a fine of up to $600 may
be imposed by the District Justice. The Township may also enforce the terms
of this article by filing an action in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of
Chester County. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this article
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
is exhibited a motion-picture show or other presentation or
performance which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct,
or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, except that
the foregoing shall not apply to any minor accompanied by his parent.
I. Knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a condition to sale
or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any written or printed
matter, or any article or instrument to purchase or take by consignment
for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any
written or printed matter of an obscene nature or any article or
instrument of an obscene nature.
J. Knowing the content of the advertisement to be explicit sexual
materials as defined in this article, to transmit or cause to be
transmitted an unsolicited advertisement in an electronic
communication to one or more persons within the Township that
contains explicit sexual materials.
§ 59-11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-13
54:182
Chapter 60
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 59.
§ 60-1. License required. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person,
not exempted by § 60-6 hereof, who is not the holder of a valid and
unexpired license issued pursuant to this chapter to engage in selling,
purchasing or soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed matter,
services, goods, wares or merchandise of any description or in soliciting
contributions, gifts or pledges of money or any other thing of value, by
visitation to private homes or residences or on the public streets, highways
and private property in West Goshen Township.
§ 60-2. Application for license. [Amended 11-6-1969 by Ord. No.
10-1969; 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
Any person, not exempted by § 60-6 hereof, desiring to obtain a license to
engage in the activities described in § 60-1 hereof shall make application
therefor in person to the West Goshen Township Police Department
(hereinafter "the Police").
A. The applicant shall supply, over his signature, the following
information:
(1) His name.
(2) His place and date of birth.
(3) His temporary address and telephone number.
(4) His permanent residence address and permanent telephone
number.
(5) The address at which he will receive notices under this chapter.
(6) The name and address of his employer or principal, if any, and the
nature of the business activity thereof.
(7) The nature of the business or activity in which the applicant wishes
to engage within the township.
(8) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted in any
jurisdiction of any crime other than of minor traffic violations and,
if so, of what crime or crimes.
§ 59-13 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 60-2
60:183
B. Upon submission of the application and the payment of a fee in the sum
of $50, the Police shall, within 48 hours, determine whether the
applicant has ever been convicted of a crime constituting a
misdemeanor or felony under the laws of any jurisdiction, together with
such additional information relating thereto as may be disseminated by
the Police Department. In the event that no record of such conviction is
found, the Police shall authorize the issuance of a license. In the case
where the application is for the sale or solicitation of goods and services
from a fixed location in the township or from property in a residential
zoning district, the Police shall then consult with the Township Zoning
Officer to determine whether the Zoning Ordinance45 and land
development approval for such property permits such sales or
solicitation. If the Zoning Officer determines that such sales are not
permitted from that particular property because of the zoning
classification of the property; conditions of land development approval
will be violated if such sales or solicitation occur from such property;
the proposed sales would constitute a second principal use of the
property in violation of the Township Zoning Ordinance; the property is
not owned or regulated by the township and no written authorization
from the property owner has been obtained; or sales from such location
would create a traffic hazard or a threat to the public's health, safety
and welfare, he/she shall notify the Police that the application shall be
denied. The Zoning Officer shall state in writing why such application
for license has been rejected. Otherwise, the Zoning Officer shall notify
the Police that the license may be issued, in which case the Police shall
issue the license in the form of a card which shall, unless revoked,
entitle the licensee to engage in the activities specified, for a period of
one year after the date of issuance. The Police are authorized to reject
the application of any applicant who has previously been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony criminal offense. [Amended 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
C. Licenses may be renewed annually, upon payment of the fee herein
above provided for and amendment of the original application to reflect
any changes necessary in the information therein contained and after a
determination by the Police that the applicant has not, in the interim
period, been convicted of any misdemeanor or felony criminal offense.
D. The Township Police are also authorized to deny renewal of any license
previously issued to the applicant if they determine that the licensee
has failed to comply with the rules of conduct established by § 60-3
hereof or upon a determination that the licensee has made any material
and false statement in his application for a license hereunder.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 60-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 60-3
60:184
§ 60-3. Rules of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued herein shall, in the carrying
on of his business or activities in the township, comply with the following
rules of conduct:
§ 60-4. Revocation of license; notice. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-1998]
Any license issued hereunder may be immediately revoked by the Police
upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the standards of conduct
established by § 60-3 hereof or upon ascertainment that the licensee has
made any false statement in his application for license hereunder. After
the license is revoked, the Police shall send written notice to the licensee
explaining the grounds for such revocation. Such notice shall be personally
served or sent by registered mail to the address designated for this purpose
in the license application.
§ 60-5. Hearing for reinstatement of license.
A. He shall carry his license card at all times and exhibit it upon request to
any officer or any person upon whom he shall call or with whom he shall
talk in carrying on his licensed activities. [Amended 8-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 13-1998]
B. He shall not permit any other person to have possession of his license
card and shall immediately report its loss to the Police. He shall not
cause or permit his license card to be altered or defaced. [Amended
8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
C. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling house without
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request.
D. He shall not represent his license card to be an endorsement of himself
or of his goods or services or of the goods or services of his principal or
employer.
E. He shall immediately surrender his license card upon revocation of his
license as hereinafter provided.
F. A licensee shall be permitted to conduct the activities described in
§ 60-1 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and dusk, Monday through
Saturday. [Added 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
A. Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear,
with counsel, if he so desires, before the Board of Supervisors at a
regular or special meeting and be heard in behalf of a request for
reinstatement of his license.
B. Any person who has been refused a license or the reissuance of a
license by the Police may appeal such determination to the Board of
§ 60-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 60-5
60:185
§ 60-6. Exemptions.
The following persons are exempted from the licensing requirements of this
chapter:
§ 60-7. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
Supervisors who shall determine whether there exists substantial
grounds under the provisions of this chapter to sustain denial of the
applicant's application for a license or reissuance of a license. In a
reinstatement proceeding the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant. In a proceeding involving refusal of the Police to issue a
license, the township shall have the initial burden to establish the
grounds under this chapter for denial of the license, and the applicant
shall then have the burden to show cause why the Police's
determination should not be affirmed. These appeal proceedings shall
be governed by the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law.46 [Added
8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
A. Persons soliciting contributions in behalf of organizations or nonprofit
corporations exempted from the provisions of, or duly registered
pursuant to, the Act of May 13, 1925, P.L. 644, as amended,47 who,
while soliciting, are possessed of a card or other written evidence of
their appointment or authority to solicit for said organization or
corporations.
B. Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their own farms from a
truck or other vehicle.
C. Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to engage in an activity described in § 60-1 hereof, when so engaged,
including, without limitation, real estate, insurance or securities
brokers and salesmen.
D. Persons engaged in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated
by the owner thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
E. Any honorably discharged and disabled soldier, sailor or marine of the
military or naval service of the United States, who is a resident of this
commonwealth.
46.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 60-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 60-7
60:186
incurred by the township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Chapter 62
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 62-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township hereby adopts the
International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, as now and as hereafter
supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than three copies of the
International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, are filed in the office of the
Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 62-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with the words,
"West Goshen Township."
B. The heading of Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following: "SECTION 103 ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section 103.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
§ 60-7 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 62-2
60:187
103.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall by resolution appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more building
officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official and building officials shall be referred to in this
Code as Code Officials.
D. Section 103.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and reserved.
E. Section 106.6.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The permit fees for all plumbing work
provided for in this Code shall be paid in advance in accordance with
the fee schedule established by resolution, duly adopted by the Board
of Supervisors of West Goshen Township, as the same may from time
to time be amended.
F. Section 106.6.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
G. Section 108.4 is deleted and replaced with the following:
108.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of the Plumbing Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall install, alter or repair a plumbing
system in whole or in part in violation of this Code shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Imposition of one fine for any violation or noncompliance
shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance nor permit it to
continue or be repeated, and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects forthwith. Each section
of the chapter violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each
day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is found
to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations
shall be subject to the imposition of a separate fine imposed by the
District Justice of not more than $1,000, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township, collectable as
specified in this section.
H. Section 108.5 shall be amended by inserting "not less than $100" in the
first blank and "nor more than $1,000" in the second blank.
I. Section 109 Means of Appeal shall be deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No.
§ 62-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 62-2
60:188
Chapter 63
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Existing buildings — See Ch. 29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 32.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 38.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 39.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 41.
Fuel gas standards — See Ch. 43.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 49.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
05-2012; 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No.
8-2015]
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
J. Section 305.6.1 shall be amended by inserting "36 inches" in both blank
spaces.
K. A new Section 602.4 shall be added which shall read as follows:
602.4 Individual water supply. Connection to public water shall be
required where the water main or any extension thereof is within 150
feet of the building. Otherwise, an on-site water well source shall be
supplied.
L. Section 701.2 shall be amended by the addition of the following
provision at the end of the existing section: "Connection to the West
Goshen public sewer system shall be required where the sewer main or
any extension thereof is within 150 feet of the building. Otherwise, an
on-site sanitary sewer system shall be supplied."
M. Section 904.1 shall be amended by the insertion of "12 inches" in the
"[NUMBER]" blank.
§ 62-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 63-1
60:189
§ 63-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as
now and as hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended and revised as
published by the International Code Council, Inc. Not fewer than three
copies of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, are
filed in the office of the Secretary of West Goshen Township, and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 63-2. Additions, insertions and changes to standards.
The following amendments, additions, deletions, and changes are hereby
made to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[NAME
OF JURISDICTION]" and the replacement thereof with the words "West
Goshen Township."
B. The heading of Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following: "SECTION 103 ENFORCEMENT."
C. Section 103.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 General. The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, appoint
a Building Code Official who shall be certified by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania under the Act. The Building Code Official shall be
responsible for administration and enforcement of this Code. The
Building Code Official shall be assisted by one or more building
officials who shall also be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Act. The
Building Code Official and building officials shall be referred to in this
Code as "Code Officials."
D. Section 103.5 shall be deleted in its entirety and reserved.
E. Section 106.4 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
106.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, plus costs and attorney's
fees, and, upon default of the payment of the fine and costs,
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Section 111, Means of Appeal, shall be deleted and replaced with the
following: [Amended 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012; 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 5-2015; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
§ 63-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 63-2
60:190
§ 63-3. Fees.
When necessary to ensure the proper implementation of the provisions
of the Code and its administration and enforcement, the Board may, by
resolution, establish a schedule of applicable fees.
Chapter 64
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
§ 64-1. Purpose.
SECTION 111
BOARD OF APPEALS
111.1 General. The West Chester Area Council of Governments
(WCACOG) has formed a Board of Appeals, which shall hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
Code. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the WCACOG and
shall be governed by the rules and regulations adopted by the
WCACOG. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
G. Section 304.14 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[DATE]"
and the replacement thereof with "June 1" and "October 30."
H. Section 602.3 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[DATE"]
and the replacement thereof with "October 15" and "April 15."
I. Section 602.4 shall be amended by the deletion of the words "[DATE"]
and the replacement thereof with "October 15" and "April 15."
A. Whereas, the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 67603, provides
that the Board of Supervisors may by ordinance require that abutting
property owners of a water system connect with and use the system;
and
B. Whereas, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP) has identified the groundwater in the Southwest Industrial
Area of the township as contaminated and unsuitable for the purposes
of human consumption; and
C. Whereas, ICI Americas, Inc. (ICI) in cooperation with PADEP is
conducting ongoing monitoring and testing of soil and groundwater
conditions in the Southwest Industrial Area of the township; and
D. Whereas, Philadelphia Suburban Water Company has been granted the
franchise rights to supply public water to the Southwest Industrial Area
§ 63-2 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 64-1
64:191
§ 64-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — Commercial agricultural activities,
including, but not limited to, irrigation of crops, watering of livestock and
food production, processing or packaging.
BUILDING MAIN — An extension from the water supply system of any
structure to the lateral of a main.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property used or intended
for use, in whole or in part, for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article.
LATERAL — The part of the public water line from the water system to the
curbline or property line if there is no curbline.
MAIN — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the public water supply
used or usable for water distribution purposes and which is not a lateral.
NONPOTABLE USE — A use that does not result in internal or external
contact with humans or animals and is not used for agricultural purposes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property served directly or indirectly by the water
system.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or any
successor thereto, including its authorized representatives.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, firm, society,
trust, corporation, municipality, municipal authority or other group or
entity.
PHILADELPHIA SUBURBAN WATER COMPANY — A supplier and purveyor
of public water which has received franchise rights from the Pennsylvania
of the township from the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission
(PUC); and
E. Whereas, the Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township believes
that it is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the southwestern industrial area that they be connected to a supply
of public water for human consumption;
F. Now, therefore, be it enacted and ordained by the Board of Supervisors
of West Goshen Township that new Chapter 64, entitled "Public Water
Supply," consisting of §§ 64-1 through 64-7 of the West Goshen Code are
added and enacted, and shall read as follows.
§ 64-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 64-2
64:192
Public Utilities Commission to supply water to all improved property in
the Southwest Industrial Area of the township, including its authorized
representatives, successors and assigns.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — All facilities for the transmission and
distribution of public water.
SOUTHWEST INDUSTRIAL AREA — All that area identified on the attached
map and list of properties, which are incorporated herein by reference and
marked as Exhibit A and Exhibit B respectively.48
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on land or water, whether or not it is affixed to the land.
§ 64-3. Use of public water supply required.
§ 64-4. Permits.
Any persons desiring to be connected to the public water system shall
obtain a permit from the Township Secretary. The applicant shall also make
application to the Philadelphia Suburban Water Company.
§ 64-5. Building mains.
Grouping of more than one improved property on one building main shall
not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for good cause
shown, but then only after written permission of the township and the
Philadelphia Suburban Water Company has been secured, subject to such
rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by the township
and the Philadelphia Suburban Water Company. A building main shall be
connected to a main at the place designated by Philadelphia Suburban
Water Company and where the lateral is provided.
A. Improved property. The owner of any improved property in the
Southwest Industrial Area shall connect such property with and shall
use the public water supply, within 90 days after receipt of notice from
the township to such owner.
B. Future improved property. After the effective date of this chapter, no
building permit shall be issued to any person applying to construct a
new or expanded structure in the Southwest Industrial Area unless the
owner has connected or has secured a permit to connect to the public
water supply.
C. Industrial establishment. Any industrial establishment which has its
own supply of water for nonpotable uses may use its own supply for
such nonpotable uses.
48.Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 64-2 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 64-6
64:193
§ 64-6. Liability of township.
The township shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure of service
when occasioned by any emergency, required repairs or failure from any
cause beyond its control. The township reserves the right to restrict the
use of the public water supply whenever the public welfare so requires.
In consideration of the right to connect to the public water supply, the
township shall not be liable for any damage or expense resulting form leaks,
stoppages or defective plumbing or from any other cause occurring to any
premises or within any building; and it is hereby expressly agreed by all
persons making connection with the public water supply that no claims shall
be made against the township on account of the breaking or stoppage of, or
any damage or expense to, any house water system.
§ 64-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 66
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject
to the payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000,
plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a
term of not more than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter
that is violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or
portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, each of which violation shall be
punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus the cost of prosecution, or upon
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days.
All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be
paid to the Township Treasurer.
B. Fines and cost imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by
applicable law.
C. Each improved property, as hereinbefore defined, whether or not the
owners thereof shall be permitted to connect two or more units through
a single common connection to a lateral of the public water system or
shall be required to make separate connection for each improved
property or unit, shall constitute a separate and distinct unit under the
provisions of this chapter, and the persons owning improved property,
consisting of multiple units contained in the same structure, who violate
any provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the aforesaid fine for
each and every one of the improved properties or units which are in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 64-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 64-7
64:194
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Nuisances — See Ch. 53.
Plumbing — See Ch. 62.
Sewer districts — See Ch. A88.
§ 64-7 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 64-7
64:195

ARTICLE I
Sewer System Connections
[Adopted 9-7-1961]
§ 66-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this Chapter 66, Articles I through IV inclusive, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated: [Amended 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 7-1985; 11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 7-1979; 9-27-1994 by
Ord. No. 2-1994]
AUTHORITY — The West Goshen Sewer Authority, Chester County,
Pennsylvania, as well as the duly qualified and acting members of the
Board thereof.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion
thereof intended to be used wholly or in part for the purposes of
carrying on a trade, business or professional or for social, amusement,
religious, educational, charitable or public uses, and which contains
plumbing for kitchen, toilet or washing facilities.
FLOOR DRAIN — A pipe having an open orifice set in any floor of a
building (the term "building," as used herein, is defined in § 84-8 of
the West Goshen Zoning Code) into and through which liquids may be
drained whether by gravity or pumping.
HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the main horizontal drain and its
branches inside the walls of the building, vault or area and for five feet
outside thereof and extending to and connecting with the house sewer.
HOUSE SEWER — That part of the main house drain or sewer
extending from a point five feet outside of the outer wall of a building,
vault or area to its connection with the service lateral.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product commodity or article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each single dwelling unit, household unit,
flat or apartment unit, store, shop, office, business or industrial unit or
family unit contained within any structure erected within 150 feet from
the sewer system and intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage is or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property served directly or indirectly by the sewer
system.
§ 66-1 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-1
64:197
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, group or other entity.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the sewer system. This reduction or
alteration may be obtained by the physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes or by other means; provided, however, that
no person shall increase the use of process water or in any other
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement imposed by this chapter or applicable
regulation of any governmental authority having jurisdiction.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms,
house trailer, structure, dwelling, apartment, enclosure or any other
one-family living unit intended to be occupied as separate living
quarters by a family, other group of persons living together or by
persons living alone, but excluding institutional dormitories.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Improved
property which adjoins, abuts on or is adjacent to the sewer system
or as may be further defined or modified under rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to § 66-6.
REPRESENTATIVE — The Secretary of the Board of Township
Supervisors, the Township Engineer, Plumbing Inspector, Sewer
Manager, Health Officer or such other person as shall be appointed by
the Township as its representative for any of the purposes herein.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial
and industrial establishments.
SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the sewer line from the sewer
system to the curbline or to the property line if there is no curbline.
SEWER DISTRICTS — Sewer District No. 1 as designated and created
pursuant to resolution of the Township duly adopted on March 5, 1958,
and Sewer Districts Nos. 2 and 3 as each designated and created
pursuant to ordinance of the Township, duly enacted July 6, 1960.49
SEWER MANAGER — Any person who may, from time to time, be
placed in general charge of the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — All temporary and permanent facilities, at any time
and from time to time, owned by or leased to and operated by the
Township and used or usable for or in connection with the collection of
sanitary sewage and acceptable industrial wastes.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. A88, Sewer Districts.
§ 66-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-1
64:198
§ 66-2. Notice of completion of sewer system.
Whenever the sewer system is completed and ready for public use, it shall
be the duty of the Township to cause notice of the fact to be given by
advertisement published once in one newspaper of general circulation in
the Township, and such advertisement shall state that the sewer system
may be used by all persons owning occupied buildings on property
accessible to the sewer system, subject to the payment of any connection
charges and of annual sewer rentals in amounts as may from time to time
be fixed by the Township.50
§ 66-3. Sewer connections required.
SHOWER DRAIN — A floor drain located within a booth, stall or
enclosure designed and constructed as a shower bath in which water is
sprayed on the bather from an overhead nozzle.
SOIL PIPE — Any pipe receiving the discharge of one or more water
closets, with or without other fixtures.
TOILET — A disposal apparatus consisting of a hopper, fitted with
a flushing device, used for human urination and defecation; a water
closet.
TOWNSHIP — West Goshen Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania,
and the group of elected officials acting as the Board of Supervisors of
the Township.
WATER SUPPLIER — The public agency or private company furnishing
water service to the particular property connected to the sewer system.
B. Terminology. Technical terminology contained in these rules and
regulations or in the ordinances above referred to shall be interpreted
by and through and shall have the meanings set forth in the Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewerage, and Industrial Wastes
and Glossary, Water and Sewerage Control Engineering, both prepared
by the American Public Health Association.
A. Any person owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall, at his own expense, connect such
building with the sewer system within 90 days after the date of
publication specified in § 66-2.
B. Any person owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at his own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
C. Any person owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at his own
50.Editor's Note: See Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 66-1 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-3
64:199
§ 66-4. Private sewage disposal systems prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or other receptacle on such premises or otherwise for receiving sanitary
sewage after the expiration of the particular period specified in § 66-3
hereof, or otherwise at any time to erect, construct, use or maintain any
pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the discharge of sanitary sewage
into the gutters of the Township, the storm sewers of the Township or upon
public or private property or otherwise, except into the sewer system.
§ 66-5. Private sewage disposal systems deemed nuisances.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system, or
otherwise erects, constructs, uses or maintains any pipe, conduit, drain or
other facility for the discharge of sanitary sewage in violation of this article
shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting, constructing and
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Township is hereby authorized
and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 66-6. Compliance required.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system, except in compliance
with the ordinances and resolutions, as well as such rules and regulations
as may from time to time be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by
the Township or the Authority.
§ 66-7. Notice of connection.
After the expiration of the particular periods specified in § 66-3 of this
article, if any person owning an occupied building on property accessible to
the sewer system shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer
system as required by said § 66-3, the Township shall cause to be served on
such person owning such property so failing to connect to said system and
also upon the occupants of the building in question a copy of this article and
a written or printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and such
notice shall further state that its requirements shall be complied with within
30 days from the date thereof.
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 90 days
after notice to do so from the Township.
D. Where more than one occupied building, as hereinbefore defined, is
contained in a separate structure, a single common connection to the
lateral of the sewer system shall be permitted for accommodating all
units contained in such structure, except that separate connections
shall be required for each semidetached or row-type house or structure.
§ 66-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-8
64:200
§ 66-8. Permit.
Persons, firms and corporations desiring to do plumbing intended to be
connected to the sewer system shall obtain from the Secretary of the
Township, in the form to be provided, a permit entitling the applicant to
engage in regular or particular work during the calendar year in which
the permit is granted, for which permit a fee of $5 shall be charged. The
permit thus granted is revocable at the will of the Township, and the permit
is renewable from year to year by endorsement or by exchange for a new
permit at the discretion of the Secretary of the Township. No plumbing or
connections shall be made without this permit.51
§ 66-9. Competency to obtain permit.
§ 66-10. Application to install service line. [Added 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 7-198552]
§ 66-10.1. Permit required for connection; notice upon vacating
premises. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
A. Any person, firm or corporation which, for a period of at least one year
previous to the passage of this article, has been regularly engaged in
the plumbing business in the Township shall be deemed competent to
initially obtain a permit; and all other persons, firms or corporations
desiring to do plumbing business in the Township or to do a particular
piece of work to be connected with the sewer system shall exhibit such
evidence of competency as said Township from time to time may
require.
B. Any plumber or other person who shall neglect or refuse to take out a
permit or comply with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed
competent to perform any work intended to be connected with the
sewers, and no work performed by such plumbers or other persons
shall be connected with any sewers.
A. Any person owning an occupied building upon property accessible to
the sewer system required to install a house sewer from the service
lateral to such building shall first make written application on the form
furnished by the Township. The application must be signed by such
person or his duly authorized agent and must be completely filled out in
all its parts.
B. No person owning any premises connected with the sewer system or
tenant of such premises shall permit another person or premises to use
or connect with his service lateral or house sewer, except upon written
permit from the Township.
51.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 62, Plumbing.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 66-10,
Violations and penalties, as § 66-10.16.
§ 66-8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-10.1
64:201
§ 66-10.2. Extensions by developers. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
7-1985]
In cases where an individual, builder or developer desires to install sewer
lines, service laterals and house sewers to a house or to every housing unit
within a housing development prior to individual use or sale, he may do so
upon meeting all conditions as set forth in this section and in other sections
of this chapter.
A. Before making any connection from the house sewer to the service
lateral, a permit shall be obtained from the Township. A permit
authorizing such connection may be granted after proper application
therefor has been made to the Township and upon payment of the
connection charge. No sewer connection or disconnection shall be
made except under the supervision, control and approval of the
Township's authorized representative.
B. Upon completion of each connection, the permit shall be returned to
the Township for approval, and the approved permit shall be then
returned to the person to whom it was issued. The person making the
application shall be responsible, together with the owner if the
application is made by a tenant, for all sewage bills and the proper
observance of the rules and regulations.
C. When the premises is vacated, the user shall give notice to the
representative of the Township. A new application for service shall be
made upon change of user of a property, and the Township may
discontinue service until such new application has been made and
approved by the Township or its representative.
A. Plot plans for a development must be submitted to the Township for
approval prior to any house construction.
B. Sewer plans conforming to all original specifications established by the
Authority or Township shall be designed in compliance with either the
method in Subsection B(1) or the method in Subsection B(2), stipulated
below:
(1) The individual, builder or developer may request the Authority to
provide plans and detailed design of the sewer system for the
extensions, including approvals from the necessary state agencies.
The engineering fees for the design will be in accordance with the
current schedule of suggested minimum fees of the Pennsylvania
Society of Professional Engineers, together with necessary legal
and other costs, and shall be paid by the individual, builder or
developer. The total of the estimated engineering fee and the other
estimated costs must be deposited with the Authority before design
commences.
(2) The individual, builder or developer may procure design of these
extensions directly from any professional engineer qualified and
§ 66-10.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-10.2
64:202
§ 66-10.3. Separate house connections required; exceptions. [Added
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
Unless written permission is obtained from the Township, a separate house
sewer will be required for each individual building or house whether
constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row, but a single house
sewer will be permitted to serve a school, factory, an apartment house or
other permanent multiple unit structure whose individual apartments or
units may not be subject to separate ownership.
§ 66-10.4. Common waste systems. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
7-1985]
A single house sewer will be permitted to serve a double house in which
the house drain is common to both houses or is not readily separable.
In such a case, it will be necessary for each owner to make separate
competent in the field of sanitary engineering design. In such case,
the plans and detail design must conform to the standard of design
of the presently constructed sewer system. The completed plans
shall be submitted to the Authority for approval. Any revisions in
design considered necessary in the opinion of the Authority shall
be made by the Authority at cost of time and materials, legal and
other expenses and paid for by the developer. The Authority shall
approve any planned connection to the sewer system upon the
recommendation of the consulting engineer of the Authority and
undertake to secure approvals from the necessary state agencies.
An amount equal to the estimated cost of approval, necessary
revisions and all other costs shall be deposited with the Authority
before such revisions and approval are made.
C. Such approved extensions may then be constructed by and at the
expense of the individual, builder or developer but only under the
inspection of an inspector for the Authority, designated by the Township
or the Authority. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the
individual, builder or developer making the extension. The estimated
cost of the inspection of construction shall be deposited with the
Authority before construction commences.
D. Upon the completion of the extension to the sewer system of the West
Goshen Sewer Authority, the individual, builder or developer shall deed
the extension, free of all encumbrances, to the Authority. The extension
to the sewer system shall be accepted by the Authority only after a
certificate is issued by the consulting engineer of the Authority. No
connections shall be made to the extension until the engineer's
certificate has been issued and accepted by the Authority. When the
extension has been accepted by the Authority, all connections shall be
made in accordance with this chapter, including all the necessary
inspections of house sewers, securing of permits and other pertinent
requirements.
§ 66-10.2 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-10.4
64:203
application and pay separate connection charges for the installation and
pay the prescribed sewer rentals for each property. In addition, it will be
necessary for both property owners to sign an agreement relieving the
Township of any responsibility or obligation caused by or resulting from
installation of a single house sewer. The agreement shall provide that any
disagreement between the two parties concerning future maintenance of
the common house drain and house sewer will be sufficient cause for the
Township to require the installation of additional connections to the sewer
main to provide individual house sewers and service laterals to both houses.
The installation of such separate service lateral from the sewer main to the
curb, as well as the new house sewers from the curb to the property, shall
be made at the joint expense of the property owners signing the agreement.
§ 66-10.5. House sewers and service laterals. [Added 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 7-1985]
House sewers shall be subject at all times to the inspection and approval of
the Township or its representative who shall have supervision and control
over the same. Any house sewer not so approved shall be relaid at the
expense of the property owner if ordered by the Township or its
representative. During construction of the sanitary sewers, the service
lateral will be installed by the Authority to the curbline, and the house
sewer connection shall be made, by and at the sole expense of the property
owners, to the service lateral heretofore constructed. After completion of
construction of the sewer system any additional service lateral and house
sewer shall be constructed from the street sewer main to the building by
and at the expense of the property owner who has obtained a permit. All
service laterals and house sewers heretofore or hereafter installed shall be
maintained by and at the sole expense of the property owner.
§ 66-10.6. Pipe materials and installation. [Added 5-28-1985 by
Ord. No. 7-1985]
A. All building sewers shall be constructed of one of the following types of
pipe:
(1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe at least four inches in internal
diameter and conforming to ASTM Designation D-3034-SDR-35
Type PSM.
(2) Medium weight cast-iron soil pipe at least four inches in internal
diameter conforming to ASTM Designation A-74-C1SP1301.
B. Jointing materials for the various types of pipe shall be as follows:
(1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe.
(a) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe shall be the push-on type
and shall be joined by an elastomeric rubber gasket.
§ 66-10.4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-10.6
64:204
§ 66-10.7. Cleanouts and traps. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
7-1985]
§ 66-10.8. Trenching conditions. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
7-1985]
Wherever in the opinion of the Township or its representative the trenching
conditions require either a specific type of pipe, jointing material or
encasement in concrete, such materials as it may direct shall be installed
to protect the property owner and/or the Township for special conditions as
follows:
(b) The rubber gasket shall comply with the physical requirements
as designated in ASTM D-3212 and the laboratory performance
requirements designated in ASTM D-3139.
(2) Cast-iron pipe shall have leaded joints properly caulked. Cement
joints will not be permitted.
C. The pipe shall be installed with a minimum grade of 1.00%, have the
best possible alignment and have adequate cover to protect the line
from crushing or frost action. All service laterals and house sewers shall
be constructed in accordance with the Specifications for the
Construction of the Sanitary Sewerage System of West Goshen Sewer
Authority on file in the Township office.
A. Cleanouts shall be provided in each house sewer and at intervals to
permit complete rodding with a one-hundred-foot-long auger or tape.
Cleanouts shall be constructed by using a Y-fitting in the run of pipe
with a forty-five-degree bend and riser to the ground surface. The riser
pipe must be provided with a standard four-inch screw-type ferrule.
B. All connections to the sewer system must be provided with a house trap
between the main house drain and the house sewer. Traps shall be of
the running type with approved cleanouts and fresh air inlet on the
upstream side.
A. Where the trench is less than four feet deep in a trafficked roadway,
special bedding, consisting of crushed stone or concrete cradle, as
directed by the Engineer or representative of the Township must be
used.
B. Service laterals and house sewers for all service stations, garages or
other establishments storing, using or dispensing gasoline, kerosene,
benzene or similar solvents shall be constructed of cast-iron pipe with
leaded joints.
C. Where lines are laid in fill, extra-heavy cast-iron pipe with lead joints
shall be used.
§ 66-10.6 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-10.8
64:205
§ 66-10.9. Connections to service laterals and street sewer mains.
[Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
§ 66-10.10. Permit for surface opening; restoration of surface.
[Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
Whenever the surface of any street, sidewalk or cartway is disturbed by
construction of any service lateral or other required connection, it shall
be the responsibility of the permit holder to restore the surfacing material
in kind. Any and all such construction shall be in compliance with all
applicable Township ordinances and regulations, including Chapter 70
hereof, and all necessary permits shall be obtained from the Township
before construction is commenced, including the permit required for
opening or disturbing the surface of the street, sidewalk or cartway.
§ 66-10.11. Supervision and inspections by Township. [Added
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
The construction of service laterals and house sewers shall, at all times, be
subject to supervision and inspection by the Township or its representative
and shall conform to the Authority and Township specifications. The service
laterals and house sewers shall not be covered until permitted by the
Engineer or Township representative, and all backfilling of trenches shall
be under their supervision and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping
in six-inch layers to a minimum height of 12 inches above the pipe.
D. Where foundation conditions are poor due to groundwater or
subsurface materials, a base of Pennsylvania Department of Highways
No. 2B crushed stone at least six inches in depth shall be applied.
E. Where rock is encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of four
inches below the bottom of the pipe and the trench refilled to the grade
line with clean earth or crushed stone.
A. Connections to service laterals, if of the same pipe size, shall be made
by proper joining to the bell end of the service lateral provided. If castiron
pipe four inches in diameter is used, the connection shall be made
with a standard reducing fitting of PVC or cast iron. This applies also to
the connection of the house drain to the house sewer pipe. Projecting
the smaller pipe into the larger and sealing will not be permitted.
Where a house sewer is made with pipe larger in diameter than the sixinch
service lateral provided, the house sewer shall be extended to the
sewer main and properly connected as specified herein.
B. Connections to street sewer mains where no branch fitting has been
previously provided shall be made with an approved saddle-type fitting
properly installed and encased in a six-inch envelope of concrete
extending completely around the barrel of the sewer main pipe.
§ 66-10.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-10.12
64:206
§ 66-10.12. Connections through private property. [Added
5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
Connections with sewers where same are run through private property shall
in all respects be governed by this chapter.
§ 66-10.13. Disconnection from sewer system upon noncompliance.
[Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
The Township shall have the right to close or disconnect from the sewer
system any service lateral or house sewer used for carrying any discharge
prohibited by this chapter or regulations adopted and promulgated
hereunder, subject to the procedure established in § 66-40.
§ 66-10.14. Responsibilities of owners. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord.
No. 7-1985]
It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of any house, occupied
building or any structure whatsoever connected to the sewer system to
maintain the service lateral. More specifically, the owner shall at his sole
expense promptly and properly repair all leaks, stoppages and defective
plumbing and service laterals. In particular, the owner shall take whatever
action is necessary and appropriate to eliminate the infiltration/inflow into
the service lateral of rainwater, surface water, groundwater or other
objectionable material.
§ 66-10.15. Liability of Township. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord. No.
7-1985]
The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure of service when
occasioned by an emergency, required repairs or failure from any cause
beyond its control. The Township reserves right to restrict the use of sewer
service whenever the public welfare so requires. In consideration of the
right to connect to the sewer system, the Township shall not be liable
for any damage or expense resulting from leaks, stoppages or defective
plumbing or from any other cause occurring to any premises or within any
building; and it is hereby expressly agreed by all persons making connection
with the sewer system that no claims shall be made against the Township on
account of the breaking or stoppage of, or any damage or expense to, any
house sewer where the cause thereof is found to be in such house sewer.
§ 66-10.16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-4-1964;
11-13-1979 by Ord. No. 7-1979]
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of
§ 66-10.12 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-10.16
64:207
not more than 30 days. Each section or provision of this article that
is violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion
thereof in which a violation of this article is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, each of which violations shall be
punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or
upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days.
All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article shall be
paid to the Township Treasurer. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by Ord. No.
2-1997]
B. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by
applicable law.
C. Each occupied building, as hereinbefore defined, whether or not the
owners thereof shall be permitted to connect two or more occupied
buildings or units by a single common connection to a lateral of the
sewer system or shall be required to make separate connections for
each occupied building or unit, shall constitute a separate and distinct
unit under the provisions of this article, and the persons owning
occupied buildings, consisting of multiple units contained in the same
structure, who violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be
subject to the aforesaid fine for each and every one of such occupied
buildings or units which are in violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 66-10.16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-10.16
64:208
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 12-9-1964]
§ 66-11. Tampering with sewers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, injure, break or remove
any sewer line, manhole cover or any other part of the sewer system of the
Township of West Goshen.
§ 66-12. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 2-14-1984 by Ord. No.
1-1984]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the sewer system,
except through a sewer metering manhole into which all of such person's
sewer lines flow, any dangerous or harmful substances which would
adversely affect the functioning of the sewer system or the processes of
sewage treatment or any discharges prohibited by any other section of
Chapter 66. Prior to any such discharge, such person shall apply to the
Township for and be issued a permit allowing such discharge, subject to the
Township regulations.
§ 66-13. Discharge of sewage or refuse restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of cleaning
cesspools or septic tanks or for any other person to place, throw or deposit
or discharge into the sewer system or into the manholes of the sewer system
any sewage or refuse without first having obtained approval of the Township
Supervisors.
§ 66-13.1. Floor drains. [Added 9-27-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any floor drain, except a
shower drain, to the sewer system except those specifically permitted
by Subsection B of this § 66-13.1 following the issuance of a permit.
B. Floor drains installed in toilet rooms having two or more water closets
shall be permitted only in the following commercial or institutional
buildings when authorized by the Sewer Manager subject to the
specifications contained in Subsection C of this § 66-13.1: hospitals and
clinics, veterinary clinics, nursing homes, schools, gymnasiums,
dormitories, places of assembly, government buildings and toilets
accessible by and posted as open and available to the members of the
general public.
C. Each floor drain shall be equipped with the following devices:
(1) A Josman, Series 6F, round strainer with solid threaded floor drain
cover or equivalent, which shall be maintained tightly screwed in
place except when the use of the floor drain is needed in the case of
an overflow from fixtures causing flooding in the toilet room; and
§ 66-11 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-13.1
64:209
§ 66-14. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 2-14-1984
by Ord. No. 1-1984; 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by
Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this article that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this article is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
(2) A Josman, 67400 Series, no-hub swing-check type backwater valve
or equivalent.
D. Prior to the issuance of a permit(s) by the Sewer Manager for a
permitted floor drain(s) and their installation, the owner of the building
in which it is to be installed shall sign a release and indemnification
agreement, in form and content approved by the Township Solicitor,
releasing and indemnifying the Township and the Sewer Authority from
any direct or consequential liability and/or damages that may occur or
do occur as the result of sewage and/or sewage gases, odors or fumes
entering the building through the floor drains installed in the building.
E. No waiver of nor hardship variance from the requirements of this
§ 66-13.1 shall be granted.
§ 66-13.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-14
64:210
ARTICLE III
Sewage Disposal
[Adopted 5-1-1968 by Ord. No. 6-1968]
§ 66-15. Title.
This article shall be known as the "West Goshen Sewage Disposal Ordinance
of 1968."
§ 66-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEWAGE — All matter commonly referred to as sewage or defined as
sewage by any statute of the commonwealth, including but not limited to
human excrement, garbage, decaying matter, industrial or household waste
and kitchen and laundry water.
§ 66-17. Pollution or health nuisances prohibited.
The following acts are hereby declared to be detrimental to the public
health and are prohibited:
§ 66-18. Exceptions.
The proper disposal of sewage by any means or method authorized by
statute of the commonwealth or ordinance of this Township is excepted from
the provisions of § 66-17 hereof. In any prosecution under this article, the
burden of proving an exception shall be on the defendant.
§ 66-19. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
A. Construction, maintenance or use of any privy, cesspool, urinal or other
receptacle for sewage which directly or indirectly overflows, drains or
discharges over or upon the surface of the ground or into ditches or any
creek, stream, river, gutter, street or roadway or which does or may
attract flies.
B. Discharge of sewage onto or the accumulation of sewage on any street,
road or public place or any creek, stream or river or any private
property.
§ 66-15 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-19
64:211
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this article that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this article is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 66-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-19
64:212
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Charges
[Adopted 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 9-1980]
§ 66-20. (Reserved)53
§ 66-20.1. Applicability of chapter. [Added 2-28-1984 by Ord. No.
2-1984]
Articles II, III and IV of this Chapter 66 and all sections and subsections
thereof shall apply to and be enforceable against all persons, owners and
users of the sewer system, both within and without the territorial
jurisdiction of West Goshen Township, including those persons, owners and
users connected to the sewer system pursuant to municipal agreement
between the Township and other political subdivisions.
§ 66-21. Connection charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of each property connecting to
the sewer system a connection charge of $190 plus $10 fee for the cost of
inspection, for each connection made to the sewer system. The connection
charge shall be due and payable at the time application is made to the
Township to make any connection to the sewer system or upon the date
when the Township shall connect any such property to the sewer system, at
the cost and expense of the owner, if such owner shall have failed to make
such connection as required by the Township ordinance, then in effect,
requiring such connection.
§ 66-22. Imposition of sewer rents. [Amended 3-12-1997 by Ord. No.
3-1997]
There is hereby imposed upon each property served by the sewer system
and having the use thereof quarterly sewer rents or charges, payable, as
hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer
system, based on the schedules of classifications and rates or charges
hereinafter set forth. Sewer rents shall also be due and payable in
accordance with the sewer rates established in §§ 66-23 and 66-24 by each
property owner required to connect to the sewer system as provided for
in § 66-3 of this chapter, regardless of whether such property has been
physically connected to the sewer system. It is the intention of this section
that any owner who in violation of this chapter fails to timely connect
his property to the sewer system when such connection is required shall
pay the required sewer rents as compensation for the availability of sewer
service.
§ 66-23. Classifications other than industrial. [Amended 12-27-1983
by Ord. No. 8-1983; 9-27-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994; 3-12-1997 by
53.Editor's Note: Former § 66-20, Definitions, was repealed 9-27-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994.
The definitions are now included in § 66-1.
§ 66-20 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-23
64:213
Ord. No. 3-1997; 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 05-200954; 7-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 03-2011; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 07-2013; 10-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 6-2018]
The flat or metered rates for sewer classifications other than industrial
establishments shall be as follows:
A. Each private dwelling or living unit: $105 per quarter.
B. Each firehouse or municipal building: $105 per quarter.
C. Each church: $158.45 per quarter. Where a church is combined with a
day-care center or school through one connection to the sewer system,
the rates provided for in this Subsection C and in Subsection D shall
both apply.
D. Each public or private school: $25.49 per year per pupil, based upon the
daily average number of pupils enrolled on days when the school was in
session during the full school term immediately preceding the date of
each quarterly bill. Teachers and employees shall be classified as pupils
for sewer rental purposes.
E. Each hospital, convalescent home and institution: $129.52 per quarter,
plus $7.04 per 1,000 gallons of water used in excess of 20,000 gallons
per quarter.
F. Each retail gas station: $338.04 per quarter.
G. Each commercial establishment, other than those enumerated above,
not regularly dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the
premises or discharging industrial waste: $129.52 per quarter, plus
$7.04 per 1,000 gallons of water used in excess of 20,000 gallons per
quarter.
H. Each commercial establishment, other than those above, which
regularly dispenses food or beverages for consumption on the premises
or discharges industrial waste: $176.06 per quarter, plus $7.04 per
1,000 gallons of water used in excess of 20,000 gallons per quarter.
I. Multiple uses:
(1) Where there is a combination of private dwelling or living units of
any number located in one building or a combination of one or more
such dwelling or living units with one or more commercial
establishments located in one building and each such unit or
establishment has the use of the sewer system through or by means
of one sewer connection to the building housing the multipledwelling
units or combined uses, then the sewer rate for each
dwelling or living unit shall be $105 per quarter and the sewer rate
for each commercial establishment shall be $129.52 per quarter.
54.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that the adopted sewer rates would take effect
as of the beginning of the third quarter for 2009.
§ 66-23 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-23
64:214
§ 66-24. Meter rates for commercial establishments and industrial
establishments. [Amended 12-27-1983 by Ord. No. 8-1983;
3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 3-1997; 5-28-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 05-200955]
The Sewer Manager may require the owner of the commercial
establishment to install a separate meter for the commercial
establishment, in which event a separate metered sewer rental
charge shall be due and payable in accordance with the metered
sewer rates as established in § 66-24 of this article in addition to
the flat quarterly rate of $129.52 per quarter.
(2) Where there is a combination of one or more commercial
establishments located in one building and each such unit or
establishment has the use of the sewer system through or by means
of one sewer connection to the building housing the multiple
commercial establishments, then the sewer rate for each
commercial establishment shall be $129.52 per quarter, plus
applicable metered sewer rates as established by § 66-24 of this
article.
J. Each motel or hotel: $39.34 for each motel room, hotel room or suite
per quarter. Where a restaurant, barroom or other facilities are
conducted in connection with any motel or hotel, a separate metered
sewer rental charge shall be due and payable in accordance with the
metered rates as established in § 66-24 of this article.
K. Rooming house: $105 per establishment per quarter, plus $39.34 for
each separate living quarters for each roomer, whether or not occupied.
Employees shall be classified as roomers for sewer rental purposes.
L. Each restaurant, barroom or other commercial establishment not
otherwise classified herein, which regularly dispenses food or
beverages: $8.58 per quarter per employee, based upon the daily
average number of employees for the quarter immediately preceding
the date of each quarterly bill, plus $8.58 per quarter for each seat
provided for customer use, provided that there shall be a minimum
charge of $338.04 per quarter.
A. Sanitary sewage. [Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
(1) The quarterly sewer rents or charges shall be computed on the
basis of the gallonage of water usage per quarter, as evidenced by
meter readings taken by or for the water supplier for the purpose of
measuring and calculating water supplied by or purchased from
the water supplier and such other meters or measuring devices as
may be installed pursuant to the provisions and requirements of
55.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that the adopted sewer rates would take effect
as of the beginning of the third quarter for 2009.
§ 66-23 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-24
64:215
this article, and shall be subject to the minimum charges as herein
provided as follows:
Quantity of Water Used
(gallons per quarter)
Quarter Rates
(per thousand gallons)
First 200,000 $7.04
Second 400,000 $5.63
Next 200,000 $4.33
Over 800,000 $2.34
(2) The Township shall require the owner of each such commercial
establishment and industrial establishment to install a water meter
for each connection to the sewer system. Such meter shall be
installed within 60 days after written notice to such owner
requiring such installation. The Sewer Manager may extend the
date for such installation upon justifiable cause shown. Pending
connection of the required water meter, the minimum quarterly
charge for sanitary sewage service to industrial establishments and
commercial establishments shall be $10.11 per quarter per
employee, based upon the daily average number of employees for
the quarter immediately preceding the current quarter for which
the bill is rendered, but in no event shall the minimum charge be
less than $140.85 per quarter.
B. Industrial waste.
(1) In the event that the Township consents to accept industrial waste
into the sewer system, charges will be made for sewage consisting
in whole or in part of industrial waste, which sewage has total
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the
following concentrations:
(a) Suspended solids (SS): 300 parts per million.
(b) BOD: 250 parts per million.
(2) The total charge for sewage having concentrations in excess of the
foregoing shall be determined in accordance with the following
formula:
Total charge = Q + 0.001 Q (BOD in ppm - 250) + 0.001 Q (SS
in ppm - 300)
Where:
Q = Metered quantity charge (§ 66-24).
SS = Suspended solids.
ppm = Parts per million.
§ 66-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-25
64:216
§ 66-25. Exclusion of industrial wastes and prohibited discharges.
[Amended 2-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
A. The Township shall have the night to refuse connection to the sewer
system or to disconnect a sewer or to compel pretreatment of any
waste, including industrial wastes, by an industrial establishment or a
commercial establishment in order to prevent discharge into the sewer
system of any such waste deemed to be harmful to the sewage
collection system or the sewage treatment plant or deemed to have a
deleterious effect on sewage treatment or the sludge-handling
processes or deemed to in any way affect, impair or interfere with the
Township's agricultural utilization of its sewage sludge for land
application as part of normal farming operations. For purposes of
agricultural utilization, the Township Supervisors may, from time to
time, by resolution, promulgate regulations governing standards to be
applied in determining impairment of agricultural utilization of sewage
sludge and, in addition, promulgate prohibitions against specific types
or strengths of industrial or other wastes or other substances (in
addition to those set forth in § 66-26) which are harmful to the sewage
collection system, or which are prohibited from discharge to any
interceptor or treatment facility to which the sewer system is or is to be
connected, or in any disposal facility connected to or utilized by the
sewer system. Such prohibitions may be modified from time to time by
the Township, and any sewer permit issued shall, by virtue hereof, be
subject to such standards, specifications and prohibitions in effect from
time to time.
B. The owner of any property on which is located and conducted any
commercial or industrial establishment which uses any one or more of
the controlled metals, compounds or substances designated by
resolution of the Township as subject to this subsection and which is
serviced by and connected to the sewer system shall, within 60 days of
the effective date of this subsection, install a sampling manhole into
which all sewer lines carrying sanitary or industrial waste must flow,
together with appurtenant parts and structures as specified in
Specifications for Sewer Manholes, promulgated by resolution of the
Township, and a flow meter, recorder, sampler, measuring flume and all
accessories to make a complete wastewater sampling and flow
recording station capable of continuous operation, as specified in
Specifications for Sewer Waste Water Flow Meter and Sampler System
promulgated by resolution of the Township. The required installations
shall be installed and maintained in good and safe operating condition
by the owner at his expense. The Sewer Manager or anyone acting
under his direction and control shall have the right of entry to such
facilities to collect samples, to measure flows and to make inspections
at any time.
C. The analysis of wastes, including industrial wastes, shall be determined
in accordance with the current and latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the
§ 66-25 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-25
64:217
American Public Health Association, and, if required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the current
standard testing procedures mandated by the Department and/or, if
applicable, the current standard methods mandated by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency. Sampling and analysis shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and sewage sludge and to
determine the existence of hazards to the environment and to those
systems and applications designated in § 66-25A. Samples for testing
shall be taken at the control sampling manhole and at such other
manholes as determined or required by the Sewer Manager.
D. Industrial wastes may be discharged into the sewer system but only
upon prior written permit issued by the Township. Application for any
such permit shall be accompanied by such information relating to the
nature or character of the industrial waste proposed to be discharged
into the system, including, without limitation, a detailed engineering
report in respect thereto prepared by a registered engineer or
engineering firm, an analysis of the wastes proposed to be discharged
and such other information as the Township by regulation may, from
time to time, require. The reports, analysis and information required by
regulation shall, thereafter, be submitted biannually and/or upon any
change in or addition of the metals or compounds utilized by the
industrial or commercial establishments which are designated and
regulated by resolution as described in Subsection B of this section, or
subsequent resolutions adopted by the Township. Any permit issued
under this section shall be conditioned upon compliance with such
reasonable restrictions as the Township or the Sewer Manager, acting
in his representative capacity, may impose, including, without
limitation, requirements for the establishment of facilities for the
pretreatment and prescreening of wastes, the construction of flowequalization
facilities to assure a uniform rate of discharge and the
installation of the facilities and sampling devices mandated by
§ 66-25B. Interceptors shall be provided before or after the issuance of
a permit or at any time when they are required by the Township for the
proper handling of liquid industrial wastes. All such interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Township and shall be so
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All such required facilities and interceptors shall be
maintained continuously in a safe, satisfactory and effective operating
condition at the expense of the owner. The Township may, from time to
time, adopt and promulgate standards and regulations governing
requirements and procedures under this subsection. Operation,
maintenance, recordkeeping and testing of specimen samples of
wastes, including industrial wastes, discharged into the sewer system
shall be the responsibility of the owner at his expense, subject to
certain minimum standards and report procedures promulgated and
adopted, from time to time, by the Township.
§ 66-25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-25
64:218
§ 66-26. Prohibited discharges.
In addition to the foregoing, all persons are specifically prohibited from
discharging into the sewer system any of the following waters, waste or
wastewaters:
E. The Township shall inspect the facilities of any user of the sewer system
to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter are being met and all
requirements are being complied with. The term "user" shall include
the owner or occupant of any residence, commercial establishment or
industrial establishment. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its
representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
or in the performance of any of their duties. The Township shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as it determines
are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before
entry into the user's premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the Township will be permitted
to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing inspections and
other duties required by this subsection, provided that, in case of
emergency, inspections shall be permitted at any time determined
necessary by the Sewer Manager.
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
B. Quantities of flow or concentrations, or both, which constitute slugs.
"Slug" shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation and shall adversely affect the sewer system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
C. Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water discharged through
or from a sump pump or a floor drain (except as permitted by § 66-13.1
of this chapter), water from roof runoff, subterranean water, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process water. [Amended 9-27-1994 by
Ord. No. 2-1994]
D. Any garbage, except garbage properly ground in a garbage-grinding
device approved by the Sewer Authority, which said device shall induce
sufficient dilution water to carry the garbage after grinding in
suspension so as to prevent obstruction or restriction of the flow of said
garbage or sewage.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
§ 66-25 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-26
64:219
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the
sewer system or to any interceptor, treatment and disposal facilities to
which the sewer system is or is to be connected or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewer system or the aforesaid
treatment facilities.
F. Any waters or wastes having a corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer
system or the aforesaid treatment facilities.
G. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance is
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewer system or the aforesaid treatment
facilities. Toxic wastes shall include wastes containing cyanide, copper
and/or chromium ions.
H. Any waters or wastes containing total solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment works, except as such waters or
wastes may be approved by the owner or lessee of the aforesaid
treatment facilities.
I. Any exhaust steam, oils, grease, gas, benzine or other combustible
gases or liquids, offal, insoluble solids or other dangerous or harmful
substances which would adversely affect the functioning of the sewer
system or the process of sewage treatment.
J. Any metals or compounds in excess of the concentrations limitation
imposed from time to time by regulation promulgated and adopted by
the Township. [Added 2-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
K. No person, owner or user of the sewer system shall, at any time,
increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a
discharge into the sewer system as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with the limitation
contained in the pretreatment standards established in or pursuant to
this chapter, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation imposed by this
chapter or by any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. [Added
2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 2-1984]
L. Gas stations and garages are required to provide oil interceptors of the
types Series GA, GX, GNC or GRC, of Josam Manufacturing Company,
Michigan City, Indiana, or equivalent, in the proper location where the
dangerous liquids are to be intercepted. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord.
No. 7-1985]
M. Restaurants or other commercial establishments as directed are
required to provide grease interceptors of the type Series J of the Josam
Manufacturing Company or equivalent. [Added 5-28-1985 by Ord.
No. 7-1985]
§ 66-26 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-26
64:220
§ 66-26.1. Enforcement. [Added 2-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
N. Direct discharge of process water from an automatic or manually
operated car wash facility for the washing of any type of motorized
vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks, regardless of whether such
facility is operated as a primary commercial enterprise or as accessory
to another principal use, unless the design and operation of the facility
includes and utilizes a recycling filtration system designed and
operated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications to allow the
reuse of wash water as an integral part of the car wash operation. Prior
to discharging recycled process water to the sanitary sewer system, the
owner shall apply for and receive from the Sewer Manager a written
discharge permit, which shall specify compliance with the pollutant
limitations specified in Sewer Resolution No. 15-1984. Sludge
particulates and inert materials captured by the recycling filtration
process shall not be discharged to the sewer system but must be
removed and disposed of by the owner at a site approved by the
regulatory agency having jurisdiction. [Amended 9-27-1994 by Ord.
No. 2-1994]
A. Suspension of wastewater treatment service and/or permits.
(1) Harmful contributions. The Township is empowered herewith to
suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or any permit
issued by the Township pursuant to this chapter when such
suspension is necessary, in the Township's opinion, to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, causes interference with the
Township's sewage collection, processing and disposal system or
causes the Township to violate any condition of a state or federal
permit issued to it in conjunction with the Township's sewage
system or its disposal processes.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of his wastewater treatment
service or of any permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
prohibited discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township shall
take such measures as it deems necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize
interference with or endangerment of its sewer system determined
in § 66-25A or endangerment to any individuals. The Township shall
reinstate the wastewater permit and/or the wastewater treatment
service upon satisfactory proof issued to the Township by the user
of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of
the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the Township within 15
days of the date of the occurrence.
§ 66-26 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-26.1
64:221
B. Revocation of permit. Any user who violates any of the following
conditions, any other section or subsection of this chapter or any
applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having the user's
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of Subsection C of
this section:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge.
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3) Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring, with respect to the provisions and
requirements of this chapter or of any regulations or standards
adopted hereunder.
(4) Violation of conditions of a permit issued hereunder.
(5) Noncompliance with any of the requirements, standards or
regulations imposed by § 66-25 and each of its subsections.
C. Notification of violation and hearing.
(1) Whenever the Township determines or has reason to believe that
any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a permit or the
conditions thereof issued under this chapter or any prohibition,
limitation, standard or requirement contained or adopted pursuant
to this chapter, the Township may serve upon such person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date
of such notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the Township by the user.
(2) The Township may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system to show cause
before the Board of Supervisors why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice shall be served on the user,
specifying the time and place of the hearing to be held by the Board
regarding the violation, the nature of the violation and the
proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause
before the Board why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. All testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded
stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made
available to any party thereto, at cost. The Board is empowered to
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents in any such hearing.
(3) In any such hearing, the burden of proof to show cause shall be
upon the user. If warranted by the evidence, the Township may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that, following a specified time period not to exceed 30 days, the
sewer service be discontinued unless the violation is completely
§ 66-26.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-26.1
64:222
§ 66-27. Measuring methods and devices for industrial uses.
corrected within such time as ordered by the Board. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the Township's immediate
suspension of wastewater treatment services or the immediate
suspension of any wastewater permit or the disconnection of any
sewer lateral to prevent discharges into the sewer system as
described in § 66-25A or 66-26A through J or for failure to install
the facilities required by § 66-25B.
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from a water
supplier discharges sanitary and/or industrial waste into the sewer
system, the volume of water used, as determined from meter
readings made by or made available to the Township, shall be used
in computing the sewer rentals.
(2) In cases where persons have sources of water supply in addition to
or other than from the water supplier and discharge sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system, those
persons may provide a meter on such additional or other source of
supply. The total amount of water used as shown be these meter
readings will be used in computing the sewer rentals. If no such
meter is installed, the Sewer Manager shall estimate the total
amount of water used for the purpose of determining the sewer
rentals.
(3) In cases where persons use water from the water supplier and/or
from any other source such that all or any part of the water so used
is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of water used
to determine the sewer rentals shall be computed by one of the
following methods:
(a) Method No. 1: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings from this meter or measuring
device shall be used in computing the sewer rentals.
(b) Method No. 2: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system. The reading
from this meter or measuring device will then be deducted
from the total water meter readings and the remainder shall be
used in computing the sewer rentals.
(c) Method No. 3: When, in the opinion of the Sewer Manager, it is
not appropriate or not practical to install devices to
continuously determine the quantity of water not discharged to
the sewer system, the Sewer Manager will determine, in such
manner and by such method as he may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water discharged into the sewer system
and the quantity of water used to compute the sewer rentals
§ 66-26.1 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-27
64:223
§ 66-28. Changes in classification.
If use or classification of any property should change within any quarter,
the difference in sewer rental, prorated on a monthly basis to the nearest
calendar month, will be charged or credited, as the case may be, on the bill
for the succeeding quarter. Additional classifications and additional sewer
rentals may be established by the Township from time to time.
§ 66-29. Time and method of payment of sewer rents.
Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly, and quarterly billings for
sewer rentals shall be made by bills dated on the first days of January, April,
July and October of each year, for the quarterly calendar period immediately
preceding the date of the bill. The bills for sewer rentals under § 66-23 for
the first quarter during which a property is connected will be prorated on
the basis of the quarterly rate. All bills shall be due and payable on their
respective dates.
§ 66-30. Penalties for delinquent sewer rents and liens, billings and
payments for sewer rents. [Amended 1-26-1982 by Ord. No. 1-1982;
12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 10-1989]
shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity
measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to
the estimated amount shall be submitted to the Township after
notice of the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be
final for the current calendar year.
B. Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices not provided by
the water supplier but otherwise used under the provisions of this
article may be furnished and installed by the Township at the expense of
the property owner and shall be owned by and under the control of the
Township and may be tested, inspected or repaired by Township
employees whenever deemed necessary. The owner of the property
upon which such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for
its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made
by the Township at the property owner's expense, whether such repairs
are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for
such installation and repairs shall be due and payable at the same time
and collected in the same manner as are the bills for sewer services.
Such bills from and after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the
property upon which such measuring device is installed.
C. Meter reading. The Township shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or measuring devices, unless such readings are otherwise made
available to the Township by the water supplier, and they shall be made
available to Township employees for meter reading at any reasonable
time.
A. Quarterly charges for sewer rent or other charges shall be subject to a
penalty of 10% if not paid by the last day of the month in which the bill
§ 66-27 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-30
64:224
is dated; and if the quarterly installment plus penalty is not paid by the
last day of the second month after the date of the bill, to the aggregate
amount thereof, there shall be added and due an additional penalty
equal to 3/4 of 1% per month, or fraction thereof on the unpaid balance
thereof until paid. Where payment is made by mail, if the payment
bears a United States postmark, the date of payment shall be deemed
to be the postmarked mailing date. The penalties provided for in this
section shall be concurrent with and not exclusive of all other remedies
available to the Township for the collection of such sewer rents and
charges. All unpaid sewer rents and charges, together with penalties
thereon, and all costs incurred by the Township and authorized by
Township ordinance to be imposed and collected in connection with
unpaid and delinquent sewer rents and charges shall be a municipal
claim and, when filed with the proper public office, shall constitute
a lien on the property served for which the sewer rents and charges
have been imposed. Interest at the rate of 9% per annum is hereby
imposed and shall be collected on all sewer rents and charges from
and after the date of the filing of the municipal lien therefor in the
manner provided for in the Pennsylvania Tax and Municipal Lien Law.56
[Amended 7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 13-1997; 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005]
B. Bills for sewer rents or charges shall be paid by the owner of the
property and mailed or e-mailed to the address or e-mail address
specified in the application for the permit to make the sewer connection
to the property to be served by sewer service, unless and until a
different address or e-mail address is specified, in writing, by the owner
of such property to the Township, with acknowledgement by the
Township of receipt thereof. Failure of the owner to receive a bill as a
result of an incorrect address, e-mail address or otherwise shall not
excuse payment of sewer rents or charges or extend the time for
payment thereof. It shall be incumbent upon all persons connected to
the sewer system to provide the Township with the correct billing
address or e-mail address, as well as any changes thereto.
C. All sewer rents not paid by the last day of the month on which the bill is
dated shall be deemed to be delinquent. All delinquent sewer rents,
together with penalties, charges and costs thereon, shall constitute a
municipal claim against the property or properties served by the sewer
service from the date the same first became due and payable. If such
sewer rents, penalties and charges are not timely paid, the Township
shall file a municipal lien against the property served pursuant to the
procedure established in the Pennsylvania Tax and Municipal Lien
Law,57 and such lien shall be collected in the manner provided for by
law for the filing and collection of such municipal liens. In addition, the
Township may collect all delinquent sewer rents, penalties and charges
by action in assumpsit, or in any other manner or by any proceeding
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 66-30 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-30
64:225
§ 66-31. Registration of multiple-family uses.
Every owner or operator of a rooming house, apartment house or other
multifamily structure shall, on or before July 1 of each year, register with
the Secretary of the Township, on a form to be provided, indicating the
number of roomers or dwelling units in each such rooming house,
apartment house or other multifamily dwelling. Such registration shall also
be required for multiple uses described in § 66-23I hereof.
§ 66-32. Installation and connection of sanitary facilities.
§ 66-33. Use of private sewage disposal systems prohibited.
otherwise provided for by law. All of the Township remedies shall be
cumulative. [Amended 7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 13-1997]
A. Any person owning property accessible to the sewer system and upon
which there is an occupied building shall, at his own expense, install
sanitary facilities in such building and connect the same to the public
sewer within 60 days after publication of or receipt of notice from the
Township.
B. Any person owning property accessible to the sewer system and upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of
erection and at his expense, install sanitary facilities in such building
and connect the same to the sewer system.
C. Persons owning properties not accessible to the sewer system and upon
which there are occupied buildings more than 150 feet from such sewer
system and persons owning properties not accessible to the sewer
system, who are nevertheless able to arrange for connections thereto
through intermediate properties, shall be permitted to make such
connection.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying a property on
which there is a building required to be connected to the sewer system
under the provisions of § 66-32 hereof to construct or use on such
property any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other device for
the disposal of sanitary sewage, and any such prohibited devices shall
be cleaned and filled in with clean soil or gravel within 90 days
following the date on which the connection is required to be made or, in
the case of failure of connection, within 90 days of notice by the
Township, provided that reinforced concrete septic tanks must be
cleaned within said period but need not be filled.
B. Any such privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other device
constructed or used in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, which shall be, abated as provided by law.
§ 66-30 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-34
64:226
§ 66-34. Connection permit required.
No connection shall be made to any sewer system except upon payment
of the prescribed connection fee and upon permit issued by the Authority
pursuant to its rules and regulations regarding connections, and as
approved by the Township. No person shall make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any part of the sewer system or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
municipal authority.
§ 66-35. Failure to connect; connection by Township; lien.
[Amended 1-26-1982 by Ord. No. 1-1982]
If any person shall be required to make connection to the sewer system
pursuant to the provisions of this article and fails to do so after reasonable
notice and opportunity, and in any event within 90 days of such notice,
the Township may proceed as permitted by law to enter upon the property,
make such connection and collect the cost thereof by municipal lien or
otherwise. Interest at the rate of 10% per annum is hereby imposed and
shall be collectible on such municipal claim from the date of the completion
of the work after it is filed as a lien.
§ 66-36. Expiration of permits.
§ 66-37. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the connection
charges and from sewer rentals and all penalties thereon, as herein
provided for, shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all
other funds of the Township and shall be used only for the purpose of
defraying the expenses of the Township in the operation, maintenance,
repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to
such sewer system and for such payments as the Township may be required
to make under any lease or agreement it may enter into in connection with
A. All sewer permits heretofore or hereafter issued shall expire six months
from the date of adoption of this article or six months from the date of
issuance of such permit, whichever shall first occur, unless a use and
occupancy permit is applied for prior to such expiration date and issued
within 15 days thereafter.
B. After expiration of any permit, the same shall be deemed null and void
for all purposes. The capacity of the Township and, to the extent of
available capacity, the previous permit holder's reapplication shall be
deemed a new application for all purposes.
C. No refund of any tapping fee or other fee paid to secure said permit
shall be made to any permit holder after the expiration of the said
permit or upon surrender or revocation of same during the life of said
permit.
§ 66-34 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-37
64:227
or the financing of the sewer system, in accordance with the provisions of
the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.58
§ 66-38. Rules and regulations.
The Township reserves the right to and may, from time to time, adopt,
revise, amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary
and proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules
and regulations shall be and become a part of this article.
§ 66-39. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 3-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 2-1997]
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of
not more than 30 days. Each section or provision of this article that is
violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion
thereof in which a violation of this article is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense, each of which violations shall be
punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or
upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days.
All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article shall be
paid to the Township Treasurer.
B. Violations.
(1) Failure to connect within 30 days of notice by the Township: § 66-21
and/or 66-32.
(2) Failure to install a required manhole within 30 days of notice by the
Township: § 66-25B.
(3) Failure to secure permit prior to discharge of industrial waste into
the sewer system: § 66-25D.
(4) Failure to pretreat or prescreen industrial waste or supply any
other device required by § 66-25D within 30 days of notice by the
Township: § 66-25D.
(5) Discharge of harmful waste into the sewer system: § 66-26.
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 305.1.
§ 66-37 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-39
64:228
§ 66-40. Review and appeal procedure. [Added 7-24-1984 by Ord.
No. 7-1984]
The following procedures shall control an application for reconsideration,
rehearing or appeal to the Township from a determination thereof with
respect to construction, application or enforcement of this chapter:
(6) Failure to install a measuring device within 30 days of notice by the
Township: § 66-27.
(7) Failure to supply the Township with required notice: § 66-31.
(8) Construction, use or maintenance or failure to disconnect any
facility or device described in section: § 66-33.
(9) Failure to secure permit prior to connection to the sewer system:
§ 66-34.
A. Any permit applicant, permit holder, authorized industrial wastewater
discharger or other discharger, adversely affected by any decision, act
or determination (decision) made by or on behalf of the Township by the
Sewer Manager, his authorized representative or any Township
regulatory body having jurisdiction, in the interpretation or
implementation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any permit issued
hereunder, may file with the Township Review and Appeals Board, at
the Township administrative offices, a written appeal therefrom, in
triplicate, and delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, within 30 days of the date of such decision. Such appeal
shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the sum of $500, which shall be
held in an escrow account by the Township and disbursed to cover the
cost of all expenses incurred in the appeals process. Such request for
reconsideration shall contain the name and address of the appellant, all
of the information and data required by § 66-25D, Chapter 66, West
Goshen Township Code, and Sewer Resolution No. 8-1984, adopted and
promulgated thereunder, together with such information as may be
required hereafter by subsequent resolutions adopted by the Township,
and a brief statement setting forth the factual basis for the appeal and
the specific grounds therefor. Any request for reconsideration which
does not strictly comply with the foregoing requirements shall not be
accepted for filing and shall be returned forthwith to the appellant.
B. Within 15 days of the Township's receipt of a request for
reconsideration which complies with Subsection A hereinabove, the
Review and Appeals Board shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the
time and place for the hearing upon the request. Such hearing shall be
conducted by the Review and Appeals Board not less than 15 nor more
than 30 days after the request for reconsideration has been timely and
properly filed. The Board shall conduct such hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
§ 66-39 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-40
64:229
(1) The hearings shall be conducted by a majority of the Board or the
Board may appoint any member as a Hearing Officer. The decision
shall be made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision by
the Board and accept the decision of the Hearing Officer as final.
(2) The Township and the Sewer Authority shall be automatic parties
to the proceedings before the Board.
(3) The Board or the Hearing Officer presiding shall have power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers,
including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(4) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(5) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(6) A stenographic record of the proceedings and a transcript of the
proceedings shall be kept and made only if the complete cost
thereof is paid or arranged for by the applicant, in advance of the
hearing.
(7) The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision within 45 days of the last hearing before the Board
or Hearing Officer. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer
and there has been no stipulation that his decision shall be final,
the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to
the appellant and the Township, who shall be entitled to make
written representations thereon to the Board prior to the final
decision, and the Board's decision shall be entered not later than
30 days after the decision of the Hearing Officer. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the Board from continuing any hearing,
from time to time, as necessary to accept complete evidence with
respect to any request for reconsideration.
(8) A copy of the final decision shall be mailed to the applicant, the
Township and the Sewer Authority within 10 days of its date.
(9) The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant in any request for
reconsideration; and in order to sustain any such request, the
appellant's proof shall be clear, precise and indubitable.
C. In passing upon any request for reconsideration, the Board of Appeals
shall consider and shall base its decision upon the following required
guidelines:
(1) Contact process water flow having the designated metals,
compounds and/or substances as described in § 66-26J and F,
§ 66-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-40
64:230
Chapter 66, West Goshen Code, and Sewer Resolution No. 4-1984,
and subsequently adopted resolutions, in a closed-loop system,
shall be required to install a sampling manhole and sampler.
(2) Noncontact process water flow having the designated metals,
compounds and/or substances as described in § 66-26J and F,
Chapter 66, West Goshen Code, and Sewer Resolution No. 4-1984,
and subsequently adopted resolutions, in a closed-loop system, may
not, in the Board's discretion, be required to install a sampling
manhole and sampler if all of the following considerations are met:
(a) No floor drains are located on the property.
(b) No sump pump connections to the sanitary sewer are located
on the property.
(c) No connections of holding waste or rinse tanks to the sanitary
sewer are located on the property.
(d) No stormwater, springwater, groundwater, roof water runoff,
subsurface drainage, building or building foundation drainage
connected or connecting to the sanitary sewer system are
located on the property.
(e) The Board determines that upon permit issuance, the appellant
is in compliance with all sections and requirements established
under Chapter 66, except for those three requirements directly
related to the installation of a sampling manhole and sampler.
§ 66-40 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-40
64:231

ARTICLE V
Pretreatment Standards and Regulations for Industrial Wastewater
Discharges
[Adopted 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
§ 66-41. Legislative intent.
§ 66-42. Definitions; word usage.
A. West Goshen Township has previously adopted standards governing the
discharge of wastewater, as herein defined (the regulations), into the
West Goshen Township Public Sanitary Sewerage System;
B. Pursuant to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards mandated by
federal regulations and stream discharge criteria promulgated by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania through the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, West Goshen Township is required to
make certain changes in those standards (the "regulations") and to
impose certain requirements upon its users, including, on certain users,
a requirement for pretreatment of effluent; and
C. West Goshen Township has determined to incorporate through the
adoption of this article various additional regulations, pursuant to its
authority under the Sewage Facilities Act59 and other enabling statutes,
and to amend existing regulations pursuant to which the use of its
sewerage system, as herein defined, will be permitted, including,
without limitation, administrative and penal provisions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACTS — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
(the "Act"); and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, as amended (the Sewage Facilities Act60).
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Region III.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER — An authorized
representative of a user is:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
59.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 66-41 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-42
64:233
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW — The wastewater discharge volume for the
most recent calendar month divided by the number of calendar days in
that month.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§§ 66-43.1 through 66-43.3. BMPs include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage
or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
BOD (denotes "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five
days at twenty 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be found
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user's facility for pretreatment.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY — Any industry subject to pretreatment
standards as specified in 40 CFR (the "United States Code of Federal
Regulations"), Chapter 1, Subchapter N, establishing quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged or introduced to a treatment plant by existing or new
industrial users in specific industrial subcategories.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
COD (DENOTES CHEMICAL "OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity of
oxygen, expressed in mg/L, required to chemically oxidize the organic
A principal executive officer or a person having responsibility for
the overall operation of the user's facility if the user is a
governmental agency, unincorporated organization or other similar
entity.
(3)
A duly-authorized representative of the individual designated in (1)
through (4) above if:
(a) The authorization is made in writing;
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(b)
The written authorization is submitted to the West Goshen
Township Sewer Manager.
(c)
(4)
§ 66-42 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-42
64:234
and inorganic matter in a water or wastewater sample under the
standard laboratory procedure. The standard laboratory procedure
shall be that in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public
Health Association.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD, COD, total suspended solids, total
Kjeldahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, fecal coliform bacteria and oil and
grease.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The West Goshen Township Board of
Supervisors.[Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all the effluent samples
for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.[Added 12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 11-2008]
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of concentration the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measured of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 11-2008]
ENGINEER — Any consulting engineer appointed by West Goshen
Township or West Goshen Sewer Authority.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including,
where appropriate, the Administrator or other duly authorized official
of said agency.
EXTRA-STRENGTH WASTEWATER — A wastewater having a
concentration above the maximum allowable concentration established
from time to time by resolution of the control authority, but which may
be acceptable for discharge to the sewerage system, subject to the
prior approval of the Sewer Manager and the discharger's payment of
a surcharge.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial
handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream, over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 20-2004]
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person discharging anything other than
domestic waste to the sewerage system.
§ 66-42 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-42
64:235
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Any water which, during a
manufacturing, or processing operation, including those regulated
under Sections 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, comes into direct contact
with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product,
or any other water contaminated by an industrial and/or commercial
process, and distinct from domestic wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit authorizing a
person to deposit or discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage
system.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling.[Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the
treatment, conveyance, processes or operations of the sewerage system
or a decrease in treatment efficiency or which contributes to a violation
of any requirement of the West Goshen Township Authority's NPDES
permit, or which prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge in
compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder: Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317),
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II and Title IV, commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA),
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the
concentration, mass or other characteristics of wastewater, wastes or
pollutants discharged to the sewerage system by industrial users, and
which are developed by West Goshen Township in compliance with
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, National Prohibitive
Discharge Standards or other applicable federal and state
regulations.61
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured that month.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.[Added 12-10-2008
by Ord. No. 11-2008]
61.Editor's Note: The former definition of “milligrams per liter (mg/L),” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008.
§ 66-42 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-42
64:236
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317), as from time to time amended, and which are defined in 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as from time to time
amended.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
or NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), as from time to time amended.
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE — Any regulation developed under the authority of
Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical
Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which
standards will be applicable to such source if such categorical
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
Determination of the applicability of new source standards shall be
made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR 403.3.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling purposes
which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property, or his agent.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge through the sewerage system which
exists in quantities or concentrations, alone or with discharges from
other sources, which causes a violation of any condition of West Goshen
Township Sewer Authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in
magnitude or duration of a violation.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
(DEP) — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any department or agency of the
Commonwealth succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or responsibility
of that Department.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, copartnership,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, group,
society or other legal entity whatsoever, government entity, either
commonwealth or local, and their agencies, commissions, departments
and instrumentalities, or the legal representatives, heirs, successors
and assigns thereof.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration
expressed as moles per liter, which indicates the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.
§ 66-42 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-42
64:237
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, sewage sludge, garbage, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage
system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means,
except as prohibited by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and 40
CFR 403.6(d), as amended from time to time.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — The West Goshen Township Sewer
Manager or authorized designee.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 20-2004]
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the control authority in accordance
with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act, or by West Goshen Township,
which applies to industrial users. This term includes National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local discharge limits and
prohibited discharge limits established by this chapter or other
regulatory authority having jurisdiction.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 20-2004]
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer
skilled in the field of wastewater treatment.
SANITARY SEWAGE, DOMESTIC SEWAGE OR SEWAGE — The normal
waterborne waste from a household, and toilet wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments.
SEWER AUTHORITY — The West Goshen Township Sewer Authority.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The sewage collection and treatment system
of West Goshen Township and West Goshen Sewer Authority and any
pipe, conduit or other equipment which carries wastewater to the West
Goshen Township publicly owned treatment plant (POTW), or any of its
component parts. For purposes of the applicability of the regulations
promulgated by this article, the sewerage system also includes any
sewers or facilities that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons
outside West Goshen Township who are, by contract with the Township,
users of the POTW.
§ 66-42 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-42
64:238
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Except as provided for in
Subsections (3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user
is:[Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — The term shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users [or any other industrial
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Pretreatment Coordinator on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
The Township may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons
per day gpd of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to Township finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(a)
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in § 66-44.9B(2) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection 2 of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Township may at any time on its own initiative
or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
§ 66-42 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-42
64:239
user that violates Subsections (3), (4), or (7) below] and shall
mean:[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004; 12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 11-2008]
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that may
cause a violation of any pretreatment requirement or pretreatment
standard set forth in this Article V.[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits as defined in § 66-42.
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those
violations in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal
or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in § 66-42,
multiplied by the applicable criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH).
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by § 66-42 (daily maximum or longer-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Township
determines has caused, either alone or in combination with other
discharges, an interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the health of the Township personnel, the
environment or the general public; or has resulted in exercising
any emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule date or a compliance schedule milestone
contained in the user's industrial waste discharge permit or
enforcement action for starting construction, completing
construction or attaining final compliance.
(5)
(6) Failure to accurately and timely report incidents of noncompliance.
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(7)
Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date any required
reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports
on compliance with compliance schedules.
(8)
§ 66-42 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-42
64:240
§ 66-43. Prohibitions and restrictions on all users.
Sections 66-43.1 through 66-43.3 set forth regulations for all users.
SLUG CONTROL PLAN — A report prepared by an industrial user and
provided to the Township in accordance with this article which details
the existing and proposed facility plans and operating procedures to be
followed by that user in the event of a slug load.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the latest Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued
by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater (Standard Methods), a
manual published by the American Public Health Association specifying
analytical procedures for testing and analysis of wastewater.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting exclusively therefrom.
SURCHARGE — An additional charge for the treatment of extrastrength
wastewater in excess of the basic charge for the treatment of
wastewater.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or
wastewater and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in
Standard Methods.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The sum of the organic
nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen present in wastewater, as measured by
standard laboratory procedure as described in Standard Methods.
TOWNSHIP — West Goshen Township, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
USER — Any person who contributes wastewater into the sewerage
system.
WASTEWATER — The combined flow of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastewater, together with such quantities of infiltration and inflow as
may be present.
B. Words in the present tense include the future. The singular number
includes the plural number. The plural number includes the singular
number. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is
permissive.
§ 66-42 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-43.1
64:241
§ 66-43.1. General discharge restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no user shall discharge or
cause to be discharged to the sewerage system any sewage, industrial
wastewater or other matter or substance:
A. Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the
sewerage system resulting in interference, but in no case with a
temperature at the introduction into the sewerage system which
exceeds 120° F. or is less than 40° F., and in no case, heat in such
quantities that the temperature of the influent to the POTW exceeds
104° F.
B. Containing petroleum oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or other
products of mineral origin, animal fats, oil, wax or grease, or other
similar substances (collectively called "oil and grease"), in amounts that
will cause pass-through or interference.
C. Containing any liquids, solids or gases at concentrations which are, or
may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
sewerage system or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha,
paint products, sulfides and any substance having a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. using the test methods specified in 40
CFR, Chapter 1, Subpart C, Section 261.21.
D. Containing solid or viscous substances at concentrations which will
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference, such as
but not limited to ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass clippings, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye, building
materials, rubber, asphalt residues, hairs, bones, leather, porcelain,
china, ceramic wastes, polishing wastes or glass grindings.
E. Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any
other corrosive or scale forming property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel of the
sewerage system.
F. Containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, may injure or cause either interferences or a pass-through
or interference in the sewerage system, constitute a hazard to humans,
animals, or plants, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
POTW, or exceed any limitations set forth in a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. [Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
G. Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create
a public nuisance or result in toxic gases, vapors or fumes in the
§ 66-43.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-43.1
64:242
§ 66-43.2. Trucked or hauled wastewater.
sewerage system in a quantity that will cause worker health and safety
problems.
H. Containing objectionable color not removed in the treatment process,
such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
I. Containing radioactive substances of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits which are prohibited by applicable state or federal
regulations.
J. Prohibited by any permit, statute, rule, regulation, ordinance or
resolution issued or promulgated by the Township or any public agency
having jurisdiction, including the state and the EPA.
K. Containing any substance which will cause the sewerage system to
violate the Sewer Authority's NPDES permit or the receiving water
quality standards.
L. Containing any substance which shall cause the sewerage system to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under Section 405 or other applicable or
amended sections of the Act, or be in noncompliance with any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal promulgated
pursuant to the Solid Waste Control Act, or State Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
M. Containing nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
N. Constituting a slug load.
O. Containing stormwater, surface water, uncontaminated groundwater,
roof runoff, foundation drain water or drainage from the fields.
P. Containing any garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in size.
Q. Containing pesticides, unless upon written request, special permission
is obtained from the Township.
R. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. [Added 12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 11-2008]
S. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that might cause
excessive foaming in the POTW. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
11-2008]
A. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges to the sewerage system are
prohibited, except as authorized hereinafter.
B. Tank truck or hauled wastes may only be discharged into sewerage
system upon the issuance of a discharge permit by the Township.
§ 66-43.1 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-43.2
64:243
§ 66-43.3. Strength of waste surcharge.
C. Tank truck or hauled wastes authorized for discharge shall be
discharged only at the location, time and at a rate fixed by the
discharge permit.
D. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall not include any industrial
wastewater except as authorized in writing by the Township.
E. Prior to discharge, the tank truck or hauled waste shall be subject to
inspection and sampling by the Township.
F. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall be subject to rates and
charges in accordance with a schedule established by the Township, as
amended from time to time.
A. Any user discharging wastewater to the sewerage system defined as
extra-strength wastewater in such resolutions as the Township shall
adopt from time to time shall pay the surcharge established in those
resolutions. The effective date of any change in definitions or fees shall
be stated in all such resolutions.
B. No user shall discharge into the sewerage system any extra-strength
wastewater without a written permit from the Township providing for
sampling and the payment of a surcharge to the municipality to whose
sewer system the user is connected, in accordance with the formulas
set forth in the current pretreatment chapter. The Township shall retain
and have the right at any time to give notice to the industrial user that
extra-strength discharges will no longer be accepted.
C. The surcharge computations shall be based on the wastewater sample
analyses for the most recent complete calendar quarter. Surcharges
shall be based on wastewater sample analyses (or, in the absence
thereof, on the Township estimates) for the calendar quarter which they
apply. The surcharge formulas are independent of each other and
measure different characteristics of the same wastewater. Surcharges
measured by each formula are cumulative.
D. The surcharge billings shall be in addition to any other quarterly sewer
use charge paid by the user to the municipality to whose sewer system
the user is connected. Payment of a surcharge shall not relieve the user
of its obligation to comply with the local loading limits promulgated by
resolution in § 66-44.2 of this article.
E. The Township shall bill the amount of the surcharge to the municipality
to whose sewer system the high-strength discharger is connected in its
next regular billing after the determination of the surcharge, and the
municipality, shall pay the same under the terms and on the same
schedule as the other amounts due under that bill.
§ 66-43.2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44
64:244
§ 66-44. Prohibitions and restrictions on industrial users.
Sections 66-44.1 through 66-44.15 set forth regulations for industrial users.
§ 66-44.1. Permit required for discharge of industrial wastewater.
No person shall discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage system
in violation of § 66-43 et seq. hereof and unless the person discharging the
same has submitted a complete and accurate industrial waste discharge
questionnaire to the Pretreatment Coordinator in the form prescribed by
the Township and has been issued an industrial waste discharge permit or
has been notified in writing by the Pretreatment Coordinator that a permit
is unnecessary for the discharge described in the questionnaire.
§ 66-44.2. Local discharge limits.
§ 66-44.3. Spills or slug loads.
A. The Township shall by resolution adopted by the Township's Board of
Supervisors establish and promulgate local discharge limits regulating
the discharge of specific pollutants to the sewerage system by
industrial users. Local discharge limits may be established for any
substance which is discharged, or likely to be discharged, to the
sewerage system. Such limits shall be calculated as mandated by the
Pretreatment Coordinator and the Engineer, and may be amended from
time to time by the control authority. [Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
B. Local discharge limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination
of the two.
C. The procedure for the calculation of local discharge limits shall be as
recommended by the EPA.
D. Local discharge limits shall be calculated to prevent interference; passthrough;
the discharge of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats to
worker health and safety; physical, chemical or biological damage to
the sewerage system; and noncompliance with the Sewer Authority's
NPDES permit.
E. Local discharge limits applicable to industrial users shall be adopted by
resolution of the Township. Local discharge limits applicable to all
industrial users shall be included in all industrial waste discharge
permits.
F. Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local discharge limit
established for that pollutant shall be a violation of this article.
G. The Pretreatment Coordinator may develop best management practices
(BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to
implement local limits and the requirements of § 66-43.1. [Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
§ 66-44 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.3
64:245
A. All industrial users shall provide and maintain at their own expense
facilities adequate to prevent an accidental discharge or slug load of
any substance stored or used at the industrial user's facilities that, if
discharged into the sewerage system, will violate any of the provisions
of §§ 66-43.1 and 66-44.2 of this article. Slug control plans shall be
submitted, as requested, to both the municipality to whose sewer
system the industrial user is connected and to the Township, detailing
the facility plans and operating procedures to be utilized by the
industrial user for this protection. Slug control plans shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information, in addition to such additional data
as shall be required from time to time by the Pretreatment Coordinator:
(1) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
discharges; and a complete description of stored chemicals.
(2) Procedures for immediately notifying the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer collection system
the industrial user is connected of accidental discharges and slug
loads into the sewerage system.
(3) Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from such discharges and
procedures to prevent reoccurrence of all such discharges.
B. An industrial user proposing to connect to the sewerage system after
the effective date of this article shall submit a copy of its slug control
plan to the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user will
connect and to the Pretreatment Coordinator for approval, or
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator they
are not needed, before connection to the sewerage system. Review of
such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility to modify the industrial user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
C. In the case of an accidental discharge or slug load to the sewerage
system of any pollutant, the industrial user shall immediately notify by
telephone both the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial
user is connected and the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident.
The notification shall include information regarding the location of the
discharge, the kind of pollutants involved, the concentration and
volume of the discharge and corrective actions planned or taken.
[Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
D. Within five days following an accidental discharge or slug load, unless
waived by the Pretreatment Coordinator, the industrial user shall
submit to the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected and to the Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any liability on
account thereof. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
§ 66-44.3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.3
64:246
§ 66-44.4. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, located in 40 CFR
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as amended from time to time,
for any industrial user are more stringent than limitations imposed under
this article for industrial users in that subcategory, then the pretreatment
standards shall apply and are hereby incorporated in this article. The
Township shall notify all affected industrial users of the applicable
[reporting] requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. If an industrial user subject
to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not previously
submitted an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the
industrial user shall apply for a permit within 90 days of the promulgation
of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
§ 66-44.5. Dilution prohibition.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement, no industrial user shall increase the
use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The Township may impose
mass limitations on industrial users in cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
§ 66-44.6. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on industrial wastewater discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those established and imposed in this
article.
§ 66-44.7. Township's right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the sewerage system.
§ 66-44.8. Industrial waste discharge permits.
E. A notice shall be permanently posted by each industrial user on a
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause such an accidental discharge
to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
[Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
F. Significant industrial users are required to notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
11-2008]
A. General.
§ 66-44.3 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.8
64:247
(1) No industrial users shall connect to or discharge wastewater to the
sewerage system without an industrial waste discharge permit.
(2) Upon written application to the Township, but prior to discharge,
the Pretreatment Coordinator may determine that industrial users
which are not significant industrial users or do not have industrial
wastewater do not require an industrial waste discharge permit
and may discharge industrial wastewater to the sewerage system,
but are required to comply with all other provisions of this article.
If an industrial user makes changes to the processes, flow,
wastewater concentration, wastewater characteristics or other
operations reported in the most recent industrial waste discharge
questionnaire filed by the industrial user with the Township, and
those changes result in its meeting the definition of an industrial
user, the industrial user shall immediately upon becoming aware
that such a change has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a change
if it is planned, notify in writing both the Township and the
municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected, and, if the application and proposed discharge are in
compliance with this article, obtain an industrial waste discharge
permit, which shall be issued within 90 days of submission of the
permit application.
(3) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted
an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the user
shall, within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard:
(a) Obtain an industrial waste discharge permit; and
(b) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b), as amended from time to time. This information
shall be incorporated into the application for an industrial
waste discharge permit.
B. Permit application.
(1) Industrial users shall file with the Pretreatment Coordinator a
complete and accurate industrial waste discharge permit
application in the form prescribed by the Township.
(2) The application for an industrial waste discharge permit shall be
fully completed and verified in writing by the industrial user or a
duly authorized and knowledgeable officer, agent or representative
thereof. The application shall contain, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, such scientific or testing data or other
information as may be required by the Township, and the industrial
user shall pay an application fee to and shall reimburse the
Township for all expenses incurred as a result of the processing of
the signed application. The Township shall have, at its discretion,
§ 66-44.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.8
64:248
the right to inspect the premises, equipment and material and
laboratory testing facilities of the applicant.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, the applicant shall provide the
following minimum information to the Pretreatment Coordinator:
(a) Name and address of the user; name, title and telephone
number of responsible official; name, title and phone number
of person to contact for information about the industrial waste
discharge.
(b) Description of the industry and the manufacturing processes or
operations that occur there and the types of products that are
produced.
(c) Applicable standard industrial classification codes for activities
conducted at the facility.
(d) Statement as to whether the industry is subject to compliance
with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and if so,
which ones apply.
(e) Indication and description of the sources of or the processes
that produce industrial wastewaters.
(f) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Township and as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant
to Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as
amended. If the discharge is from a proposed new discharge,
wastewater characteristics shall be reliably estimated in
accordance with accepted procedures.
(g) Volume of industrial wastewater to be discharged to the
sewerage system and the methods of measuring the same.
Flow volume information shall include the time and duration of
the discharge and the average daily and thirty-minute peak
wastewater flow rates, including monthly and seasonal
variations, if any.
(h) Description of any wastewater treatment facilities or processes
used or proposed to be used to treat the industrial wastes prior
to their discharge to the sewerage system.
(i) Schematic flow diagram showing the existing and proposed
sources of industrial wastewater and the on-site treatment
processes.
(j) The quantity of sludges removed from the industrial user's
facility system and their method and location of disposal.
§ 66-44.8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.8
64:249
(k) Description of any other wastes that are removed from the
industrial user's facility system, their quantities and methods
and locations of disposal.
(l) List of raw materials used or stored on the premises, their
material safety data sheets, their approximate quantity of
usage on a monthly basis and what they are used for.
(m) Plans and specifications for a sampling manhole.
(n) A list of any additional environmental control permits held by
or for the facility, such as air quality permits, RCRA permits,
stormwater management permits and all other required
permits.
(o) Such additional information as the Township shall require.
(4) Review and approval.
(a) The industrial waste discharge permit application shall be
reviewed by the municipality to whose sewer system the
industrial user is proposing to connect, and if acceptable to
such municipality, shall be submitted to the Pretreatment
Coordinator for review and approval.
(b) No industrial waste discharge permit shall be issued to an
industrial user whose discharge of materials to sewers,
whether shown upon the application or determined after
inspection and testing conducted by the Township, is not in
conformance with federal, state, municipal or the Township's
ordinances and resolutions. If an application is denied, the
Township shall state in writing the reason or reasons for
denial, and said written communication shall be delivered to
the applicant, and if applicable, to the municipality to whose
sewer system the industrial user is proposing to connect.
(5) If the Township denies an application for an industrial waste
discharge permit, the industrial user may, within 60 days after its
receipt of the Township's denial, request review by the control
authority of such denial. The request for review shall be in writing
and shall specify the grounds for review, and shall be accompanied
by such appropriate supporting information and documents as shall
be sufficient to apprise the control authority of the substance of the
industrial user's position. The control authority at a public hearing
shall review the industrial waste discharge permit application, the
Township's written denial, and such other evidence and matters as
the industrial user shall present at a public hearing. It shall also
consider all evidence offered by the Township or the Pretreatment
Coordinator and any interested party. The public hearing shall take
place no later than 45 days following receipt of the industrial user's
written request for the review. The Board's written decision shall
be provided to the industrial user within 20 days of the close of the
§ 66-44.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.8
64:250
public hearing or hearings and shall be final. [Amended 9-8-2004
by Ord. No. 20-2004]
(6) If, based on the characteristics of the industrial user's waste
discharge, additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance procedures are required to meet any Township,
municipal, state or federal pretreatment standards, the industrial
user shall submit to the Township prior to issuance of the industrial
waste discharge permit the shortest, reasonable schedule by which
the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
Township shall include a compliance schedule acceptable to the
Township in the user's industrial waste discharge permit, which
shall be conditional upon compliance with timely implementation of
the additional pretreatment required. The following conditions
shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
(b) No increment shall exceed nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit to
both the Pretreatment Coordinator and the municipality to
whose sewer system it is connected a written report, including,
as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason for delay and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return the construction and implementation to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than three months
elapse between such progress reports to the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer system it is
connected.
C. Permit action. A permit issued under this section may be modified,
revoked and reissued or terminated for good cause, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's
operation which were not covered in its current permit.
§ 66-44.8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.8
64:251
(3) A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Permit conditions.
(1) Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations,
resolutions, user charges and fees established by the Township and
municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected. Permits shall contain the following:
(a) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards; [Amended 12-10-2008
by Ord. No. 11-2008]
(b) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports, including the information to be contained and the
signatory requirements of these reports. These requirements
shall include an identification of pollutants (or best
management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state,
and local law; [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
(c) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Township
and affording the Township and the municipality to whose
sewer system the industrial user is connected access thereto;
(d) Requirements for notification of the Township and such
municipality in advance of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the sewerage system;
(e) Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
(f) List of prohibited discharges;
(g) Statement of duration of the permit;
(h) Notification of the rules regarding transferability, if allowed;
(i) Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance; and
(j) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(k) Right-of-entry requirements upon the property and within the
facility for which the permit is issued by authorized
representatives of the Township and the municipality to whose
sewer system the user is connected; [Amended 12-10-2008
by Ord. No. 11-2008]
§ 66-44.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.8
64:252
(l) Indemnification of the Township and such municipality from all
liability resulting from or on account of any discharge; and
[Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
(m) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary. [Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
(2) Permits may also contain other requirements, including but not
limited to:
(a) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(b) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and pretreatment facilities;
(c) Compliance schedules; and
(d) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township or
the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected to ensure compliance with this article, applicable
municipal ordinances or other requirements.
(3) Issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit in no way relieves
the industrial user from any liability on account of its discharge into
the sewerage system, whether such discharge is permitted thereby
or not.
E. Permit duration and permit fees.
(1) Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for an initial oneyear
period and shall expire at the end of that one-year period
unless the Township or the municipality to whose sewer system the
industrial user is connected elects to revoke the permit on or
before its expiration. Upon the user's payment of the requisite
permit fee to the Township, renewal permits shall be issued for a
period not to exceed five years upon written application of the
permittee made at least 60 days prior to the permit's expiration.
Subsequent permits may be issued upon payment to the Township
of the requisite fee for up to five-year periods upon prior written
application made to the Township at least 90 days before the
permit's scheduled expiration. The terms and conditions of the
permit shall be subject to modification by the Township or the
municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is
connected during the term of the permit. The industrial user shall
be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of the change. However, the Township or
such municipality shall use their best efforts to inform the
industrial user of such change at least 60 days prior to the effective
date of the change, but its/their failure to do so shall not preclude
or delay implementation of the required change. In the event that
§ 66-44.8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.8
64:253
such changes require major changes in pretreatment by the
industrial user, and the industrial user's failure to comply with
the amended discharge requirements does not itself or with other
failures to comply put the Township or the municipality to whose
sewer system the industrial user is connected in substantial danger
of violating any agreement, permit, regulation, ordinance or law,
then the Pretreatment Coordinator may grant the industrial user a
period not to exceed six months from the date otherwise required
for compliance within which to effect such changes to its
pretreatment facilities as are necessary to comply with the permit's
terms and conditions. Upon demonstration of justifiable cause
proven by the permittee within the said six-month period, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may extend the date otherwise required
for compliance for such additional reasonable period of time as
he determines necessary. No extensions shall be considered or
granted unless the industrial user makes written request for a
time extension and submits to the Township and the municipality
to whose sewer system the industrial user is connected an
implementation schedule acceptable to the Township and such
municipality contemporaneously with the extension request.
(2) Permit fees and renewal fees shall be established by resolution
adopted and amended from time to time by the control authority
and shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following: an
application review fee, an administrative fee, a sampling fee, an
analytical costs fee, any surcharges and/or fines and any
miscellaneous expenses incurred from the purchase or utilization
of any sampling apparatus and/or activities. [Amended 9-8-2004
by Ord. No. 20-2004]
F. Permit transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a
specific industrial user for a specific operation. An industrial waste
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises, different facilities or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the Township and the
municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is connected.
The succeeding owner or industrial user shall file a new application
and, until permit or modification thereof is issued, shall comply with the
terms and conditions of the existing industrial waste discharge permit
and such additional permit conditions as the Township and such
municipality shall require.
G. Waste characteristic change. Any industrial user who plans or becomes
aware of a change in the method of operation or in the pretreatment
facilities which will increase the concentration of pollutants which are
regulated by this article or the volume of wastewater discharged to the
sewerage system shall notify the Township and the municipality to
whose sewer system the industrial user is connected of the change at
least 90 days prior to such change. If required by the Township or the
municipality, the industrial user shall apply for an industrial waste
§ 66-44.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.8
64:254
§ 66-44.9. Reporting requirements for industrial users.
discharge permit that reflects the proposed changes. The new
industrial waste discharge permit will be subject to a fee to reimburse
the Township and such municipality for all expenses incurred as a result
of the processing of the permit and permit application. Approval or
denial of a new industrial waste discharge permit shall be regulated by
the procedures established hereunder for the issuance of an original
permit.
H. Files. The Township shall maintain files in which copies of all industrial
waste discharge permits, revisions thereto, and supporting data will be
filed for reference. Files shall be maintained for a period of at least five
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when
requested by EPA.
A. Compliance date report under National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the sewerage system, any industrial user subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to the
Township and the municipality to whose sewer system the user is
connected a written report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by categorical standards, and the average and maximum daily
flow from these process units in the user's facility which are limited by
such categorical standards. The report shall state whether the
applicable categorical standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional operations and maintenance and/or
pretreatment are scheduled to bring the industrial user into compliance
with the applicable categorical standards. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and, when requested
by the Township, certified by a qualified professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
11-2008]
(1) Each industrial user shall submit to the Township and the
municipality to whose sewer system it is connected, during the
months of April, July, October and January, or by such date as
otherwise specified in the industrial users industrial waste
discharge permit or otherwise by the Township, a complete and
accurate written report, in form and content as prescribed by the
Township, indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the discharge during the reporting period which are regulated by
the industrial waste discharge permit. All monitoring data obtained
for purposes of determining compliance with the industrial waste
discharge permit by certified analytical techniques must be
reported by the industrial user. In addition, this report, where
§ 66-44.8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.9
64:255
applicable, shall include a record of all daily flows which, during
the reporting period, exceeded the maximum daily flow listed in
the industrial user's industrial waste discharge permit. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports
shall also contain the following certification statement signed by
the authorized representative of the user:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a procedure designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the facilities proposed to be connected to the sewerage
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations relating to unsworn falsifications.
(2) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the Pretreatment Coordinator must annually submit the
following certification statement signed by the authorized
representative of the user. This certification must accompany an
alternative report required by the Pretreatment Coordinator:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, that during the period from __________ to __________ [insert
dates]:
(a) The facility described as [facility name] met the definition of
nonsignificant categorical industrial user as per § 66-42;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this
reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following
information:
(3) The Township may impose mass limitations where the imposition of
mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the periodic
compliance report required by Subsection B(1) shall state the mass
of pollutants regulated in the industrial user's discharge permit to
§ 66-44.9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.9
64:256
the sewerage system. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or, where requested by the Township,
production and mass of pollutants contained therein, which are
limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency
of monitoring shall be prescribed in the industrial users industrial
waste discharge permit. All sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA
pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR
136, and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures
approved by the EPA.
(4) For categorical industries that have mass limits as categorical
standards, the Township may specify equivalent concentrations to
regulate the strength of the industrial user's discharge. If
concentration limits are regulated in lieu of mass discharge limits,
the industrial user must provide the Township with the following
information as part of each written compliance report:
(a) For the reporting period, the rate of production of the process
for which categorical standards have been established.
(b) The average wastewater flow rate generated by the regulated
production activity for the reporting period.
(c) Thirty days' notice of any anticipated change in production.
(5) The industrial wastewater discharged into the sewerage system
shall be sampled and analyzed by and at the expense of the
industrial user, and copies of the original laboratory reports listing
the results of the analyses and the analytical methods used shall be
submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
(6) Except as indicated in Subsection B(7) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Township. Regardless of sampling technique used, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis
as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Township, as appropriate.
In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
§ 66-44.9 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.9
64:257
(7) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports, a minimum of four grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide
and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
authorize a lower minimum. For periodic compliance reporting, the
industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(8) Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the
date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(9) All records and information resulting from the monitoring activities
required by the industrial waste discharge permit, any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities undertaken independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with established best management
practices shall be retained by the industrial user for at least five
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course
of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the
Township or when requested by either the Township or the EPA.
C. Baseline monitoring report.
(1) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted
the baseline monitoring information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b),
as from time to time amended, the industrial user shall, within 180
days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, provide this information to the Township.
The report shall include all items required by 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(2) A new source, or an industrial user proposing to discharge wastes
into the sewerage system that is subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, shall submit to the Township the baseline
monitoring report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) at least 90 days
prior to commencement of discharge from the regulated process or
facility.
D. Noncompliance discharge report. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
11-2008]
(1) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of
this article, an applicable pretreatment standard or the industrial
user's industrial waste discharge permit, the industrial user shall
notify the Pretreatment Coordinator and municipality to whose
sewer system the industrial user is connected within 24 hours of
§ 66-44.9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.9
64:258
§ 66-44.10. Monitoring facilities.
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator and to such
municipality within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
(2) Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the Township
performs sampling at the user's between the time when the initial
sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the
Township receives the results of this sampling, or if the Township
has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial
user.
A. When requested by the Township or municipality to whose sewer
system the industry is connected, all industrial users shall provide and
operate, at their own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurements of its industrial waste discharge. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the industrial user's
premises, but the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial
user is connected may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the industrial user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, subject to the
issuance of proper permits for such purpose, and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. The monitoring facility shall be constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Township and the municipality to
whose sewer system the industrial user is connected or is proposing to
connect. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial
user. The facility shall be located as to be accessible at all times to
persons authorized by the Township or such municipality. By obtaining
an industrial waste discharge permit, the industrial user consents to the
entry upon its land and facility and agrees to facilitate such entry by
representatives of the Township and such municipality, and further
consents to the use of the monitoring facility for observation, sampling
and measuring of the wastewater discharge at all times. Construction of
the monitoring facility shall be completed within 120 days following
issuance of the industrial waste discharge permit.
C. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facilities in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
11-2008]
§ 66-44.9 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.11
64:259
§ 66-44.11. Inspection and sampling.
The Township or the municipality to whose sewer system the industrial
user is connected may inspect the facilities of any industrial user. Persons
or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall
allow the Township or its representative, or such municipality or its
representatives, as a condition of the permit issued by the Township
authorizing any discharge to the sewerage system, ready access at all
reasonable times, and in the event of emergency situations posing an
immediate threat to the sewerage system, to all parts of the premises,
buildings and facilities for the purpose of inspection, sampling records
examination and copying, or in the performance of any of their duties.
The Township, such municipality and EPA shall have the right to set up
on the industrial user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where an industrial user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry onto their
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Township, such municipality or EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay.
§ 66-44.12. Pretreatment.
A. Industrial users shall provide necessary pretreatment and flowequalizing
facilities as required to comply with this article and shall
achieve compliance with all applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the
appropriate federal regulations, or as otherwise required by the
Township. Any industrial user required to pretreat or flow-equalize
wastewater to a level in compliance with the provisions of this article
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's sole
expense. Detailed plans and other materials and documents showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the Pretreatment Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer
system the industrial user is connected for review before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall
in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an effluent in compliance with the
provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities, flow-equalizing facilities or method of operation shall be
reported to and be reviewed and commented on by the Township and
such municipality prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes.
B. The industrial user may allow a bypass which does not cause
pretreatment standards to be violated, but only for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. If an industrial user knows in
advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to
the Pretreatment Coordinator and to the municipality to whose sewer
system it is connected at least 10 days before the date of the bypass.
§ 66-44.11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.12
64:260
§ 66-44.13. Hazardous waste discharge.
The industrial user shall give oral notice of an unanticipated bypass
that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Pretreatment
Coordinator and the municipality to whose sewer system it is connected
immediately after an unanticipated bypass incident is brought under
control, but in no event later than four hours from the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written report shall
also be provided to the Pretreatment Coordinator within five working
days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause;
the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and, the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
C. The Township shall annually publish in the daily local newspaper of
largest circulation within the Township's service area a list of industrial
users serviced by the Township which were in significant
noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements during the preceding twelve-month period.
[Amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 20-2004]
D. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements shall be made available to the Township and
the EPA upon request.
E. The Township and the municipality to whose sewer system the
industrial user is connected shall have access to all such pretreatment
facilities and flow-equalizing facilities as required by this article at all
reasonable times for purposes of inspection and testing, and in the
event of an emergency posing a threat to the sewerage system, at any
time.
F. The municipality to whose sewer system an industrial user is connected
shall reimburse the Township within 30 days of receipt of notice from
the Township requiring reimbursement for all of its expenses incurred
as a result of review, monitoring, application processing, sampling or
any other activities conducted by the Township and directly related to
ensuring the industrial user's compliance with the provisions of this
article. The Township shall have the right to collect any unpaid,
delinquent or overdue invoice for such expenses by legal process and,
further, shall have the right to file and enforce a municipal lien against
the industrial user's real property for collection thereof pursuant to the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Law.62 In
its discretion, the Township shall also have the right to suspend any
such user's discharge permit pending full and complete reimbursement
of the Township.
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 66-44.12 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-44.13
64:261
§ 66-44.14. Confidential information.
A. It shall be a violation of this article and the industrial user's discharge
permit for an industrial user to discharge any quantity of waste to the
sewerage system, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Section 261.1 et seq., Subparts A
through D, as from time to time amended. In the event of an accidental
discharge, the industrial user shall provide an immediate written
notification of such discharge, but in no event later than four hours
from the time the user becomes aware of or in the exercise of
reasonable prudence should have become aware of the discharge, to
the Township, to the EPA Region III Waste Management Division
Director and to DEP. Failure to provide such notice shall constitute a
violation of this article.
B. The notification required by Subsection A shall include the name of the
hazardous waste as in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Section 261.1 et seq.,
Subparts A through D, as from time to time amended, the EPA
hazardous waste number, the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other), and a certification under penalties of perjury that the industrial
user has a program in place to reduce to compliance levels the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes illegally discharged to the sewerage
system. If the industrial user's discharge to the sewerage system
constitutes more than 100 kilograms of such waste, the notification
shall also include an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the waste and an estimation of the mass and concentration
of such constituents.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, notifications, monitoring
programs and inspections shall be available to the public or any
governmental agency upon written request unless the industrial user
specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to the
Township's satisfaction that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a written report, those
portions of a report that have been accepted by the Township as
confidential shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies
for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, state disposal system
permits and/or the state or federal pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of any report shall be available for use by
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person or industrial user furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
C. When information accepted by the Township as confidential is
transmitted to any governmental agency by the Township, a written
§ 66-44.13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-44.14
64:262
§ 66-44.15. Measuring volumes of wastewater.
§ 66-45. Enforcement.
Sections 66-45.1 through 66-45.8 set forth enforcement provisions.
§ 66-45.1. Immediate suspension of discharge presenting imminent
danger.
notification to the industrial user shall be provided by the Township
listing the confidential information transmitted and the governmental
entity requesting the information.
A. The flow volume used to determine wastewater flows and surcharges
shall be specified in the industrial waste discharge permit and be based
on:
(1) Direct wastewater metering;
(2) Metered water use; or
(3) Such other method acceptable to the Township.
B. Both the Township and the municipality to whose sewer system the
industry is connected may, in their discretion, require that each
industrial user connected to its sewer system which has been issued an
industrial waste discharge permit install, calibrate, maintain and use
any meter or measuring device specified therein at the industrial user's
own expense. Such municipality shall be responsible for the reading of
all meters or measuring devices. The Township shall have the absolute
right, but not the duty, of reading the meters, from time to time, at its
discretion. The meters and devices shall be made available for meter
reading at any reasonable time, and in the event of an emergency
posing a threat to the sewerage system, at any time.
A. The municipality to whose sewer system the user is connected shall
order the immediate suspension of discharge of wastewater to the
sewer system by any user when so directed by the Township. The
Township may direct such a suspension when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Township, in order to stop or prevent an
actual or threatened discharge which presents an imminent danger of
harm to people, to the sewerage system or to the environment, or
interference ("dangerous discharge").
B. Any industrial user notified of an order to suspend shall comply
therewith immediately. In the event of a failure of the industrial user to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township or
municipality to whose sewer system the industrial user is connected
shall take such steps as it deems necessary to enforce compliance with
the order to effect the suspension of discharge of the industrial user's
wastewater into the sewerage system, including immediate severance
of the industrial user's sewer connection to the Township's or the
§ 66-44.14 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-45.1
64:263
§ 66-45.2. Termination of service.
Any user who violates any provision of this article, any regulation
promulgated by the Township pursuant to this article or any enabling
legislation, any resolution promulgated by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to or related to this article, any applicable state or federal
regulations or an industrial waste discharge permit or any condition thereof
shall be subject, in addition to any civil or criminal penalties which may
be imposed, to severance of its sewer connection to the sewerage system,
termination of its sewage service and revocation of its industrial waste
discharge permit.
§ 66-45.3. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Township or a municipality to whose sewer system an
industrial user is connected finds that the industrial user has violated
or is violating this article, an industrial waste discharge permit or any
prohibition, limitation, condition or requirements contained herein, or has
failed to timely provide the Township with the information needed to
accurately determine compliance with any pretreatment standard or
pretreatment requirement, such municipality or the Township, or both, may
serve upon such person or industrial user who is in violation a written
notice of violation. The notice may require a response in the form of a plan,
explanation, compliance schedule or other appropriate response within
a specified time period. Compliance with any such requirement shall be
mandatory.
municipality's sewer system. The municipality shall permit
reinstatement of the discharge upon proof satisfactory to itself and the
Township of the elimination of the imminent and substantial danger
referred to above. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
report to the Township describing the causes of the actual or
threatened discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence within 15 days of the date of the first such discharge or
threat of discharge. The Township shall have the concurrent right and
power to suspend discharge by such industrial user to its sewerage
system and to enforce the requirements of this subsection.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the Township from
enforcing this article, or any part hereof, or from enjoining and
preventing the discharge of any hazardous waste or any other
discharge deemed unlawful or dangerous to the sewerage system by
any legal process selected by the Township, including but not limited to
an action or actions at law or in equity for injunctive relief and
damages, administrative enforcement proceedings, criminal
enforcement proceedings authorized by any federal or state statute or
law, or through any other authorized legal proceeding. All remedies of
the Township shall be cumulative.
§ 66-45.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-45.4
64:264
§ 66-45.4. Legal action by municipalities.
If any industrial user violates the provisions of this article, Township,
federal or state pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements, its
industrial waste discharge permit, any prohibition, limitation, condition
or requirements contained therein or herein or any order issued by the
Township or other governmental authority having jurisdiction related to the
sewerage system or the sewer service of the Township or the municipality to
whose sewer system the industrial user is connected, either the Township or
such municipality, or both, may commence an action or actions at law or in
equity for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common
Pleas of this county, and may, in addition, take such other enforcement
action as provided for in § 66-45.1 hereof.
§ 66-45.5. Enabling regulations.
As a precondition to the Township's acceptance of sewage effluent
containing industrial wastewater from another municipality, each such
municipality connected to the sewerage system shall, within 90 days after
adoption of this article, enact regulations imposing the discharge
restrictions (and require compliance with industrial waste discharge
permits), charges, reporting and monitoring requirements no less stringent
than those set forth in § 66-43 et seq. and § 66-45 et seq. hereof on all users
within its jurisdiction, and establishing procedures for compliance with
§ 66-45 hereof. Such requirement shall be embodied in a written agreement
between the Township and such municipality. All such regulations so
adopted shall be amended within 60 days, as necessary, to impose the same
standards and requirements as those imposed by the Township through
amendment of this article. Such municipality shall, upon adoption of the
required regulations, give written notice to all commercial and industrial
dischargers connected to the municipality's sewerage system of all of the
regulatory compliance requirements related to industrial waste discharge
permits.
§ 66-45.6. Civil penalty assessment policy for industrial users.
The Township shall adopt a formal, written civil penalty assessment policy
from time to time and make the same available to the public. Industrial
users participating in the pretreatment program (the "pretreatment
program") established under § 66-44 et seq. of this article shall be given
written notice of the policy. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude
the Township or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction from
bringing a criminal action for a violation of this article.
§ 66-45.7. Procedure for assessment of civil penalties against
industrial users.
The Township may establish by resolution adopted by the Board of
Supervisors a recommend schedule of civil penalties which may be imposed
by the Township against any industrial user who violates a provision of
§ 66-45.4 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-45.7
64:265
this article or its industrial waste discharge permit, that is in significant
noncompliance or which fails to respond timely and adequately to any
notice of violation issued by the Township in accordance with the
Township's civil assessment policy. In assessing such penalties, the
Township shall provide the noncomplying industrial user with the
opportunity to show cause why a civil penalty pursuant to § 66-46.3 hereof
should not be assessed. Notice shall be served upon the industrial user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Township's
Board of Supervisors, or a hearing officer designated by the Board for
that purpose. Notice of the hearing shall be served by the Township's
administrative staff upon the industrial user and any other party in interest
at least 10 days before the hearing by regular United States Mail, postage
prepaid.
§ 66-45.8. Injunctions against violations of pretreatment standards.
The Township may seek injunctive relief in a proceeding in equity for
the prevention, abatement or termination of any prohibited discharge to
the sewerage system, for a violation of any pretreatment standard or for
violation of any other provision of this article in any of the following
circumstance. In any such proceeding, the Township may seek to collect
any civil penalties assessed, or unpaid, pursuant to §§ 66-45.7 and 66-46.3
hereof.
A. In furtherance of any such proceeding, the Board or hearing officer, as
the case may be, shall have the following powers:
(1) Issue in the name of the Township notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Issue subpoenas and take the evidence; and
(3) Make findings of fact, conclusions of law and render a decision and
order, which may include the imposition of a civil penalty or such
other order as the Board shall direct.
B. Testimony at the hearing shall be under oath and recorded
stenographically. A transcript shall be made available to any party to
the proceeding upon payment of the charges therefor. All other
administrative costs of the proceedings, including but not limited to
stenographer attendance fees, advertising, postage and notices and
similar costs, shall be paid for by the user, who shall deposit with its
request for hearing a deposit escrow fee of $1,000 from which the
administrative fees shall be paid. Any balance remaining after payment
of all such costs shall be returned to the user requesting the hearing.
A. A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent danger of
substantial harm to the sewerage system, Township personnel, the
environment or the public or imperils or results or may result in a
§ 66-45.7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-45.8
64:266
§ 66-46. Violations and penalties.
Sections 66-46.1 through 66-46.4 set forth penalty provisions.
§ 66-46.1. Fines to be established by Township and by
municipalities.
As a precondition to the Township's acceptance of sewage effluent
containing industrial wastewater from another municipality, each
municipality that discharges or is connected to the sewerage system shall,
within 90 days of the adoption of this article, enact an ordinance which
provides that any industrial user who is found to have violated the
ordinance specified by § 66-45.5 hereof shall be liable to a fine of up
to $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and the municipality's
reasonable attorney's fees, for each offense in a criminal enforcement
proceeding commenced before a District Justice. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. Such requirement shall be embodied in a written agreement
between the Township and such municipality. In addition to all other
remedies and penalties provided for in this article, the Township may
commence and prosecute an enforcement action before any District Justice
for a violation of this article as provided for in this section wherein the
violator shall be subject to the fine, costs and fees provided for herein;
provided, however, that should any violation of this article constitute a
violation of the Sewage Facilities Act,63 a District Justice shall be authorized
to impose a fine of up to $5,000, together with the costs of prosecution and
the municipality's reasonable attorney's fees, for each such offense.
§ 66-46.2. Action to enforce municipalities' ordinances applicable
to any user.
Each municipality shall at the direction of the Township take any action
permitted by law or in equity to enforce any ordinance enacted pursuant to
§ 66-45.5 or 66-46.1 of this article.
violation of any federal or state permits held by the Township relating
to the use, operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.
B. A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the environment.
C. A discharge from an industrial user causes the Sewer Authority to
violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
D. An industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention to comply with
a pretreatment standard.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 66-45.8 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-46.3
64:267
§ 66-46.3. Civil penalties for violations by industrial users.
To the extent that any provisions of this article are enabled by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965)
1535, as amended,64 any industrial user who violates any substantive or
procedural provision of § 66-44 et seq. hereof or any term or condition of
any industrial waste discharge permit may, in addition to all other civil and
criminal penalties authorized by this article, be assessed a civil penalty of
up to $2,500 for each such violation, as is determined by the Township
depending upon the severity of the violation, pursuant to the procedures
and standards set forth in Section 13.1 of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S.
§ 750.13a and 13b(b). In addition, the Township may assess against and
collect from such violator the cost of damages caused by such violation
and the cost of correcting the violation. Each violation for each separate
day shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a single operational upset which gives rise to simultaneous
violations shall be treated as a single violation.
§ 66-46.4. Uses of civil penalties collected by Township.
Civil penalties collected pursuant to § 66-46.3 hereof shall be placed in a
restricted account and shall only be used for the repair of damage and
any additional maintenance needed or any additional costs imposed as
a result of the violation for which the penalty was imposed, to pay any
penalties imposed upon the Township by the federal or state governments
for violation of pretreatment standards, for the costs incurred by the
Township to investigate and take enforcement action that resulted in a
penalty being imposed and for the monitoring of discharges in a
pretreatment program. Funds remaining in the restricted account after the
foregoing uses have been met may be used for capital improvements to the
Township's sewerage system.
64.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 66-46.3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-46.4
64:268
ARTICLE VI
Sewage Management Program for On-Lot Systems
[Adopted 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 9-1998]
§ 66-47. Short title; legislative authority; purpose.
§ 66-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABSORPTION AREA — A component of an individual or community sewage
system where liquid from a septic tank seeps into the soil; it consists of an
aggregate-filled area containing piping for the distribution of liquid in the
soil or sand/soil combination located beneath the aggregate.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Township Codes Enforcement Officer, a
sewage enforcement officer, employee of the Township, professional
engineer, plumbing inspector or any other qualified or licensed person who
is authorized to function within specified limits as an agent of West Goshen
Township to administer or enforce the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township, Chester
County, Pennsylvania.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as an "Ordinance
Providing for a Sewage Management Program for West Goshen
Township."
B. Pursuant to Section 1522 of the Second Class Township Code (Act of
May 1, 1933 P.L. 103 No. 69, as amended through Act 60-1995),65 the
Clean Streams Law (Act of June 27,1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, as
amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as "Act 537"), specifically Title 25, Chapter 71,
Section 71.71, it is the power and the duty of West Goshen Township to
provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection
of the public health by prohibiting the discharge of untreated or
inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
West Goshen Township states that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and
abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
permit intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
65.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 66522.
§ 66-47 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-48
64:269
COMMUNITY ON-LOT DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (COLDS) — Any system,
whether publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage of a liquid
nature from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal of the
sewage on one or more of the lots or at any other location for final disposal
in whole or in part into the soil. This includes land application by spray
irrigation.
LOT — A parcel of land, the land area of which is contiguous and undivided
by a street and which conforms to the provisions of Chapter 84, Zoning,
and Chapter 72, Subdivision of Land, of the code of the Township of West
Goshen and any other Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and
maps; or any other parcel or tract of land whether or not improved.
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into
groundwaters of this commonwealth or into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into a building connected to the system or in
any manner causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or pollution
of ground or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any
condition noted above occurs for any length of time during any period of the
year.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, treatment tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting, treating and disposing of
sewage into a subsurface absorption area or spray irrigation system.
OWNER — An individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not-for-profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the United States or commonwealth, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority or other legal entity which is
recognized by the law as the subject of rights and duties, being the title
owner of property in West Goshen Township. The term includes members
of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of a local agency or
municipal, public or private corporation, for profit or not-for-profit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
RETAINING TANK (also called a "holding tank") — A watertight receptacle
which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to hold
sewage pending the ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394) known as the "Clean Streams Law," as
amended.66
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Chester County Health
Department.
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 66-48 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-48
64:270
TOWNSHIP — West Goshen Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TREATMENT TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge
of sewage from a house or building sewer line and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of settleable solids from the liquid
digestion of the organic matter by detention and discharge of the liquid
portion into a distribution system or pit for underground dispersion or
elevated sand mound, individual spray irrigation. Treatment tanks include
septic tanks, cesspools, aerobic units and the like.
§ 66-49. Scope; applicability.
§ 66-50. Inspection.
A. The requirements of this article shall be effective throughout the
municipal limits of West Goshen Township, Chester County.
B. Applicability.
(1) The operation, maintenance and repair of an individual,
commercial or community on-lot sewage system shall be the
responsibility of the property owner; provided however, that
maintenance and repair shall be subject to the continuing
surveillance and inspection by the Township, its authorized agent
and/or the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner which utilizes an
on-lot sewage disposal system to have it pumped in accordance
with the schedule set forth in § 66-51 of this article and to make
such other repairs or replacements as are necessary to prevent the
malfunctioning of the system.
(3) The construction, repair and/or replacement of an individual,
commercial or community on-lot disposal system shall be subject to
the issuance of appropriate permits by the Chester County Health
Department and/or PADEP.
A. All on-lot systems, COLDS and small flow treatment facilities shall be
subject to periodic inspections and shall be subject to inspection at any
time if one or more of the following events occurs:
(1) During the installation of any individual, commercial or community
on-lot sewage system or small flow treatment facilities.
(2) If the licensed septic tank contractor performing his regular
pumpout schedule contacts the Township or Chester County Health
Department that a serious malfunction condition exits at an on-lot
system or small flow treatment facility.
(3) If the owner or a neighboring property owner of a facility contacts
the Township, PADEP or the Chester County Health Department.
§ 66-48 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-50
64:271
§ 66-51. On-lot/COLDS maintenance.
(4) If the owner fails to submit the proof of pumping within 90 days
after the date on which pumping is required as specified in § 66-51.
(5) For a small flow treatment facility, in addition to the above, if
periodic reports submitted to the Township or PADEP indicate that
the facility effluent is not achieving its minimum requirements.
B. Items to be inspected for on-lot systems:
(1) Baffle condition.
(2) Extensions (riser rings).
(3) Inspection ports.
(4) High water level in tank.
(5) Wet areas near system or site.
(6) Noticeable odors.
(7) Sewer backup into house.
(8) Abundant grass growth near system or site.
(9) Backflow of water from absorption area to tank.
C. For the small flow treatment facility, the following inspections should be
made in addition to any of the applicable items under Subsection B.
(1) Evidence that the system is operating in accordance with the
design.
(2) Test for alternating of blowers and other operating parts.
(3) Inspect outfall line, if any, for evidence of recent discharge and no
clogs in the outfall line.
(4) Inspect discharge effluent for clarity and sampling if deemed
appropriate.
A. Treatment tank systems. The owner of a lot which uses a treatment tank
system must have the tank(s) pumped and the contents disposed of at a
licensed sewage disposal facility at least once every three years by a
Chester County Health Department licensed septic tank contractor.
Every owner of a treatment tank system existing on any lot on the
effective date of this article shall submit proof of the required pumping
and disposal to the Township's Code Enforcement Officer not later than
July 1, 1998, in the form of a receipted bill issued by the contractor or
such other proof as shall be acceptable to said officer. If a system has
been pumped within 12 months of the July 1, 1998, deadline, proof of
such pumping shall be submitted to the Township's Code Enforcement
Officer. That system will then fall into the next scheduled pumping time.
§ 66-50 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-51
64:272
Thereafter, such proof shall be submitted to the Codes Enforcement
Officer demonstrating pumping and disposal of the system's contents
within the preceding twelve-month period at least once every three
years. The owner of a system installed after the effective date of this
article shall henceforth pump his system in accordance with schedule
determined by the Township.
B. Retaining tanks. The owner of a lot utilizing a retaining tank(s) or a
sewage treatment system designed or operated as a retaining tank on
the effective date of this article shall enter into a written contract with a
Chester County Health Department licensed septic tank contractor
requiring periodic pumping and disposal of the tank's contents in
accordance with the schedule required by the permit which authorized
the installation and use of the retaining tank system. A copy of the
contract shall be filed by the owner with the Codes Enforcement Officer
by July 1, 1998, and annually thereafter and shall be in effect and valid
for a period of at least one year. The owner of a system installed after
the effective date of this article shall submit the required contract to the
Codes Enforcement Officer within one year of the installation and
annually thereafter.
C. Stream discharge systems. The owner of a lot on which a stream
discharge sewerage system approved and permitted by the PADEP has
been installed shall register the system with the Township within 90
days following the effective date of this article by filing a copy of the
current PADEP permit, together with any other information required by
the Codes Enforcement Officer to verify the current validity of the
permit and copies of any tests verifying the system's operational
integrity performed during the 12 months immediately preceding the
registration. The owner of a system installed after the effective date of
this article shall register the system with the Township within 90 days
of such installation. The Codes Enforcement Officer or other authorized
agent shall arrange for period inspections as required.
D. Community on-lot disposal systems (COLDS). The operator(s) of any
COLDS permitted for flows over 2,500 gallons per day shall submit
regular reports to the Township. Reports shall be in the PADEP format
for municipal waste load management and discharge monitoring
reports. Reports are to be submitted to the Township at least as often
and at the same time as they are to be submitted to PADEP.
E. Compliance. Failure to comply with the provisions of Subsections A
through D of this § 66-50 or to correct any defect determined during an
inspection conducted pursuant to § 66-50 hereof within the time
specified for by the Enforcement Officer/Agency shall constitute a
violation of this article, subjecting the owner of the property on which
the system is installed to the enforcement and penalty provisions of
§§ 66-53 and 66-54 of this article.
F. Change of ownership. Prior to the conveyance of any lot which is
subject to the provisions of this article, the sewage system installed on
§ 66-51 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-51
64:273
§ 66-52. System rehabilitation.
When the Township becomes aware of a violation(s) of this article,
regulations promulgated by the Township hereunder or County Health
Department regulations, it shall report such violation(s) to the Chester
County Health Department and/or PADEP. All facilities provided for in this
article shall be subject to the applicable rules and regulations of Chester
County Health Department and/or PADEP.
§ 66-53. Enforcement; appeals.
§ 66-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply
with any of its provisions or regulations promulgated hereunder or who
fails or refuses to comply with any lawful notice, order or direction of
such lot shall be pumped and its contents disposed of as required by
this section, unless the owner has filed with the Township a receipt
issued by a licensed septic tank contractor proving that the system
was pumped out within the immediately preceding six-month period.
Following any conveyance of the lot, the owner shall be subject to the
provisions of this article.
G. Promulgation of regulations and required proof. In addition to the
requirements specified in this section, the Board may, by resolution,
promulgate such forms and regulations for the administration and
enforcement of this article as it shall determine necessary. Failure of a
lot owner to receive or secure any required form shall not constitute a
defense to the enforcement or penalty provisions of this article.
A. The Township's Codes Enforcement Officer shall have the power and
authority to determine all issues relating to compliance with the
provisions of this article and to bring and prosecute in the name of the
Township enforcement and penalty proceedings for violations of its
provisions.
B. Appeals from the Codes Enforcement Officer's determinations or
interpretations of the provisions of this article shall be taken to the
Board within 30 days from the date of such determination or
interpretation. Appeals shall be heard and determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Agency Law.67 The Board may request
documentation and consult with the Township Engineer or other
competent authorities as it determines necessary for a just resolution of
the appeal and may impose the reasonable costs thereof upon the
appellant; provided, however, that the Board shall have no jurisdiction
to hear or determine any appeal from the action of the Codes
Enforcement Officer in prosecuting a violation of this article in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice.
67.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
§ 66-51 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-54
64:274
the Codes Enforcement Officer or authorized agent issued pursuant to this
article shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction by a
District Justice, shall pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default in payment of the
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the county prison for a
term not exceeding 30 days. Each day during which any violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine
or imprisonment.
§ 66-55. Fee schedule.
The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, adopt a fee schedule for the
administration of this article. Said schedule shall be kept on file by the
Township Secretary and shall be reviewed and revised as necessary.
§ 66-56. Construal of provisions.
A. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
B. When the provisions of this article are more restrictive than other
ordinances or regulations of this Township, this article shall apply; but
in any case, the most rigid requirements of the applicable ordinances or
codes shall apply whenever they may be in conflict.
§ 66-54 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY § 66-56
64:275
Chapter 68
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 66-56 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 66-56
68:276
ARTICLE I
Private Roads
[Adopted 11-22-1977 by Ord. No. 10-1977]
§ 68-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words shall, for the
purposes of this article, have the following meanings:
OWNER — Any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal
entity, including singular and plural, male and female, owning any private
road; and, in the case of a land subdivision or land development containing
undedicated private roads granted approval by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to the West Goshen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,68 the developer thereof.
PRIVATE ROAD — A strip of land, be it a street, alley or right-of-way,
paved or unpaved, but limited to the cartway thereof, and intended for
general public use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to
provide access to two or more dwelling units, office units, commercial
units, industrial units or any combination thereof. The term includes any
thoroughfare intended for public use.
§ 68-2. Removal of snow and ice required.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be the duty of
the owner of any private road that connects two or more dwelling units,
two or more office units, two or more commercial units, two or more
industrial units or any combination thereof to commence removal of, at his
expense, snow or ice from such private road, by snowplowing, snowblowing,
cindering or salting, within a period of two hours after the commencement
of any fall of snow or accumulation of ice.
§ 68-3. Continued maintenance and standards.
Following initial removal of such snow or ice as required by § 68-2 hereof,
it shall be the duty of such owner, during any period of continued snowfall
or ice accumulation, to continue to plow, cinder and salt such private
road and to maintain such private road in at least the same condition
as township roads are maintained during such periods. Specifications for
township road maintenance during periods of snow and ice accumulation
shall be maintained by and be available from the office of the Township
Manager during regular business hours or, in the event of emergency
conditions, at any other time from the Township Police Department.
§ 68-4. Notice to remove; registration requirements.
In the event of snow accumulation in excess of one inch or such ice
accumulation as, in the opinion of the West Goshen Township Police
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 68-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 68-4
68:277
Department, causes hazardous driving conditions, and noncompliance by
the owner of any private road with §§ 68-2 and 68-3 of this article, the Police
Department shall notify the owner to remove such snow or ice accumulation
as herein required. In conjunction with such notification, it shall be the
responsibility of all owners of private roads in West Goshen Township to
register with the West Goshen Police Department the name, address and
telephone number of such owner or his agent to whom notification is to
be given by the Police Department pursuant to this section. Thereafter,
telephonic notification or the bona fide attempt thereat by the Police
Department shall constitute sufficient notice for the purposes of this article.
§ 68-5. Declaration of nuisance.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for the
owner of any private road affected by the provisions of this article to
permit the accumulation of snow and/or ice in violation hereof, and all such
accumulation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the township, and such
nuisance may be abated as provided in § 68-6 hereof.
§ 68-6. Failure to remove; work by township; costs.
In the event that the owner of any private road within the provisions of
this article fails, after notice pursuant to § 68-4 hereof, to comply with the
provisions of §§ 68-2 and 68-3 hereof, the township may, at its own option,
plow, cinder and/or salt such private roads in such fashion as the township
shall deem necessary. Such action by the township shall not relieve the
owner of penalties for violation of this article. The township may, thereafter,
by proper accounting means, compute the cost of such corrective action on
its part and either file a lien against the property from which the nuisance
was removed or by which it is caused or proceed by civil suit against such
owner for collection of such cost.
§ 68-7. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 68-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 68-7
68:278
Chapter 69
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 71.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 69-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate modification of natural terrain
and the alteration of drainage by providing for runoff, erosion and sediment
control measures and maintenance of artificial structures and surfaces
within West Goshen Township to assure, protect and safeguard the health,
safety and general welfare. It implements Title 25, Rules and Regulations,
Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water
Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, as the same may from time to
time be supplemented and amended.
§ 69-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "West Goshen Township Soil
Erosion, Sedimentation and Grading Control Ordinance."
§ 69-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPROVED FORESTER — A member in good standing of the Association
of Consulting Foresters or an individual who has obtained a bachelor of
science degree in forestry from a forestry program accredited by the
Society of American Foresters.[Added 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
BASAL AREA — The cross-sectional trunk area of a tree at a height of 4 1/2
feet above ground level.[Added 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
BEDROCK — The solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground
surface or beneath surface soil deposits.
BORROW PIT — An open pit from which soil is excavated as a single
incident for use at a single construction site.
BREAST HEIGHT — A height 4 1/2 feet above ground level.[Added
3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
DESIGN STORM — A storm with a one-hundred-year frequency.
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision or land development or any alteration
of land not for agricultural or conservation purposes which includes
earthmoving, filling or stripping on a tract of one or more acres, including
§ 68-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-3
68:279
but not limited to road construction, utility installation, public, commercial
or industrial facility construction, mining and quarrying and water resource
management.
EARTHMOVING — Any activity by which soil or bedrock is cut into,
quarried, displaced or relocated, including, but not limited to, construction,
mining, timber harvesting and grubbing. Also called "earth
disturbance."[Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
EROSION — The process by which soil and bedrock are worn away by the
action of wind, water, climate and other natural elements.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to
earthmoving or filling.
FILL — A deposit of soil or other materials placed by man.
FINISHED GRADE — The final vertical elevation of the ground after
development.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan which shall set
forth the objectives, scope and manner of the contemplated tree harvesting
operation, the anticipated short- and long-term effects of the harvesting
operation on the quantity and composition of the vegetation, including
trees, in the area of the tree harvesting operation and such other
information as may be required pursuant to § 69-6.[Added 3-24-1987 by
Ord. No. 3-1987]
GRADING PERMIT — The permit required to be issued prior to the
disturbance of the topography and vegetation of land in connection with the
conduct of activities regulated by this chapter.
INTERIOR AREAS — Those areas on a property which are more than 50 feet
distant from all of the boundary lines of a lot.[Added 3-24-1987 by Ord.
No. 3-1987]
LOT — Any tract or parcel of land.[Added 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any earthmoving, filling or stripping.
OPEN PIT MINING — The continuing or recurring removal of material from
below the ground surface by open excavation.
PERMIT — A grading permit.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation or agency within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any combination thereof.
SEDIMENT — Earth and rock in suspension in water or settled out of water
as a deposit on land or on beds of bodies of water.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which sediment is deposited.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels
of land under single and separate ownership where earthmoving, filling or
stripping is, was or will be performed.
§ 69-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-3
68:280
SOIL — All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan of a system of
coordinated devices to prevent the dislocation in transportation of the soil
during periods of earthmoving, development or stripping.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling water runoff
so that it will not cause erosion or flooding and for minimizing the effects of
impervious areas on water runoff.
STRIPPING — The removal of the natural ground surface, including
vegetation and/or topsoil.
TOPOGRAPHY — The physical features of a site, place or region.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Goshen.
TREE HARVESTING OPERATION — The uprooting or removal of trees
for the purpose of allowing or encouraging the natural regeneration or
preservation of a tree stand on a lot which has a gross area, prior to any
subdivision or land development, of more than three acres. This term shall
not include the removal of up to four trees per acre from any lot.[Added
3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
VEGETATION — The plants located on a site or in an area or region.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial swale, stream, channel, drain or
culvert in which water flows continuously or intermittently. Such term shall
include, but not be limited to, a channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run and
stream.[Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
§ 69-4. Activities requiring permit.
The regulations established in this section shall apply to any person
engaged in activities which disturb the topography and vegetation of land:
A. It is unlawful for any person to do any site work in conjunction with
development, including but not limited to stripping, grading,
earthmoving, filling and establishment of open pit mines or borrow pits,
for any purpose without first securing a grading permit.
B. It is unlawful for any person to pave, fill, strip or change the existing
grade of any land without first securing a grading permit.
C. It is unlawful for any person to disturb, modify, block, divert or affect
the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater without first
securing a grading permit.
D. It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect or install any dam,
ditch, culvert, drainpipe, bridge or other structure or obstruction
affecting the drainage of any premises without first securing a grading
permit.
E. It is unlawful for any person to engage in any forestry or tree harvesting
operation on a lot without first submitting a forest management plan
§ 69-3 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-4
68:281
§ 69-5. Activities not requiring a permit.
No permit shall be required in the following instances:
§ 69-6. Forest management plans. [Added 3-24-1987 by Ord. No.
3-198769]
and securing a grading permit. [Added 6-11-1985 by Ord. No.
8-1985; amended 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987; 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
F. It is unlawful for any person to harvest, clear away or remove any living
tree having a caliper of four inches or greater at breast height without
first securing a permit. No permit shall be approved for such purpose,
except as authorized by the Township Building Inspector pursuant to
§ 69-7 of this chapter. However, no permit shall be required when none
of the activities described in Subsections A, B, C, D and E of this section
are involved and: [Added 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
(1) The concerned lot has a gross area prior to any subdivision or land
development of three acres or less; or
(2) For the annual removal of up to four trees per acre on any lot.
A. Any activity for which a grading permit or equivalent must be obtained
from any agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Normal agricultural operations.
C. Any developed residential lot where the following conditions are met:
(1) The aggregate area to be stripped does not exceed 5,000 square
feet.
(2) The grade change does not exceed six inches.
(3) All bare earth is promptly seeded, sodded or otherwise effectively
protected from erosion.
(4) The earthmoving does not involve a quantity of material in excess
of 100 cubic yards.
D. Earthmoving incident to construction of individual wells and sewage
disposal systems.
A. To be approved, a forest management plan must be submitted to the
Township Building Inspector not less than 10 nor more than 90 days
prior to the commencement of the planned tree harvesting operation,
and such plan shall include the following elements:
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 69-6 through 69-14 and §§ 69-7
through 69-15, respectively.
§ 69-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-6
68:282
(1) An identification of the concerned lot, all of the legal owners of the
lot, the mailing address(s) of the owners and phone number(s) at
which they can be reached during normal business hours.
(2) A drawing of the lot identifying significant topographical features,
streams, vegetation, etc., and identifying those portions of the lot
to be the subject of the tree harvesting operation.
(3) A description, submitted by an approved forester, of the planned
tree harvesting operation as well as a description of the planned
replanting of the lot. Where no replanting is planned, a statement
from the approved forester describing the reasons why, in his
opinion, the characteristics of the lot and vegetation situate
thereon make natural regeneration appropriate or why such
replanting is not otherwise necessary.
(4) An analysis by the approved forester of the soil erosion likely to
occur as a result of the planned tree harvesting operation and
recommended counter-erosion measures.
(5) A description of the counter-erosion measures that will be utilized
by the lot owners.
B. The following restrictions and conditions shall apply to any approved
forest management plan:
(1) All holes created in the course of any tree harvesting operation
shall be filled to grade with soil.
(2) The total number of trees harvested over any three-year period may
not exceed 65% of the total basal area per acre in interior areas
other than those described in Subsection B(3) of this section.
(3) In areas within 50 feet of lot boundaries, the total number of trees
harvested over any three-year period may not exceed 40% of the
total basal area per acre in such area. Moreover, harvesting in
these boundary areas may not be undertaken in such a manner as
to concentrate most or all of the tree harvesting in portions of such
boundary areas, if the result thereof would be the harvesting of
more than 40% of the trees in such portions.
C. Township approval may not be unreasonably withheld for any forest
management plan which meets all of the above requirements. However,
the Township may impose such additional requirements as it may
reasonably deem to be necessary to ensure compliance with the
purposes of this chapter and the provisions of the Township Zoning
Ordinance70 establishing buffer zones and screening requirements.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 69-6 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-6
68:283
§ 69-7. Permit application procedure.
D. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to and not a
substitute for the requirements of § 69-7 of this chapter or any other
requirements imposed by law or ordinance.
A. Any person proposing to engage in any activity requiring a permit
hereunder shall apply for a grading permit by written application on a
form available from the Township. Such permit shall require the
applicant's agreement to comply with the regulations established in
§ 69-9 hereof upon the permit's issuance. Failure of the applicant to
abide by such regulations shall be a violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The application for permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the
property showing as a minimum:
(1) An area plan delineating the property's boundaries as well as the
specific areas of the site on which the work is to be performed and
describing existing and proposed features of the property and the
area surrounding the site of the work, including topography,
existing vegetation, watercourses, man-made features, the affected
watersheds and other natural features.
(2) A topographical survey of the site depicting topographic features,
both existing and proposed, at a suitable scale of no less than one
inch equals 50 feet and contour intervals of no more than two feet,
prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer, including
a boundary line survey, the location and description of vegetative
cover, soil types and other pertinent existing natural or man-made
features.
(3) An improvements plan at the same scale as the topographical
survey showing and describing all changes to the site, including
cuts, fills, structures, paving and utilities.
(4) A soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(5) A stormwater management plan.
(6) A time schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates of the development sequence, the expected date of
completion of construction of each protective measure provided for
in the soil erosion and sediment control plan and the stormwater
management plan and the time of exposure of each area prior to
completion of such measures.
(7) When the area of the site to be disturbed exceeds one acre or when
smaller sites are environmentally sensitive because of the presence
of watercourses or unusual drainage conditions the soil erosion and
sediment control plan and the stormwater management plan,
including permanent stormwater management devices, features
§ 69-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-7
68:284
and facilities, shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, agronomist or other professional qualified in hydrology.
Supporting data and engineering calculations shall be submitted
with these plans. The minimum design criteria shall be as follows:
(a) Peak rate of discharge at any time may not exceed the existing
peak (predevelopment) rate of discharge.
(b) The United States Soil Conservation Service soil-cover
complex method for determining the rate and quantity of water
runoff shall be used. If the applicant can demonstrate the
inappropriateness of such method, calculations may be based
upon other generally accepted and applicable engineering
methods when approved by the Township Engineer. The design
criteria for storm sewer piping, inlet systems, retention basins,
spillways, culverts, swales and all related facilities shall be
those published by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. The coefficient of
runoff use for all areas upstream of any drainage structure
shall be computed on the basis of the land use permitted by the
Township's Zoning Ordinance.71
(c) Storage requirements for water and sediment during
construction shall be based on a one-hundred-year twentyfour-
hour storm frequency, which is 7.2 inches of rainfall
within a twenty-four-hour period.
(d) Water storage for permanent stormwater management shall be
based on a one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm
frequency, which is 7.2 inches of rainfall within a twenty-fourhour
period.
(e) All drainage facilities shall be designed in the most practicable
fashion to control surface water runoff in such manner as to
prevent erosion and flooding. Such facilities shall be designed
to retard the rate of stormwater runoff to approximately the
same rate as that existing prior to construction.
(f) No slopes deeper than two horizontal to one vertical shall be
permitted. Slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical
shall be peg-sodded or seeded and covered with jute matting or
similar material. Natural or existing slopes exceeding five
horizontal to one vertical shall be benched or continuously
stepped into competent materials, as determined by the
Township Engineer, prior to placing all classes of fill.
(g) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal
to one vertical shall not be made unless approved by the
Township Engineer after receipt of a report by a registered
professional engineer, qualified in soils analysis, certifying that
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 69-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-7
68:285
he has investigated the property, made soil tests and that,
in his opinion, such steeper slopes will safely support the
proposed fill.
(h) All graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded and/or planted or
otherwise protected from erosion as soon as practicable and
shall be watered, tended and maintained until growth is well
established at the time of completion and final inspection. The
disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(i) If load-bearing fill is proposed, a soils investigation report shall
be submitted which shall consist of test borings, laboratory
testing and engineering analysis to correlate surface and
subsurface conditions with the proposed grading plan. The
report shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and
supporting ability of existing soils and rocks on the site,
conclusions and recommendations to ensure stable soil
conditions and groundwater control, as applicable. The
Township may require such supplemental reports and data as
are deemed necessary by the Township Engineer.
(j) The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be in accordance with
guidelines as may be established from time to time by the Soil
Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
(k) All trees threatened by a grade change shall be protected with
suitable tree wells or mounds unless removed. However,
extreme precaution shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary
removal of trees.
(l) If requested by the Township, the applicant shall agree to the
granting and recording of easements for drainage facilities and
for easements for the maintenance of swales and for access
easements to provide for the maintenance of water
management facilities.
C. The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to rather than in
substitution of those provisions of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance72 relating to storm and surface drainage and
stormwater management, grading and erosion control and stormwater
management criteria. The Township Engineer may, in his discretion,
authorize variances from strict adherence to the permit application
provisions of this chapter when a subdivision or land development
application is being reviewed by the Township under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance and when, in such review procedure,
the Township Engineer determines that the data required to be
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 69-7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-7
68:286
§ 69-8. Inspection and permit fees and permit approval.
submitted in an application for a permit hereunder has been included
in the subdivision or land development plans and such plans are
supported by documentation in substantial compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. In such cases, the subdivider or land
developer shall not be obligated to make application for a permit
hereunder.
D. A separate application shall be required for each grading permit. Three
copies of all plan documents referred to in this section shall be
submitted with each application, one of which, at the discretion of the
Township Engineer, shall be submitted to the Chester County
Conservation District for review and comment.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall by resolution establish a schedule of fees
and a collection procedure for all permit applications. The required fee
shall be submitted with the application which shall not be considered
for approval until the application fee is paid.
B. The Township's consulting engineer shall review the applicant's permit
application, together with all plans, surveys, schedules, design criteria
and other documents submitted or required to be submitted as part of
the permit application procedure, together with any and all
amendments thereto, and shall prepare a report of his findings and
recommendations with respect to same for the Township as he shall
determine necessary, and prior to the issuance of any permit or permits.
In addition, the Township Engineer shall perform all inspections of the
work in progress and as completed. The cost of all such plan review and
inspections shall be paid for by the applicant, and the Board of
Supervisors may, from time to time, establish by resolution a schedule
of fees and a collection procedure for all applications; provided,
however, that such schedule of fees shall not be necessary if otherwise
provided for.
C. The Township Solicitor shall review such portion of the plans and
documents submitted with the application or submitted in conjunction
with the application as the Township shall require and shall prepare
such additional documentation, including reports, agreements,
easements or other legal documents necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. The cost of all such plan review and
document preparation shall be paid for by the applicant in accordance
with the procedure established in Subsection D of this section.
D. To ensure payment of all review and inspection fees, at the time of
application, the applicant shall deposit with the Township a sum
sufficient to cover the costs of such plan review, together with the cost
of three inspections by the Township Engineer unless he determines
that fewer inspections will be required. The Board of Supervisors may
establish a schedule of necessary deposits in conjunction with any
application. Payments for the cost of all plan reviews and inspections
§ 69-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-8
68:287
§ 69-9. Regulations.
over the amount on deposit at any time shall be made by the applicant
within 30 days of billing by the Township.
E. The cost of all plan reviews and inspections made by either the
Township Engineer or the Township Solicitor shall be at the rate
regularly billed to the Township by such Engineer or Solicitor.
F. If the applicant has paid a fee under any other Township ordinance
which is applicable to the requirements of this chapter, such as the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the Township may waive
any and all of the fees under this chapter as it determines to be
equitable.
G. The Township Engineer shall approve and issue all permits in letter
form, and no work shall commence without the issuance of such
approval.
A. The permittee is responsible for any property damage or personal
injury caused by his activity authorized by the permit.
B. No person shall modify, fill, excavate, pave or regrade land in any
manner as to endanger or damage public or private property or to
cause physical damage or personal injury. All precautions will be taken
to prevent any damage to adjoining streets, sidewalks, buildings and
other structures which could be caused by settling, cracking, erosion or
sediment.
C. No person shall fail to adequately maintain in good operating order any
drainage facility on his premises. All watercourses, drainage ditches,
culverts, drainpipes and drainage structures shall be kept open and
free-flowing at all times.
D. No person shall deposit or place any debris or other material in any
watercourse, drainage ditch or structure in such a manner as to
obstruct free flow.
E. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant
to a permit granted under this chapter shall continuously maintain and
repair all graded surfaces and antierosion devices, such as retaining
walls, drainage structures or means, plantings and ground cover
installed or completed. This obligation shall apply not only to the permit
holder but also to his successors in title to the property.
F. All finish graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded, planted or otherwise
protected from erosion immediately upon completion of the grading
operation and shall be watered, tended and maintained until growth is
well established. The disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be
kept to a practical minimum.
§ 69-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-9
68:288
G. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of trees
and to assure their protection by suitable tree wells, as determined by
the Township Engineer.
H. When required, adequate provision shall be made for dust-control
measures as determined by the Township Engineer.
I. The installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control
measures shall be accomplished in accordance with standards and
specifications established by the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation District, except as otherwise required by
this chapter or other applicable Township ordinance.
J. Wherever load-bearing fill material is to be used, each layer of
compacted fill shall be tested to determine its dry density per ASTM D
1556. The density of each layer shall not be less than 95% of maximum
dry density as determined by ASTM D 1557.
K. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the general
procedure outlined in § 69-10.
L. Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be subject
to review at all times by the Township Inspector.
M. Major modifications of the approved application and plans shall be
submitted to the Township and reprocessed in the same manner as the
original application and plans. Field modifications of a minor nature
may be authorized by the Township Inspector, provided that written
authorization is given to the person performing work pursuant to this
chapter, with a copy forwarded to the Soil and Water Conservation
District.
N. Trees. [Added 6-11-1985 by Ord. No. 8-1985]
(1) No living tree having a caliper of four inches or greater at breast
height shall be harvested, cleared or removed unless and until a
permit has been issued pursuant to § 69-7 of this chapter. The
Township Building Inspector shall not approve a permit which
results in substantially increased runoff or which shall otherwise
impair the environmental integrity of the land for which the permit
is sought or adjacent properties affected thereby. [Amended
3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 3-1987]
(2) During grading and construction activities on the site for which a
permit has been issued, the permit holder and all persons working
on the site shall exercise care to prevent damage to trees which are
to remain. The following procedures shall be mandatory, and failure
to follow them shall subject the violator to the penalty provisions of
§ 69-15 of this chapter:
(a) Where existing ground levels are changed, drainage tile shall
be placed at the old soil level and shall open into a well built
§ 69-9 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-9
68:289
§ 69-10. Inspections.
around the base of the tree. Such well may be left open or, if
the tree will not be injured or damaged thereby, can be filled
with pour stones or gravel. Tiles may either be installed in a
radiating pattern or laid in parallel lines.
(b) Trees within 25 feet of a building or structure site or bordering
entrances or exits to building or structure sites shall be
protected by wiring wooden slats around such trees. For
purposes of this chapter, the terms "building" and "structure"
shall be as defined in § 84-8 of Chapter 84 hereof.
(c) No boards or other materials shall be nailed to trees during
construction, grading or tree removal activities.
(d) Heavy-equipment operators shall be warned to avoid damaging
existing tree trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut
closer than 25 feet from tree trunks.
(e) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction
shall be protected from further damage by being treated
immediately with tree paint or comparable protective covering.
(f) Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be sawed flush
to tree trunks and immediately treated with tree paint or
comparable covering.
(g) Both deciduous and nondeciduous trees disturbed or affected
by development or any activity proscribed by § 69-4E shall be
given application or applications of fertilizer, as recommended
by the manufacturer of the fertilizer, to aid in their recovery
from possible damage by grading and construction activities.
(h) Construction debris shall not be disposed of near or around the
bases of trees.
(i) Where removal of trees has been approved as a consequence of
required construction activities, the permittee shall be
required to replace at least 50% of such removed trees with a
mixture of deciduous and nondeciduous trees having a
minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches at breast height. The
permittee shall submit a landscape plan to the Board of
Supervisors for its approval to any such removal. The Board
shall have a period of 90 days from such submission to review
the landscape plan and may, for such purpose, employ
consultants to aid in its review. [Amended 3-24-1987 by Ord.
No. 3-1987]
A. All inspections shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or
Building Inspector. The permittee shall notify the Township Building
§ 69-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-10
68:290
§ 69-11. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township, after notice to the permit holder for:
§ 69-12. Permit expiration and renewal.
Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of six months from
the date of issuance. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of
the work required to be done within the time limit specified in the permit.
If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the specified
time, he shall, within 30 days prior to expiration of the permit, present in
writing to the Township a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the discretion of the
Township Engineer, such an extension is warranted, he may grant additional
time for the completion of the work. Where the Township Engineer
determines that the extension of time will require a substantial modification
of the soil erosion and sediment control plan and/or the stormwater
management plan, any extension of a permit shall be subject to approval
Inspector at least 48 hours before any work is undertaken pursuant to
an issued permit.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated in
Subsection D of this section. A set of as-built plans shall be on file at the
site and at the Township Office at all times during the course of work
carried out pursuant to the permit.
C. Engineering check notes shall accompany all as-built plans which
involve structural or mechanical measures and shall serve as
supporting evidence that structures meet design standards and
specifications as contained herein.
D. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer or
Building Inspector to certify compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory
compliance shall be necessary before issuance of an occupancy permit,
if applicable.
A. Failure to carry out the control measures described in the application at
the appropriate times as specified in the applicable time schedule or
within such reasonable extension as may be granted by the Township
Engineer.
B. Violation of any other condition of the permit.
C. Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the work.
D. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance, hazard or endangering human life or the property
of others.
§ 69-10 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 69-12
68:291
of such revised plans in accordance with the applicable procedure of this
chapter.
§ 69-13. Performance bond.
Before the issuance of a permit for a project which exceeds five acres, the
applicant shall deposit with the Township financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all of the improvements, control measures and
other conditions specified in the permit within the time specified by this
chapter, or within any extension thereof granted by the Township Engineer.
The amount of such financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost
of the work and required improvements for which the permit has been
issued. The form of financial security, the method of cost calculation and the
release of the posted security shall be in conformity with those provisions
set forth in the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance73
with respect to public improvement guaranties.
§ 69-14. Remedies.
A. If at any stage the work does not conform to the permit, including
conditions thereof, or to the plans and specifications, including
modifications thereof, or to the approved runoff and erosion control
plan, a written notice to comply shall be given to the permittee. Such
notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time
within which corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply within
the time specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation of this
chapter, in which case the bond, if any, shall be forfeited and penalties
shall be imposed under § 69-15 of this chapter.
B. In case of any paving, filling, stripping, grading or regrading; any
disturbing, modifying, blocking or diverting the natural overland
subsurface flow of stormwater; or any construction, erection and
installation of any dam, ditch, culvert, drainpipe, bridge or any other
structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any premises in
violation of this chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the
proper Township authorities, in addition to other remedies provided by
law, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
such unlawful activity; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the use of the applicable premises; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises. In addition, upon
the failure of any permit holder to complete the control measures
specified in his application, the Township may, after revoking such
permit, proceed to complete such measures itself and recover the cost
thereof from the permittee or his surety.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 69-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-15
68:292
§ 69-15. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996; 6-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 06-2013]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than
30 days. Each section of this chapter violated shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter
is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations
shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District Justice of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution
or, upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 69A
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle and traffic generally — See Ch. 78.
§ 69A-1. Approval of use.
The use of speed-timing devices as defined and set forth in the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto is hereby
approved in and for West Goshen Township to aid in the enforcement of
speed restrictions applicable within the borders of the township. The police
officers of the township are hereby authorized and directed to use approved
speed-timing devices to aid in the enforcement of speed restrictions
applicable within the borders of West Goshen Township.
§ 69A-2. Statutory authority.
All types of speed-timing devices permitted by the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, as the same may be
amended from time to time, are hereby approved for use by all township
police officers. The speed-timing devices hereby approved include
mechanical, electrical and electronic devices as set forth in the Vehicle
Code, provided that those devices shall be of the type approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as proved in the Act of June 17,
§ 69-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 69A-2
69A:293
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, Section 81, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 69A-3. Types of devices.
The speed-timing devices designated in § 69A-2 hereof shall include, by
way of example, but need not be limited to the devices set forth in Section
105.51 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code, including:
§ 69A-4. Signs.
Legible signs giving public notice of the use of speed-timing devices in West
Goshen Township may be posted at or near the public highways at the
boundaries of or within the township.
Chapter 70
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets in mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Assignment of street address numbers — See
Ch. 54.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 68.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 69A.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 72.
Vehicle and traffic regulations — Ch. 78.
A. Electrical Speed-Timing Systems manufactured by Richard Hageman.
B. Model TK-100 Excessive Speed Preventer manufactured by Systems
Innovation, Inc.
C. Speed Chek manufactured for the Union Agency.
D. Mechanical equipment as set forth in the reference section of the
Pennsylvania Code, including stop watches and the speed machine
manufactured for the Union Agency.
E. Electrical-mechanical equipment as set forth in Section 105.91 of Title
67 of the Pennsylvania Code, including Vascar-Plus manufactured by
Traffic Safety Systems, Inc.
§ 69A-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 69A-4
69A:294
ARTICLE I
Street Obstructions and Openings
[Adopted 6-12-1974 by Ord. No. 2-1974]
§ 70-1. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1156 of Article XI of the
Second Class Township Code, as amended,74 no railroad or street railway
shall hereafter be constructed upon any township road nor shall any
railroad or street railway crossings nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric
conduits or other piping be laid upon or in nor shall any telephone,
telegraph or electric light or power poles or any coal tipples or any other
obstructions be erected upon or in any portion of a Township road except
under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the
installation and maintenance thereof as may be prescribed in permits
granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 70-2. Application for permit; fee. [Amended 5-21-2008 by Ord. No.
5-2008]
The application for a highway occupancy permit shall be on a form
prescribed by the Township and submitted to the Township. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees
adopted by the Township for highway occupancy permits. In addition, the
applicant shall submit three copies of a sketch, showing such dimensions as
the location of the intended facility, width of the traveled roadway, right-ofway
lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
§ 70-3. Application review; issuance of permit. [Amended 5-21-2008
by Ord. No. 5-2008]
§ 70-4. Rules and Regulations for road openings. [Added 5-21-2008
by Ord. No. 5-200875]
All road openings in the Township shall comply with the rules and
regulations which are set forth on the attached exhibit, Rules and
Regulations Governing Street Openings in West Goshen Township.76 The
A. The Township Engineer shall review the application and determine if it
is complete and consistent with the standards for road openings as set
forth in this Article I.
B. The permit shall be issued by the Township provided all conditions in
this Article I have been met as confirmed by the Township Engineer or
Roadmaster.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67322.
75.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 70-4, 70-5
and 70-6 and 70-7, respectively. Consequently, former §§ 70-7 through 70-10 were
renumbered as §§ 70-8 through 70-11, respectively.
76.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 70-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 70-4
69A:295
rules and regulations, which may be amended from time to time by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution, shall be conditions attached to the
issuance of the highway occupancy permit.
§ 70-5. Notice of completion.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall file written notice thereof
with the Township.
§ 70-6. Excavation and restoration of surface; inspection of work.
[Amended 5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
A. All areas of the road which are excavated shall be restored according to
the following restoration requirements:
(1) Perpendicular excavation: a perpendicular street excavation for
installation of a utility service line to a new or existing residence or
business from a new or existing main utility line.
(a) Restoration requirements: The excavation area shall be milled
and overlay applied to a width of three feet beyond the trench
edge. If excavation is within three feet of the center line of the
road, full roadway width paving is required.
(2) Longitudinal excavation: a longitudinal street excavation for
installation of a water main, sewer main or other longitudinally
located utilities.
(a) Restoration requirements: The excavation area shall be milled
and overlay applied to a full lane width. If excavation is within
three feet of the center line of the road, full roadway width
paving is required.
(3) Miscellaneous surface penetrations: any single core borings, bore
holes or other small excavations.
(a) Restoration requirements: Full depth paving restoration is
required for a minimum of two feet beyond the boring or
excavation. If the boring or excavation penetrates below the
existing paving, the area below the paving shall be filled with
Type A or B flowable backfill or an alternate fill material
approved by the Township. Excavation shall be milled and
overlay applied to three feet beyond excavation. If excavation
is within three feet of the center line of the road, full width
paving is required.
(4) Miscellaneous surface penetrations: two or more core borings,
bore holes or other small excavations within a one-hundred-foot
road segment.
§ 70-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-6
69A:296
§ 70-7. Violation and enforcement provision. [Amended 6-23-1992
by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 7-1996]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $100 and not
more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the Township. No judgment shall be imposed until the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
(a) Restoration requirements: full lane width restoration. If
excavation is within three feet of the center line of the road,
full roadway width paving is required.
B. The area to be restored shall extend 10 feet beyond the starting and
ending limits of the excavation.
C. All backfilling, trench restoration, road milling and paving shall be
completed in accordance with the effective Township road construction
specifications, PennDOT specifications Publication 408, and PennDOT
Publication 213, current editions or their successor publications
adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
D. All areas excavated shall be swept to remove excess loose material from
the street.
E. Excavations which result in a disturbed paving area in excess of 1,000
square feet shall require nuclear density testing by a certified thirdparty
testing laboratory which is approved by the Township. The results
of the nuclear density tests shall be submitted to the Township, which
shall confirm that the density of the paving meets the Township
specifications. In addition, two core borings shall be provided to the
Township per 1,000 square feet of disturbed paving area.
F. Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township
shall inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with
the conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit
and this article. Where any settlement or defect in the work occurs, or
where nuclear density tests were performed, if the tests reveal a
substandard density, the applicant shall rectify any such settlement or
defect within 15 days after written notice from the Township to do so. If
at any time a settlement or defect shall become a hazard, the applicant
shall rectify such settlement or defect within two hours after notice
from the Township. If the applicant fails to comply with the notice
authorized by this section, the Township may complete the work and
shall impose upon the applicant the cost thereof.
G. The applicant shall provide the Township with the name and contact
information of an authorized representative who may be reached 24
hours a day while the work pursuant to the permit is in progress.
§ 70-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 70-7
69A:297
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 70-7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-7
69A:298
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
§ 70-8. Obligation of abutting property owner to maintain sidewalk
and curb. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 08-2013]
Curbs on public roads and sidewalks open to the public for pedestrian
traverse, or curbs and sidewalks located in whole or in part within the rightof-
way of a public or private street shall be maintained by the property
owner who owns the abutting property. The abutting property owner shall
keep such curbs and sidewalks immediately in front of his/her property in
good order and repair and at all times free and clear of all obstructions to
safe and convenient passage, including the accumulation of ice and snow.
This obligation shall not apply to any sidewalks or curbs located in parks
owned by the Township.
§ 70-9. Snow and ice removal.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property abutting any sidewalk or
public walk as described in § 70-7 above shall be required to remove or
cause to be removed, for a minimum width of two feet and the entire length
of all of said abutting sidewalk or public walk, snow and/or ice thereon
fallen or formed, within 48 hours after said snow or ice shall have ceased to
fall or be formed. The responsible party shall also cover the sidewalk with
cinders, sawdust or similar snow and ice control materials in the event of
ice and sleet. Where snow and ice are removed from the sidewalk, it may
be placed or piled on the curb side of the sidewalk but shall not be piled or
placed in the storm gutter or on the paved cartway.
§ 70-10. Notice of violation.
If the owner of any property neglects at any time to perform the duties
described in §§ 70-7 and 70-8 above, the Township may serve written notice
upon him requiring him to perform the necessary maintenance or repair.
The notice shall specify the time by which said maintenance or repair shall
be commenced and the time by which it shall be completed. The notice
provided for in this section may be served on the property owner by leaving
the same at his place of residence or, if such place of residence is unknown
to the Township, by posting the same on the abutting property.
§ 70-11. Violations and penalties.
If such property owner fails to comply with the requirements of the notice
described in § 70-9 within the time period specified therein, the Township
may assess a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each violation. Each day or
part of a day in which any such snow or ice remains after it should be
removed shall constitute a separate offense. The notice of assessment of a
fine ("fine notice") shall be served on the owner, occupant or tenant by hand
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail
§ 70-8 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 70-11
69A:299
to the postal address of the property abutting the sidewalk. Upon failure
of the owner, occupant or tenant to pay the fine within the time period
prescribed in the fine notice, an action shall be brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day in which a
violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate violation. All fines and
penalties collected for violations of this article shall be paid to the Township
Treasurer.
§ 70-11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-11
69A:300
Chapter 71
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
69.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 70-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 70-11
69A:301

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 71-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "West Goshen Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 71-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed
increases flooding, flows and velocities; contributes to erosion and
sedimentation; overtaxes the capacity of streams and storm sewers;
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage
stormwater; undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities; reduces infiltration
and groundwater recharge; increases nonpoint source pollution to
waterways; and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed can
harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of stream beds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of new development, redevelopment, and other
earth disturbance activities causing accelerated runoff and erosion and
loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the municipality and all of the
people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides infiltration
and groundwater recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by reducing the
volume of stormwater generated and by using project designs that
maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high water quality,
infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic ecosystems. Cost-effective
and environmentally sensitive stormwater management can be
achieved through the use of nonstructural site design techniques that
minimize impervious surfaces, reduce disturbance of land and natural
resources, avoid sensitive areas (i.e., riparian buffers, floodplains, steep
§ 71-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-2
69A:303
§ 71-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety and general
welfare, property and water quality by implementing drainage and
stormwater management practices, criteria, and provisions included herein
for land development, construction and earth disturbance activities, to
achieve the following throughout the municipality:
slopes, wetlands, etc.), and consider topography and soils to maintain
the natural hydrologic regime.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require the municipality to implement a
program of stormwater controls. The municipality is required to obtain
a permit and comply with its provisions for stormwater discharges from
its separate storm sewer system under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal or other storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
A. Reduce the frequency and magnitude of flooding and stormwater
impacts affecting people, property, infrastructure and public services.
B. Sustain or improve the natural hydrologic characteristics and water
quality of groundwater and surface waters.
C. Protect natural resources, including riparian and aquatic living
resources and habitats.
D. Maintain the natural hydrologic regime of land development sites and
their receiving watersheds.
E. Minimize land disturbance and protect and incorporate natural
hydrologic features, drainage patterns, infiltration, and flow conditions
within land development site designs.
F. Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated, and manage
and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as possible.
G. Provide infiltration and maintain natural groundwater recharge to
protect groundwater supplies and stream baseflows, prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
H. Reduce stormwater pollutant loads to protect and improve the
chemical, physical, and biological quality of ground and surface waters.
I. Reduce scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream channels.
J. Reduce flooding impacts and preserve and restore the natural floodcarrying
capacity of streams and their floodplains.
§ 71-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-3
69A:304
K. Protect adjacent and downgradient lands from adverse impacts of
direct stormwater discharges.
L. Minimize impervious surfaces and connected impervious surfaces to
promote infiltration and reduce the volume and impacts of stormwater
runoff.
M. Provide proper long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities, BMPs and conveyances that are
implemented within the municipality.
N. Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed land undergoing
redevelopment while encouraging new development and
redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.
O. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges.
P. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-based stormwater management planning.
Q. Provide standards to meet certain NPDES stormwater permit
requirements.
R. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
S. Implement the requirements of total maximum daily load (TMDLs)
where applicable to waters within or impacted by the municipality.
T. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
U. Fulfill the purpose and requirements of PA Act 16777 (PA Act 167,
Section 3):
"(1) Encourage planning and management of stormwater runoff in
each watershed which is consistent with sound water and land use
practices.
(2) Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management
designated to preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of
commonwealth streams; to preserve to the maximum extent
practicable natural stormwater runoff regimes and natural course,
current and cross-section of water of the commonwealth; and to
protect and conserve groundwaters and groundwater recharge areas.
77.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 71-3 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-3
69A:305
§ 71-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered or required to regulate land use activities
that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the
authority of:
§ 71-5. Applicability.
(3) Encourage local administration and management of stormwater
consistent with the commonwealth's duty as trustee of natural
resources and the people's constitutional right to the preservation of
natural, economic, scenic, aesthetic, recreational and historic values
of the environment."
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167) 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act");
B. Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.;
C. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
(hereinafter referred to as the "MPC").
A. The following activities are regulated by this chapter:
(1) All regulated activities as defined in this chapter, including, but not
limited to, new development, redevelopment, and earth
disturbance activities, that are located within the municipality shall
be subject to regulation by this chapter.
(2) When a building and/or grading permit is required for any
regulated activity on an existing parcel or approved lot created by a
subdivision and/or improved as a land development project,
issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the
terms of this chapter.
(3) This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershedbased
perspective. The municipality's stormwater management
conveyance and system design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet
type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design,
etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable municipal
ordinance(s) and applicable state regulations.
B. Duty of persons engaged in a regulated activity. Notwithstanding any
provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any landowner or any
person engaged in a regulated activity, including but not limited to the
alteration or development of land, which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics, shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such
measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate,
§ 71-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-5
69A:306
§ 71-6. Exemptions and modified requirements.
volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a
manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and
water quality of waters of the commonwealth.
C. Phased and incremental project requirements.
(1) Any regulated activity (including but not limited to new
development, redevelopment, or earth disturbance) that is to take
place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential projects
on the same parcel or property, shall be subject to regulation by
this chapter if the cumulative proposed impervious surface or earth
disturbance exceeds the corresponding threshold for exemption (as
presented in Table 70-6.1, "Thresholds for regulated activities
Exempt from Chapter Provisions").
(2) The date of adoption of this chapter shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as parent tracts relative to future
subdivisions, and from which impervious surface and earth
disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered. For
example:
If, after adoption of this chapter, an applicant proposes
construction of a six-hundred-square-foot garage, that project
would be exempted from the requirements of this chapter as
noted in Table 70-6.1. If, at a later date, an applicant proposes to
construct a nine-hundred-square-foot room addition on the same
property, the applicant would then be required to implement the
stormwater management and plan submission requirements of
this chapter for the cumulative total of 1,500 square feet of
additional impervious surface added to the property since
adoption of this chapter.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the
provisions of Article XIII, titled "Prohibitions," shall apply to every
person in the Township regardless of whether they are engaged in a
regulated activity.
A. Requirements for exempt activities.
(1) An exemption from any requirement of this chapter shall not
relieve the applicant from implementing all other applicable
requirements of this chapter or from implementing such measures
as are necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare,
property and water quality.
(2) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with
the requirements for state-designated special protection waters
designated by PADEP as high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value
(EV) waters, or any other current or future state or municipal water
quality protection requirements.
§ 71-5 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-6
69A:307
(3) An exemption under this chapter shall not relieve the applicant
from complying with all other applicable municipal ordinances or
regulations.
B. General exemptions. Regulated activities that involve less than 500
square feet of proposed impervious surfaces and less than 5,000 square
feet of earth disturbance, or Are listed in Subsection C are exempt from
those (and only those) requirements of this chapter that are included in
the sections and articles listed in Table 70-6.1. Exemptions are for the
items noted in Table 70-6.1 only, and shall not relieve the landowner
from other applicable requirements of this chapter. Exemption shall not
relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare, property, and water
quality.
Table 71-6-1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt from Chapter
Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
Subsection
§ 71-6C
Less than 500
Square Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces and
Less Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Equal to or
Greater Than
500 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces or
Equal to or
Greater Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Article I Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article II Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Sections 70-14,
70-15 and 70-23
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Sections 70-13,
70-16, 70-17,
70-18, 70-19,
70-20, 70-21 and
70-22
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article IV Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article V Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VI Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VII Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VIII Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 71-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-6
69A:308
Table 71-6-1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt from Chapter
Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
Subsection
§ 71-6C
Less than 500
Square Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces and
Less Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Equal to or
Greater Than
500 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces or
Equal to or
Greater Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Article IX Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Other erosion,
sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the
Pennsylvania Code and other applicable state and
municipal codes, including the Clean Streams Law78
NOTES:
Specific activities listed in § 71-6C are exempt from the indicated
requirements, regardless of size.
A proposed regulated activity must be less than both the proposed
impervious surfaces and proposed earth disturbance thresholds to be
eligible for exemption from the requirements listed in this table.
"Proposed impervious surface": as defined in this chapter.
"Exempt": Regulated activities are exempt from the requirements of
listed section(s) only; all other provisions of this chapter apply.
C. Exemptions for specific activities. The following specific regulated
activities are exempt from the requirements of §§ 70-13, 70-16, 70-17,
70-18, 70-19, 70-20, 70-21 and 70-22 and Article IV, Article V, Article VI
and Article VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 70-6.1), unless
otherwise noted below. All other conveyance and system design
standards established by the municipality in other codes or ordinances
shall be required, and all other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(1) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. This
exemption is limited to repair of the existing facility; upgrades,
additions or other improvements are not exempt. A written
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 71-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-6
69A:309
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to the municipality within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. A detailed plan
shall be submitted no later than 30 days following commencement
of the activity. If the municipality finds that the work is not an
emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the
requirements of this chapter shall be addressed as applicable.
(2) Maintenance: any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system, facility, BMP or conveyance made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Municipal Engineer or municipality.
(3) Existing landscaping: use of land for maintenance, replacement or
enhancement of existing landscaping.
(4) Gardening: use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(5) Agricultural-related activities:
(a) Agricultural activities (as defined in Article II), when
performed in accordance with the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
(b) Conservation practices (as defined in Article II) that do not
involve construction of any new or expanded impervious
surfaces.
(c) High tunnels (as defined in § 71-12), if: [Added 11-19-2019
by Ord. No. 9-2019]
[1] The high tunnel or its flooring does not result in an
impervious area exceeding 25% of all structures located
on the owner's total contiguous land area; and
[2] The high tunnel meets one of the following:
[a] The high tunnel is located at least 100 feet from any
perennial stream or watercourse, public road or
neighboring property line;
[b] The high tunnel is located at least 35 feet from any
perennial stream or watercourse, public road, or
neighboring property line and located on land with a
slope not greater than 7%; or
[c] The high tunnel is supported with a buffer or diversion
system that does not directly drain into a stream or
other watercourse by managing stormwater runoff in
a manner consistent with the requirements of this
subsection.
§ 71-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-6
69A:310
(6) Forest Management: forest management operations, which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the
municipality and which comply with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection's management practices contained in
its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines
for Forestry" (as amended or replaced by subsequent guidance).
Such operations are required to have an Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan, which meets the requirements of 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102 and meets the erosion and sediment control
standards of § 71-15 of this chapter.
(7) Maintenance of existing paved surfaces: Replacement of existing
paved surfaces shall meet the erosion and sediment control
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and § 71-15 of this
chapter, and is exempt from all other requirements of this chapter
listed in Subsection C above. Resurfacing of existing paved
surfaces is exempt from the requirements of this chapter listed
above. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces shall
comply with all requirements of this chapter as indicated in Table
70-6.1.
(8) Municipal roadway shoulder improvements: shoulder
improvements conducted within the existing roadway cross-section
of municipal-owned roadways, unless an NPDES permit is required,
in which case the proposed work must comply with all
requirements of this chapter.
(9) In-place replacement of residential dwelling unit: the replacement
in the exact footprint of an existing one- or two-family dwelling
unit.
(10) In-Place replacement, repair, or maintenance of residential
impervious surfaces: the replacement of existing residential patios,
decks, driveways, pools, garages, and/or sidewalks that are
accessory to an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit in the
exact footprint of the existing impervious surface.
D. Modified requirements for small projects. Regulated activities that
involve 500 to 2,000 square feet of proposed impervious surfaces and
5,000 to 10,000 square feet of proposed earth disturbance may apply
the modified requirements presented in the "Simplified Approach to
Stormwater Management for Small Projects" (Simplified Approach)
(Appendix A79) to comply with the requirements of §§ 71-16, 71-17,
71-18, 71-19, 71-20, 71-21 and 71-22, and Article IV, Article V, Article
VI and Article VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 70-6.2). The
applicant shall first contact the Municipal Engineer to confirm that the
proposed project is eligible for use of the Simplified Approach and is not
otherwise exempt from these chapter provisions; to determine what
components of the proposed project are to be considered as impervious
79.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 71-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-6
69A:311
surfaces; and to determine if other known site or local conditions exist
that may preclude the use of any techniques included in the Simplified
Approach. Appendix A80 includes instructions and procedures for
preparation, submittal, review and approval of documents required
when using the Simplified Approach and shall be adhered to by the
applicant. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
Table 71-6.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Eligible for Modified
Requirements for Listed Chapter Provisions
Ordinance Article/Section Activities Listed in § 71-6D
Article I All provisions apply
Article II All provisions apply
Sections 71-14 and 71-15 and
71-23
All provisions apply
Sections 71-13, 71-16, 71-17,
71-18, 71-19, 71-20, 71-21
and 71-22
Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 71-6D are applied
Article IV Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 71-6D are applied
Article V Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 71-6D are applied
Article VI Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 71-6D are applied
Article VII Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 71-6D are applied
Article VIII All provisions apply
Article IX All provisions apply
Other erosion, sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter
102, of the Pennsylvania Code and
other applicable state and municipal
codes, including the Clean Streams
Law81
NOTES:
"Modified Requirements": Regulated activities listed within the
subsections of this chapter noted in Table 70-6.2 are eligible for
exemption only from the indicated sections and subsections of this
chapter and only if the modified requirements of § 71-6D are met to
the satisfaction of the municipality; all other provisions of this chapter
apply.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 71-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-7
69A:312
§ 71-7. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal requirements.
§ 71-8. Financial security.
For all activities requiring submittal of a stormwater management (SWM)
site plan that involve subdivision or land development, the applicant shall
post financial security to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management facilities as required by
the approved SWM site plan and this chapter, and such financial security
shall:
§ 71-9. Waivers.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure and comply with
other required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management than any other code, rule,
act, law, regulation or ordinance, the specific requirements contained in
this chapter shall take precedence.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The
requirements of this chapter shall supersede any conflicting
requirements in other municipal ordinances or regulations.
A. Be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required
facilities except to the extent that financial security for the cost of any
of such improvements is required to be and is posted with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with a
highway occupancy permit application; and
B. Be determined, collected, applied and enforced in accordance with
Sections 509 through 511 of the MPC and the provisions of the
municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO).82
A. General. The requirements of this chapter are essential and shall be
strictly adhered to. For any regulated activity where, after a close
evaluation of alternative site designs, it proves to be impracticable to
meet any one or more of the mandatory minimum standards of this
chapter on the site, the municipality may approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to Subsections B and C.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 to 10511 and Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land, in this Code,
respectively.
§ 71-7 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-9
69A:313
§ 71-10. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
B. The governing body shall have the authority to waive or modify the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will
not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
the chapter is observed. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Modification may also be considered if an
alternative standard or approach can be demonstrated to provide equal
or better achievement of the results intended by the chapter. A request
for modification shall be in writing and accompany the SWM site plan
submission. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
C. PADEP approval required. For any proposed regulated activity involving
earth disturbance equal to or greater than one acre, the municipality
may approve measures for minimum volume and infiltration control
other than those required in this chapter only after consultation with
and evaluation by PADEP that the alternate site design meets state
water quality requirements and does not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, 35
P.S. Section 691.1, et seq.
§ 71-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-10
69A:314
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 71-11. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 71-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting or harvesting crops; or pasturing and raising
of livestock; and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new
buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity as defined in this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, partnership, public or private
association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the
term "person" shall include the members of a partnership, the officers,
members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents and
servants of a corporation, and the officers of a municipality.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
F. The definitions in this chapter are for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and have no bearing on other municipal
regulations or ordinances.
§ 71-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:315
AS-BUILT PLANS (DRAWINGS) — Engineering or site plans or drawings
that document the actual locations, dimensions and elevations of the
improvements, and building components, and changes made to the original
design plans. The final version of these documents, or a copy of same, are
signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional and submitted to the
municipality at the completion of the project, as per the requirements of
§ 71-30 of this chapter as "final as-built plans".
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to provide water quality treatment, infiltration, volume
reduction, and/or peak rate control, to promote groundwater recharge,
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs
are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CARBONATE GEOLOGY or CARBONATE ROCK FORMATIONS — See
"karst."
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial open drainage feature that conveys,
continuously or periodically, flowing water and through which stormwater
flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CN — Curve number.
COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Chester County Conservation District.
§ 71-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-12
69A:316
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by a planner certified by NRCS
that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE — A natural or man-made, existing or proposed facility,
feature or channel used for the transportation or transmission of
stormwater from one place to another. For the purposes of this chapter,
conveyance shall include pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales
(vegetated and other), gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or
features.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — Capture and temporary storage of runoff in
a stormwater management facility for release at a controlled rate.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated activities at
a site in the municipality.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter of a
tree at breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) above the
forest floor on the uphill side of the tree.
DISTURBED AREA — Land area disturbed by or where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point
(including but not limited to the point/line of interest used for hydrologic
and hydraulic calculations) and that is enclosed by a natural or man-made
ridgeline.
EARTH DISTURBANCE or EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A
construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land,
including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;
embankments; road maintenance; land development; building construction;
and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials.
EASEMENT — A right of use granted by a landowner to allow a grantee the
use of the designated portion of land for a specified purpose, such as for
stormwater management or other drainage purposes.
§ 71-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:317
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan required by the
conservation district or the municipality to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation, and that must be prepared and approved per the
applicable requirements.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
Commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the centerline of the stream
and to 50 feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both sides.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest lands. These include timber
inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment,
cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting,
site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the design high-water elevation
and the elevation of the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township.
GRADE/GRADING —
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of underground soils
and rock units.
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 71-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-12
69A:318
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
groundwater supplies from infiltration of rain or overland flow.
HEC-1 — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) hydrologic runoff model.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HIGH TUNNEL — A structure which meets the following:[Added
11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
HOTSPOTS — Areas where prior or existing land use or activities can
potentially generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of
pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic system, cycle or balance that
sustains the quality and quantity of stormwater, stream baseflow, storage,
and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), into four runoff potential groups.
The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more
runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it prevents or is resistant to infiltration
of water, including but not limited to: structures such as roofs, buildings,
storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets,
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, patios, swimming pools, tennis or other
paved courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf materials.
For the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter, compacted
soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement shall be
considered impervious. Surfaces that were designed to allow infiltration
(i.e., areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-by-case basis
Is used for the production, processing, keeping, storing, sale or shelter
of an agricultural commodity as defined in Section 2 of the Act of
December 19, 1974 (P.L. 973, No. 319),83 known as the "Pennsylvania
Farmland and Forest Land Assessment Act of 1974," or for the storage
of agricultural equipment or supplies; and
A.
Is constructed with all the following:
(1) Has a metal, wood or plastic frame;
When covered, has a plastic, woven textile or other flexible
covering; and
(2)
Has a floor made of soil, crushed stone, matting, pavers or a
floating concrete slab.
(3)
B.
83.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5490.2.
§ 71-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:319
by the Municipal Engineer, based on appropriate documentation and
condition of the material, etc.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — A stormwater BMP designed to collect and
discharge runoff into the subsurface in a manner that allows infiltration
into underlying soils and groundwater (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or
seepage trenches, etc.).
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year, in response to seasonal variations in
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, pipe, drain,
sewer, channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other
carbonate rock formations by dissolving or solution of the rock by water,
and that is characterized by closed depressions, sinkholes, caves, a
subsurface network of solution conduits and fissures through which
groundwater moves, and no perennial surface drainage features.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if they are authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (as amended).84
C.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 71-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-12
69A:320
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL — A Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect, registered professional land
surveyor, or registered professional geologist, or any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or qualified by law to perform the work
required by the chapter within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MFEMP — Mushroom farm environmental management plan.
MPC — Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101, et seq., as
amended; the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — West Goshen Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
NOAA — National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity involving placement or
construction of new impervious surface or grading over existing pervious
land areas not classified as redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs) — See "BMP
(best management practice)."
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by other
subsurface or soil conditions.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 71-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:321
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, SCS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL (PADEP BMP MANUAL) — Document Number 363-0300-002
(December 2006, and as subsequently amended).
PERVIOUS SURFACE or PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as
impervious surface.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of West Goshen
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.85
POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements approved by the municipality are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — Land cover conditions assumed to exist within the
proposed disturbed area prior to commencement of the regulated activity
for the purpose of calculating the predevelopment water quality volume,
infiltration volume, and peak flow rates as required in this chapter.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering, or other methods to trap or remove coarse materials
and other pollutants before they enter the stormwater system, but may
not necessarily be designed to meet the entire water quality volume
requirements of this chapter.
PROPOSED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — All new, additional and replacement
impervious surfaces.
RAINFALL INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
85.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. Defined terms can now be found at 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.
§ 71-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-12
69A:322
REDEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity that involves demolition,
removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing impervious surface(s).
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any earth disturbance activity(ies) or any activity
that involves the alteration or development of land in a manner that may
affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,86
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.87
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into surface waters or water bodies during or after a
storm event by permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples
include systems which discharge by percolation to groundwater,
exfiltration, and/or evaporation processes and which generally have
residence times of less than three days.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment that is designed to temporarily
detain a certain amount of stormwater from a catchment area and which
may be designed to permanently retain stormwater runoff from the
catchment area; retention basins always contain water.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain vegetation to protect the integrity of stream channels
and shorelines, to reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by
trapping, filtering, and converting sediments, nutrients, and other
chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and
other aquatic species and wildlife.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — See Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.88
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
86.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 71-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:323
SEDIMENT — Soil or other materials transported by, suspended in or
deposited by surface water as a product of erosion.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SITE — Total area of land in the municipality where any proposed regulated
activity, as defined in this chapter, is planned, conducted, or maintained or
that is otherwise impacted by the regulated activity.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pa. Code Title
25 and the Clean Streams Law.89
STORM FREQUENCY — See "return period."
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any feature, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared
by the applicant or its representative, in accordance with the requirements
of Article IV of this chapter, indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at a particular site in accordance with this chapter, and including
all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that ordinance requirements have been met,
herein referred to as "SWM site plan." All references in this chapter to
"final" or "approved" SWM site plans shall incorporate the approved SWM
site plan and all subsequent approved revisions thereto.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — See "BMP
(best management practices)."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
as defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (as amended).90
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 71-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-12
69A:324
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of West Goshen Township, Chester
County, Pennsylvania, as amended, which is codified in Chapter 72 of the
West Goshen Township Code.
SWALE — An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that
gathers and conveys stormwater or runoff, and is generally vegetated for
soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and infiltration.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation of the bank of a stream or
channel cross-section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of
the channel and into the floodplain.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER TABLE — The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by groundwater. Seasonal high-water table refers to a water table
that rises and falls with the seasons due either to natural or man-made
causes.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — Any land area of at least 0.25 acre with a natural or naturalized
ground cover (excluding manicured turf grass) and that has an average
density of two or more viable trees per 1,500 square feet with a DBH
of six inches or greater and where such trees existed at any time within
three years of the time of land development application submission of the
proposed project. The land area to be considered woods shall be measured
from the outer drip lines of the outer trees.
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 71-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-12
69A:325

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 71-13. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which are
not exempt under § 71-6 shall submit a stormwater management site
plan (SWM site plan) to the municipality for review and approval in
accordance with Articles III and IV. SWM site plans approved by the
municipality shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
B. The stormwater management and runoff control criteria and standards
in this chapter shall apply to the total proposed regulated activity, even
if it is to take place in stages. The measurement of impervious surfaces
shall include all of the impervious surfaces in the total proposed
regulated activity even if the development is to take place in stages.
C. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality issues approval of a SWM site plan, which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
and
(2) The applicant has received a letter of adequacy or approval for the
erosion and sediment control plan review by the municipality and
the Conservation District (if required), and has received all other
local, state and federal permit approvals required for the project
involving the regulated activity.
D. Neither submission of an SWM site plan under the provisions herein
nor compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person or property
otherwise imposed by law.
E. The applicant shall design the site to minimize disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural
hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The
applicant shall apply the procedures set forth in § 71-16 for the overall
site design and for selection, location and design of features and BMPs
to be used to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
F. To the maximum extent practicable, postconstruction stormwater shall
be discharged within the drainage area of the same stream or water
body receiving the runoff prior to construction of the proposed
regulated activity.
G. Existing drainage peak rate discharges up to and including the onehundred-
year storm onto or through adjacent property(ies) or
downgradient property(ies), including diffuse drainage discharge, shall
not be altered in any manner without written permission from, and,
where applicable as determined by the municipality an easement and
§ 71-13 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-13
69A:327
agreement with, the affected landowner(s) for conveyance of
discharges onto or through their property(ies). Such discharge shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
H. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to water
quality and volume control, infiltration, stream channel protection, or
peak flow rate control requirements (as presented in §§ 71-17, 71-18,
71-19 and 71-20). Drainage facilities located on the site shall be
designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through the site.
I. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from limited portions of the
disturbed area for achieving water quality volume control standards,
stream channel protection standards, and the two-year storm event
peak runoff rate reduction standards for new development required by
this chapter, the applicant shall propose alternate methods to mitigate
the bypass of the BMPs, subject to the approval of the Municipal
Engineer. In no case shall resulting peak rate be greater than required
in Table 71-20.1.
J. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated
activities (i.e., during construction) as required to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter, to meet the erosion and sediment
control requirements of the municipality, if applicable, and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean
Streams Law.91
K. For all regulated activities, permanent BMPs and conveyances shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,92 and the
Storm Water Management Act.93
L. The design of all BMPs and conveyances shall incorporate sound
engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems as identified by the
municipality. The municipality reserves the right to disapprove any
design that would result in construction in an area affected by existing
stormwater problem(s) or continuation of an existing stormwater
problem(s).
M. Existing wetlands, either on the site or on an adjacent property, shall
not be used to meet the minimum design requirements for stormwater
management or stormwater runoff quality treatment. Stormwater
discharges to existing wetlands shall not degrade the quality or
hydrologic integrity of the wetland.
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 71-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-13
69A:328
N. Hotspot runoff controls. Specific structural or pollution prevention
practices may be required, as determined to be necessary by the
Municipal Engineer, to pretreat runoff from hotspots prior to
infiltration. Following is a list of examples of hotspots:
(1) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
(2) Vehicle fueling stations;
(3) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;
(4) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
(5) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.);
(6) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification Codes;
(7) Marinas (service and maintenance areas);
(8) Outdoor liquid container storage;
(9) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities;
(10) Public works storage areas;
(11) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials;
(12) Commercial container nursery;
(13) Contaminated sites/brownfields;
(14) Other land uses and activities as designated by the municipality.
O. Contaminated and brownfield sites. Where BMPs may contribute to the
migration of contaminants in groundwater, the water quality and runoff
volume, stream channel protection, and peak rate control standards
shall be met; however, at the Municipal Engineer's discretion, the
minimum infiltration requirement may be reduced or eliminated
commensurate with the contaminated area and the required water
quality and runoff control measures may be increased to mitigate the
reduced infiltration requirement for the contaminated area.
P. Additional water quality requirements. The municipality may require
additional stormwater control measures for stormwater discharges to
special management areas including, but not limited to:
(1) Water bodies listed as "impaired" by PADEP.
(2) Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL).
(3) Areas of known existing flooding problems.
(4) Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold water fisheries, carbonate geology
§ 71-13 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-13
69A:329
§ 71-14. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit or other regulatory requirements may apply to certain
regulated activities and shall be met prior to (or as a condition of) final
or other groundwater recharge areas that may be highly vulnerable
to contamination, drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, etc.).
Q. Applicants shall utilize the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual (PA BMP Manual), as amended, or other sources
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, for testing and design standards
for BMPs, and where there is a conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, the most restrictive applies.
R. For areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology that may be
susceptible to the formation of sinkholes and other karst features, the
location, type, and design of infiltration BMPs shall be based on a site
evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional and based on
the PA BMP Manual or other design guidance acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
S. All regulated activities located within a special flood hazard area
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
shall comply with Article XIX, Flood Hazard District, of the West Goshen
Township Zoning Ordinance94 and shall be designed to maintain the
flood carrying capacity of the floodway such that the base flood
elevations are not increased, either upstream or downstream. The
natural conveyance characteristics of the site and the receiving
floodplain shall be incorporated into the stormwater management
practices proposed for the site.
T. Disturbance of existing ground cover during construction of the
proposed regulated activity is prohibited within 100 feet of top-of-bank
of all perennial and intermittent waterways, water bodies (lakes, ponds,
etc.) and wetlands, except for activities otherwise approved by state or
local agencies (e.g., stream restoration projects, road crossings,
subsurface utility projects, etc.). At the Municipal Engineer's discretion,
and with Conservation District and PADEP approval where necessary,
the nondisturbance buffer may be reduced because of setback or other
site constraints, but never be less than 10 feet.
U. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 100 feet
to either side of the top of the bank of the channel. The buffer area shall
be maintained with appropriate native vegetation. If an existing buffer
is legally prescribed (e.g., deed covenant, easement, etc.) and it
exceeds the requirement of this chapter, the existing buffer shall be
maintained.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 71-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-14
69A:330
approval by the municipality of the SWM site plan and prior to
commencement of any regulated activities, as applicable:
§ 71-15. Erosion and sediment control.
A. All regulated activities subject to permit or regulatory requirements by
PADEP under regulations at Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or erosion
and sediment control requirements of the municipality.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under
Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located in or adjacent to surface
waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by
PADEP under Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located on or discharge to a state
highway right-of-way, or require access to or from a state highway and
be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105.
A. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality receives documentation that the applicant has
received:
(a) A "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other
approval from PADEP in compliance with Chapter 102 of Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code of an erosion and sediment control
plan for construction activities, if applicable;
(b) A PADEP NPDES Construction Activities Permit as required
under Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, if applicable;95
(c) Evidence of any other permit(s) or approvals required for the
regulated activities; and
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the
municipality, if required.
B. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit(s), as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the
site at all times.
95.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 71-14 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-15
69A:331
§ 71-16. Site design process.
The applicant shall design the site to minimize the disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic
regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. For regulated activities
with 10,000 or more square feet of proposed earth disturbance or 2,000
or more square feet of proposed impervious surfaces, the applicant shall
demonstrate in its SWM site plan (as required in § 71-24C that the design
sequence, objectives and techniques described below were applied to the
maximum extent practicable in the site design of the regulated activity
while complying with all other requirements of this chapter. The site design
shall:
C. Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be applied
where infiltration BMPs are proposed, at a minimum including those
required in § 71-18M.
A. First, identify and delineate all existing natural resources and natural
and man-made hydrologic features listed in § 71-24B(8) that are located
within the site, or receive discharge from, or may be impacted by the
proposed regulated activity.
B. Second, provide a prioritized listing of these resources and features to
identify:
(1) Those to be incorporated into the site design in a manner that
provides protection from any disturbance or impact from the
proposed regulated activity;
(2) Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact but for
which the proposed regulated activity will provide improvement to
existing conditions;
(3) Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of
the overall site design in a manner that protects or improves their
existing conditions while utilizing their hydrologic function within
the limits of their available capacity (e.g., for infiltration,
evapotranspiration, or reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or
peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for or size of
constructed BMPs; and
(4) Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or
removal.
C. Third, develop the site design to achieve the following:
(1) Recognize and incorporate the priorities identified in § 71-16B as
the basis for the proposed site layout, grading, construction, and
permanent ground cover design;
(2) Minimize earth disturbance (both surface and subsurface);
§ 71-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-16
69A:332
(3) Maximize protection of or improvement to natural resources and
special management areas;
(4) Minimize the disturbance of natural site hydrology, in particular
natural drainage features and patterns, discharge points and flow
characteristics, natural infiltration patterns and characteristics,
and natural channel and floodplain conveyance capacity;
(5) Incorporate natural hydrologic features and functions identified in
Subsection B into the site design to protect and utilize those
features and their hydrologic functions to reduce the need for or
size of constructed BMPs;
(6) Maximize infiltration and the use of natural site infiltration
features, patterns and conditions, and evapotranspiration features;
(7) Apply selective grading design methods to provide final grading
patterns or preserve existing topography in order to evenly
distribute runoff and minimize concentrated flows;
(8) Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious surfaces
and:
(a) Minimize the size of individual impervious surfaces;
(b) Separate large impervious surfaces into smaller components;
(c) Disconnect runoff from one impervious surface to another; and
(d) Utilize porous materials in place of impervious wherever
practicable;
(9) Minimize the volume and peak discharge rates of stormwater
generated;
(10) Avoid or minimize stormwater runoff pollutant loads and receiving
stream channel erosion;
(11) Locate infiltration and other BMPs:
(a) At or as near to the source of generation as possible; and
(b) At depths that are as shallow as possible;
(12) Prioritize the selection and design of BMPs as follows:
(a) Nonstructural and vegetation BMPs; then
(b) Structural (surface and subsurface) BMPs;
(13) For flow volumes requiring conveyance from the source of
generation to a BMP for management, give preference to open
channel conveyance techniques that provide infiltration and water
quality benefits, and landscaped-based management in common
open space areas, where practicable; and
§ 71-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-16
69A:333
§ 71-17. Water quality and runoff volume requirements.
To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated activities
and meet state water quality requirements, BMPs shall be provided in
the site design that replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and
runoff conditions, such that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving
waters. The applicant shall comply with the following water quality and
runoff volume requirements for all regulated activities, including all new
development and redevelopment activities:
(14) Consider additional guidance for incorporating natural hydrology
into the site and BMP designs, methods and techniques that
support the objectives of Subsections B and C, Appendix B96
presents additional discussion of natural hydrology site design and
sources of information for conservation design, Low-impact design,
and sustainable design.
D. The procedures set forth above shall be utilized to the maximum extent
practicable for the overall site design and selection, location and design
of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of
§§ 71-17, 71-18, 71-19, and 71-20.
A. The postconstruction total runoff volume shall not exceed the
predevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation (design storm).
The water quality and runoff volume to be managed shall consist of any
runoff volume generated by the proposed regulated activity over and
above the predevelopment total runoff volume and shall be captured
and permanently retained or infiltrated on the site. Permanent
retention options may include, but are not limited to, reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 71-21D of this chapter.
C. The design of the facility outlet shall provide for protection from
clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
D. BMPs that moderate the temperature of stormwater shall be used to
protect the temperature of receiving waters.
E. Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with
achieving the infiltration requirements of § 71-18. The infiltration
volume required under § 71-18 may be included as a component of the
water quality volume. If the calculated water quality and runoff volume
is greater than the volume infiltrated, then the difference between the
two volumes shall be managed for water quality and runoff volume
96.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 71-16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-17
69A:334
§ 71-18. Infiltration requirements.
Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs
when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created
or expanded. The applicant shall achieve the following infiltration
requirements:
control through other techniques or practices but shall not be
discharged from the site.
F. Runoff from the disturbed area shall be treated for water quality prior
to entering existing waterways or water bodies. If a stormwater
management practice does not provide water quality treatment, then
water quality BMPs shall be utilized to provide pre-treatment prior to
the runoff entering the stormwater management practice.
G. The municipality may require additional water quality and runoff
control measures for stormwater discharging to special management
areas such as those listed in § 71-13P.
H. When the regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the water quality and runoff volume shall be separately
addressed for each drainage area.
I. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
J. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the water quality and
runoff volume requirements.
K. Water quality and volume control practices shall be selected and
designed to meet the criteria of § 71-16C that apply to water quality and
volume control.
A. Wherever possible, infiltration should be designed to accommodate the
entire water quality and runoff volume required in § 71-17.
B. For regulated activities involving new development, the volume of a
minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed impervious surfaces
shall be infiltrated.
C. For regulated activities involving redevelopment, whichever is less of
the following volume options shall be infiltrated:
(1) The volume of a minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed
impervious surfaces; or
(2) The total water quality and runoff volume required in § 71-17 of this
chapter.
§ 71-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-18
69A:335
D. If the requirements of Subsections B or C cannot be physically
accomplished, then the applicant shall be responsible for
demonstrating with data or calculations to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer why this infiltration volume cannot be physically
accomplished on the site (e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting
zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc.) and what alternative volume can be
infiltrated; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of runoff
volume should be infiltrated.
E. Only if a minimum of at least 0.5 inch infiltration requirement cannot be
physically accomplished on the site, shall a waiver from § 71-18 be
considered by the municipality.
F. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions of the
impervious surfaces, the infiltration volume for the remaining area shall
be increased an equivalent amount to offset the loss.
G. When a project contains or is divided by multiple watersheds, the
infiltration volume shall be separately addressed for each watershed.
H. Existing impervious surfaces located in areas outside of the site (i.e.,
outside of the regulated activity) may be excluded from the calculation
of the required infiltration volume.
I. A detailed soils evaluation of the site shall be conducted by a qualified
professional and at a minimum shall address soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the
infiltration BMP shall be conducted by a qualified licensed professional
and shall be consistent with the PA BMP Manual (as amended) (or other
guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer) and in general shall:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or other
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the elevation of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Standard septic/sewage percolation tests are not
acceptable for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration facility for the required retention
(infiltration) volume based on field-determined infiltration capacity
(and apply safety factor as per applicable design guidelines) at the
elevation of the proposed infiltration surface.
(4) On-lot infiltration features are encouraged; however, it shall be
demonstrated to the Municipal Engineer that the soils are
conducive to infiltration on the identified lots.
§ 71-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-18
69A:336
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site
conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and
the top of the limiting zone. Additional depth may be required in
areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology (see Subsection N).
(2) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
volume and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant.
(3) The infiltration facility shall completely drain the retention
(infiltration) volume within three days (72 hours) from the end of
the design storm.
K. All infiltration practices shall:
(1) Be selected and designed to meet the criteria of § 71-16C that are
applicable to infiltration;
(2) Be set back at least 25 feet from all buildings and features with
subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls, etc.), unless
otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer; be set back at least
10 feet from property and right-of-way boundaries.
(3) For any infiltration practice that collects runoff from shared or
multiple features and that is located within 50 feet of a building or
feature with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls,
etc.), the bottom elevation shall be set below the elevation of the
subgrade element.
L. Infiltration facilities shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants to groundwater:
(1) When a hotspot is located in the area draining to a proposed
infiltration facility, an evaluation of the potential of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility shall be
performed, including a hydrogeologic investigation (if necessary)
by a qualified licensed professional to determine what, if any,
pretreatment or additional design considerations are needed to
protect groundwater quality.
(2) When located within a "wellhead protection area" of a public water
supply well, infiltration practices shall be in conformance with the
applicable approved source water protection assessment or source
water protection plan.
(3) The applicant shall provide appropriate safeguards against
groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
§ 71-18 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-18
69A:337
§ 71-19. Stream channel protection requirements.
For regulated activities involving new development with one or more acres
of earth disturbance, the applicant shall comply with the following stream
channel protection requirements to minimize stream channel erosion and
associated water quality impacts to the receiving waters:
M. During site construction, all infiltration practice components shall be
protected from compaction due to heavy equipment operation or
storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration areas shall also be
protected from sedimentation. Areas that are accidentally compacted
or graded shall be remediated to restore soil composition and porosity.
Adequate documentation to this effect shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer for review. All areas designated for infiltration shall
not receive runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved
final stabilization.
N. Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated to
reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures to
prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge to the
infiltration system.
O. Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration practices,
they shall have appropriate measures to prevent clogging by unwanted
debris (for example, silt, leaves and vegetation). Such measures shall
include but are not limited to leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
P. All infiltration practices shall have appropriate positive overflow
controls.
Q. No sand, salt or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous
surface material for winter ice conditions.
R. The following procedures and materials shall be required during the
construction of all subsurface facilities:
(1) Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed with
equipment that will not compact the bottom of the seepage bed/
trench or like facility.
(2) The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to the
placement of aggregate.
(3) Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of fines, shall
be allowed.
(4) The tops, bottoms and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall be
nonwoven fabric acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Stormwater shall be distributed throughout the entire seepage
bed/trench or like facility and provisions for the collection of debris
shall be provided in all facilities.
§ 71-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-19
69A:338
§ 71-20. Stormwater peak rate control requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following peak flow rate control
requirements for all regulated activities including those that involve new
development and redevelopment that are not located in the Chester Creek
watershed.
A. The peak flow rate of the postconstruction two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm shall be reduced to the predevelopment peak flow rate of
the one-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation, using the SCS
Type II distribution.
B. To the maximum extent practicable, and unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Engineer, the postconstruction one-year, twenty-fourhour
storm flow shall be detained for a minimum of 24 hours and a
maximum not to exceed 72 hours from a point in time when the
maximum volume of water from the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm is
stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., when the maximum water surface
elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the orifice is at the invert of the
proposed BMP).
C. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 71-21D of this chapter.
D. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the Municipal
Engineer, and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. For
sites with small drainage areas contributing to the BMP that do not
provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation
with the three-inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing
this condition.
E. When the calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or
other methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to
the Municipal Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function.
F. All proposed stormwater facilities shall make use of measures to extend
the flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
G. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate control shall be separately addressed for each
drainage area.
A. Postconstruction peak flow rates from any regulated activity shall not
exceed the predevelopment peak flow rates as shown for each of the
design storms specified in Table 71-20.1.
§ 71-19 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-20
69A:339
Table 71-20.1
Peak Rate Control Standards
(Peak Flow Rate of the Postconstruction Design Storm Shall be
Reduced to the Peak Flow Rate of the Corresponding
Predevelopment Design Storm Shown in the Table)
Predevelopment Design Storm
Postconstruction
Design Storm
Frequency
(24-Hour Duration)
New Development
Regulated Activities
Redevelopment
Regulated Activities
2-year 1-year 2-year
5-year 2-year 5-year
10-year 2-year 10-year
25-year 25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year 100-year
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 71-21D of this chapter.
C. For regulated activities involving only redevelopment, no peak flow rate
controls are required when and only if the total proposed impervious
surface area is at least 20% less than the total existing impervious
surface area to be disturbed by the regulated activity. In all cases where
this requirement is not met, the redevelopment regulated activity shall
achieve the peak flow rate controls presented in Table 71-20.1, using
the redevelopment ground cover assumptions presented in § 71-21D.
D. Only the area of the proposed regulated activity shall be subject to the
peak flow rate control standards of this chapter. Undisturbed areas for
which the discharge point has not changed are not subject to the peak
flow rate control standards.
E. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to peak flow
rate control requirements. Drainage facilities located on the site shall
be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through the
site.
F. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate controls shall be separately addressed for
each drainage area.
G. The effect of structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices implemented as part of the overall site design may be taken
§ 71-20 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-20
69A:340
§ 71-21. Calculation methodology.
into consideration when calculating total storage volume and peak flow
rates.
H. Regulated activities located within the Chester Creek watershed shall
achieve the applicable peak flow release rate control requirements
presented in the approved PA Act 167 Plan for that watershed and as
presented in Table 71-20.2 below, and as presented in the Chester
Creek Watershed Release Rate Map in Appendix F of this chapter.97
Table 71-20.2
Control Criteria for Stormwater Management Districts
District Control Criteria
100% Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than predevelopment
peak discharges.
50% Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than 50% of the
predevelopment peak discharges.
A. Stormwater runoff from all regulated activity sites with a drainage area
of greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique(s) that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 71-21.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods.
The method selected for use shall be based on the individual limitations
and suitability of each method for a particular site. The use of the
Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for drainage areas
greater than five acres shall be permitted only upon approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
Table 71-21.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55 are met
HEC-1/HEC-HMS United States
Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of a full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
97.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Township offices.
§ 71-20 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-21
69A:341
Table 71-21.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational (Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to five acres, or
as approved by the
municipality
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality
B. All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall use the
appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
consistent with this chapter. Rainfall depths used shall be obtained
from NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series.
When stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or
infiltration, water quality and runoff volume functions, the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours.
C. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration (duration) and storm
events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 partial
duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times of concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
D. The applicant shall utilize the following ground cover assumptions for
all predevelopment water quality and runoff volume, infiltration volume
and peak flow rate calculations:
(1) For regulated activities involving new development, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
(b) For all other areas (including all impervious surfaces),
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(2) For regulated activities involving redevelopment, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
§ 71-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-21
69A:342
(b) For areas that are not woods or not impervious surfaces,
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(c) For areas that are impervious surfaces, predevelopment
calculations shall assume at least 20% of the existing
impervious surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground
cover.
(3) The applicant shall determine which stormwater standards apply to
the proposed regulated activity as follows:
(a) Stormwater standards for new development shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only new
development activities as defined in this chapter.
(b) Stormwater standards for redevelopment shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only redevelopment
activities as defined in this chapter.
(c) At the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, regulated
activities that involve a combination of both new development
and redevelopment activities, as defined in this chapter, may
either:
[1] Apply the stormwater standards (redevelopment or new
development) that are associated with the activity that
involves the greatest amount of land area; or
[2] Apply the redevelopment and new development
stormwater standards to the corresponding
redevelopment and new development portions of the
proposed regulated activity.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both predevelopment and proposed
(postconstruction) conditions to be used in the Soil Cover Complex
Method shall be obtained from Table C-1 in Appendix C of this
chapter.98
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both predevelopment and proposed
(postconstruction) conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be
obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C of this chapter.99
G. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
H. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
98.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
99.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 71-21 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-21
69A:343
§ 71-22. Other Requirements.
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5, as
amended). Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open
channels shall be consistent with methods and computations contained
in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15, as amended).
Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with
Table C-3 in Appendix C of the ordinance.100
I. Runoff calculations shall include the following assumptions:
(1) Average antecedent moisture conditions (for the Soil Cover
Complex Method only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(2) A type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method
only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
A. Any BMP intended to hold standing water for four days or longer shall
be designed to incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West
Nile Guidance found in Appendix D,101 PADEP document 363-0300-001
"Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring" (as amended), (or
contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center or the Penn
State Cooperative Extension Office for design information.)
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to safely convey flow up to
and including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment shall provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the
maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the
one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow. Should any BMP require
a dam safety permit under PA Chapter 105 regulations,102 the facility
shall be designed in accordance with and meet the regulations of PA
Chapter 105 concerning dam safety. PA Chapter 105 may require the
safe conveyance of storms larger than one-hundred-year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by PA
Chapter 105 regulations shall be designed to convey, without damage to
the drainage facility or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year storm
event. Larger storm events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year storms)
shall also be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without
creating additional damage to any drainage facilities, nearby
structures, or roadways.
100. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
101. Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
102. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 71-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-22
69A:344
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas shall be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management
requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way shall comply with
PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission and
approval requirements.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016, as
amended) and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008, as amended), or other
design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
§ 71-22 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-22
69A:345

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 71-23. General requirements.
For any regulated activity, unless exempt per the provisions of § 71-6:
§ 71-24. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including items described in § 71-16, calculations, maps, and plans. A note
on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and
sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations
and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps
by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the
municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well
organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for review
and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included
in the SWM site plan:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activity shall commence until the municipality issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and, if required, a letter of
adequacy has been issued by the Conservation District for an erosion
and sediment control plan.
C. The preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, and the issuance of any building or occupancy
permit shall not proceed until the applicant has received written
approval of a SWM site plan from the municipality.
D. The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
A. General.
(1) A general description of the proposed project;
(2) A listing of all regulatory approvals required for the proposed
project and the status of the review and approval process for each.
Final approval or adequacy letters must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's issuing
final approval of the SWM site plan. Proof of application or
documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the programs
listed below shall be part of the SWM site plan, if applicable:
(a) NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction
Activities;
(b) PADEP permits as needed:
§ 71-23 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-24
69A:347
[1] PADEP joint permit application;
[2] Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management);103
[3] Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management);104
(c) PennDOT highway occupancy permit;
(d) Erosion and sediment control plan letter of adequacy; and
(e) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
(3) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the municipality, and that a revised erosion and
sediment control plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the
Conservation District or municipality (as applicable) for a
determination of adequacy prior to construction of the revised
features.
(4) The following signature block signed and sealed by the qualified
licensed professional responsible for the preparation of the SWM
site plan: "I (name), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify
to the best of my knowledge that the SWM site plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the West Goshen Township
Stormwater Ordinance, Chapter 71."
B. Maps or plan Sheets. Map(s) or plan sheets of the site shall be
submitted on minimum twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets and
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds and the
requirements of the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan and O&M
agreement (Article VII). If the SALDO has additional or more stringent
criteria than this chapter, then the SALDO criteria shall also apply.
Unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the contents of
the maps or plan sheets shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) A location map, with a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet or
greater, showing the site location relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) The name of the project, tax parcel number(s), and the names,
addresses and phone numbers of the owner of the property, the
applicant, and firm preparing the plan.
(3) Signature and seal of the qualified licensed professional(s)
responsible for preparation of the maps and plan sheets.
(4) The date of SWM site plan submission and revision dates, as
applicable.
103. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
104. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106.
§ 71-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-24
69A:348
(5) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet.
(6) A North arrow.
(7) Legal property boundaries, including:
(a) The total project property boundary and size with distances
marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(b) Boundaries, size and description of purpose of all existing
easements and deed-restricted areas of the project property,
with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the
nearest degree.
(8) Existing natural resources and natural or man-made hydrologic
features that are located within the site or receiving discharge
from, or that may otherwise be impacted by, the proposed
regulated activity, including but not limited to:
(a) All existing natural resources, hydrologic features and
drainage patterns including natural waterways, water bodies,
wetlands, streams (intermittent and perennial), ponds, lakes,
vernal pools, etc., natural infiltration areas and patterns, areas
of significant natural evapotranspiration, and other water
features and aquatic resources.
(b) Any existing man-made drainage features, BMPs, conveyances,
facilities, open channels, swales, drainage patterns, or other
flood, stormwater or drainage control features.
(c) For the site, discharge points and locations of concentrated
flows and their drainage areas.
(d) For named waters, show names and their watershed
boundaries within the site.
(e) Special management areas (as per § 71-13P).
(f) For the water bodies, streams and wetlands identified in
Subsection B(8)(a), label or otherwise show the following
attributes, if applicable:
[1] The Designated Use as determined by PADEP (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93);
[2] Impairments listed on the PADEP "Integrated List" (as
updated) and the listed source and cause of impairment;
[3] Name, date, and target pollutant(s) for any approved total
maximum daily load (TMDL); and
[4] Drainages to water supply reservoirs.
§ 71-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-24
69A:349
(g) Areas that are part of the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity
Inventory (PNDI) and a list of potential impacts and clearances
received (for regulated activities involving one acre or more
proposed earth disturbance).
(h) Woods, vegetated riparian buffers and other areas of natural
vegetation.
(i) Topography using contours (with elevations based on
established benchmarks) at intervals of two feet. The datum
used and the location, elevation and datum of any benchmarks
used shall be shown.
(j) Areas classified by the municipality as steep slopes.
(k) Soil names and boundaries, general type of soils with
hydrologic soil group noted, and in particular note areas most
conducive to infiltration BMPs, such as groups A and B, etc.,
estimated permeability in inches per hour, and location and
other results of all soil tests and borings.
(l) If present, areas with underlying carbonate geologic units,
existing sinkholes, subsidence or other karst features, and any
associated groundwater recharge areas with increased
vulnerability to contamination.
(m) Any contaminated surface or subsurface areas of the site.
(n) Water supply wells.
[1] Location of existing well(s) on the project property and
delineation of the(ir) recharge area(s) (if known), or a fiftyfoot
diameter assumed recharge area;
[2] Location of existing well(s) within 50 feet beyond the
boundary of the project property boundary (if public water
supply is proposed for the regulated activity);
(o) Current FEMA one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries,
elevations, and floodway boundaries for any special flood
hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property.
(p) Boundaries of riparian buffer(s) as required by § 71-13U.
(9) Location of the proposed regulated activity, limits of earth
disturbance (disturbed area), and BMPs and conveyances relative
to the location of existing natural resources and hydrologic
features and special management areas resulting from the site
design process of § 71-16.
(10) Description of existing and proposed ground cover and land use
including the type and total area.
§ 71-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-24
69A:350
(11) Existing and proposed man-made features including roads, paved
areas, buildings, and other impervious and pervious surfaces on the
project property (or an appropriate portion of the property as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) and
within the proposed disturbed area, and including the type and
total area of the following:
(a) Existing impervious surfaces;
(b) Existing impervious surfaces proposed to be replaced;
(c) Existing impervious surfaces to be permanently removed and
replaced with pervious ground cover;
(d) New or additional impervious surfaces; and
(e) Percent of the site covered by impervious surfaces for both the
existing and proposed postconstruction conditions.
(12) The total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
(13) All BMPs, conveyances and other stormwater management
facilities shall be located on the plan sheets, including design
drawings, profile drawings, construction details, materials to be
used, description of function, etc.
(14) Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the
time of concentration for the predevelopment and postconstruction
conditions shall be included.
(15) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
on-lot wastewater facilities (including subsurface tanks and leach
fields), and water supply lines within the site and within 50 feet
beyond the proposed limits of earth disturbance.
(16) A grading plan, including all areas of proposed earth disturbance
and the proposed regulated activity and delineating the boundary
or limits of earth disturbance of the site. The total disturbed area of
the site shall be noted in square feet and acres.
(17) Proposed final grade elevations and contours at intervals of two
feet.
(18) For each proposed BMP and conveyance included in the SWM site
plan (including any to be located on any property other than the
property being developed by the applicant), the following shall be
included on the SWM site plan map or plan sheets:
(a) Identification of the person responsible for ongoing
inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance of the BMP or
conveyance after completion of construction.
(b) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces,
and conveyances draining to and from the BMP or conveyance.
§ 71-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-24
69A:351
(c) Easements, as per the requirements of Article VII, that shall
include:
[1] Boundaries labeled with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree;
[2] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all BMPs and
conveyances for the purposes of inspection and
enforcement of the requirements of this chapter, and any
applicable O&M plans and O&M agreements;
[3] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all roadways necessary
to access all BMPs and conveyances, where roadways are
not to be dedicated to the municipality;
[4] Notes or other documentation as needed to grant the
owner of any BMP or conveyance the right of access for
the purpose of inspection, operation, maintenance, and
repair of the BMP or conveyance that is to be owned,
operated and maintained by a person other than the
municipality, and other than the owner of the property on
which the BMP or conveyance is located;
[5] A minimum twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer)
around all BMPs and conveyances;
[6] Sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way or roadway, as determined in consultation
with the Municipal Engineer; and
[7] Accompanying notes or other documentation as needed,
and in accordance with Article VII describing the type,
purpose and total area of easements, who the easement is
granted to, and the rights, duties and obligations of the
parties with respect to every BMP or conveyance.
(d) Boundaries of land areas (if any) for which deed restrictions
are required for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting
disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, indicating the area to
which the restriction applies with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree, and a written description of the
type, purpose and nature of the restriction.
(e) Other items that may be needed to comply with all other
requirements of Article VII.
C. A written description of the following information shall be included in
the SWM site plan:
§ 71-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-24
69A:352
(1) Existing features, conditions, natural resources, hydrologic
features, and special management areas [as listed in Subsection
B(8)];
(2) How the site design achieves the requirements of § 71-16, and if
applicable, where they could not be achieved and why;
(3) The overall stormwater management design concept for the project
and how the site design achieves the requirements of §§ 71-13
through 71-22 of Article III;
(4) Proposed features and conditions, proposed erosion and sediment
control features, proposed BMPs, conveyances, and any other
stormwater facilities;
(5) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of flow alteration
and runoff volumes, water quality and peak flows, etc.) on existing
natural resources, hydrologic features and special management
areas, adjacent and downgradient properties, and any existing
municipal or other stormwater conveyance system(s), that may be
affected by or receive runoff from the regulated activity (whether
located within or outside of the area of the regulated activity), and
specifics of how erosion, water quality and flow impacts will be
avoided or otherwise mitigated;
(6) Proposed nonpoint source pollution controls and justification and
confirmation that the proposed project will not result in any
increased pollutant loadings to any existing stream or stream
impairment identified by PADEP, or to any receiving water body;
(7) Expected project time schedule; and
(8) Description of construction stages or project phases, if so
proposed.
D. A detailed site evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional
for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
contaminated sites and brownfields, as described in § 71-13O and R of
this chapter.
E. Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation, such as
hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations, assumptions, BMP
loading ratios, etc., consistent with the guidelines and criteria
presented in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, and used in the design of the
BMPs, conveyances and other features proposed to be utilized for
stormwater management, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the requirements of this chapter have been met, specifically
including the requirements in §§ 71-13 and 71-16 through 71-21.
§ 71-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-24
69A:353
§ 71-25. SWM site plan submission.
A complete SWM site plan that complies with all applicable provisions of
§ 71-24 shall be submitted to the municipality for review and approval, as
follows:
F. Inspections, operation and maintenance requirements. The following
documents shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality for
review and approval as part of the SWM site plan, in accordance with
the requirements of Article VII, for each BMP and conveyance included
in the SWM site plan (including any to be located on any property other
than the property being developed by the applicant):
(1) An O&M plan;
(2) An O&M agreement;
(3) Any easement agreements that are needed to ensure access,
inspection, maintenance, operation, repair and permanent
protection of any permanent BMP(s) and conveyances associated
with the regulated activity;
(4) Any written deed, deed amendment or equivalent document (if
needed) to be recorded against a subject property, as shown on the
SWM site plan maps or plan sheets, or recorded plan sheets for the
purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or
conveyance; and
(5) Written approval, easement agreements, or other documentation
for discharges to adjacent or downgradient properties when
required to comply with § 71-13G and Article VII of this chapter.
G. An erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared
for and submitted to the Conservation District and/or municipality. A
letter of adequacy from the Conservation District, if applicable, must be
submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the
municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
H. A Highway Occupancy Permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) District Office must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's final
approval of the SWM site plan when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
A. The SWM site plan shall be coordinated with the applicable state and
federal permit process and the Municipal SALDO review process. All
permit approvals or letters of adequacy not yet received by the
applicant at the time of submittal of the SWM site plan to the
municipality must be submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a
condition of) the municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
§ 71-24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-25
69A:354
§ 71-26. SWM site plan review.
B. For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
C. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, the SWM
site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for review in accordance
with instructions from the municipality.
D. The number of copies of the SWM site plan to be submitted by the
applicant for review shall be in accordance with instructions from the
municipality.
E. The corresponding review fee shall be submitted to the municipality
simultaneously with the SWM site plan, per the municipality's fee
schedule.
F. Any submissions to the municipality that are found to be incomplete
shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant
with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which the
submission is incomplete.
G. Financial security, per the requirements of § 71-8, shall be submitted to
the municipality prior to approval of the SWM site plan or as part of the
financial security that is posted pursuant to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.105
A. The SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality for review by
the Municipal Engineer for consistency with this chapter and the
respective PA Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan(s). The Municipal
Engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or land
development for compliance with this chapter and the Municipal
SALDO provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. If applicable, the applicant shall have received a "letter of adequacy"
from the Conservation District or other PADEP approval for the
proposed regulated activity prior to (or as a condition of) final approval
by the municipality.
C. The Municipal Engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in
writing whether the SWM site plan is consistent with the requirements
of this chapter. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision and land
development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period
allowed by the MPC (as amended). If a longer notification period is
provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will
be so notified by the municipality.
(1) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall forward
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 71-25 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-26
69A:355
a letter of consistency to the municipality, who shall then forward a
copy to the applicant.
(2) The municipality may approve the SWM site plan with conditions
reasonably defined to make the SWM site plan compliant with the
terms of this chapter, and, if so, shall provide the conditions for
approval in writing.
(3) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with this chapter, the Municipal
Engineer will forward a letter to the municipality, with a copy to the
applicant citing the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the
inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance
may be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable
judgment as to compliance with this chapter. Any SWM site plans
that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted in accordance with § 71-28 when
consistent with this chapter. Resubmission will commence a new
municipal review and notification time period.
D. The municipality will not grant final approval to any proposed
subdivision, land development, or regulated activity specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent with this
chapter.
E. All required permits from PADEP shall be obtained and submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) final approval of any
proposed subdivision, land development, or other regulated activity by
the municipality.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity will be approved by the
municipality if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent
with this chapter, as determined by the Municipal Engineer. All
required permits from PADEP shall be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
G. The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the
municipality approved the SWM site plan. If stormwater management
facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been
constructed, or if constructed, as-built plans of these facilities have not
been approved within this five-year time period, then the applicant may
seek reinstatement of approval of the expired SWM site plan. If the
municipality determines that the expired SWM site plan is consistent
and compliant with current regulations and requirements, then the
expired SWM site plan will be reinstated; otherwise, it will be rejected.
The applicant will be prohibited from conducting any regulated activity
until a reinstated or newly approved SWM site plan is obtained in
accordance with § 71-28 of this chapter.
H. All or portions of the final approved SWM site plan shall be recorded (as
"record plans") per the instructions of the municipality.
§ 71-26 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-26
69A:356
§ 71-27. Revision of SWM site plans.
§ 71-28. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plans.
Any SWM site plan deemed inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised
and resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's
concerns documented in writing. The submission shall be addressed to
the municipality in accordance with § 71-25 of this chapter, distributed
accordingly, and be subject to review as specified in § 71-26 of this chapter.
The applicable municipal review fee shall accompany a resubmission of a
SWM site plan previously determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant.
I. Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall be responsible for
completing final as-built plans of all BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan as per the requirements of § 71-30 of this chapter.
A. A submitted SWM site plan under review by the municipality shall be
revised and resubmitted for any of the following reasons. The revised
SWM site plan shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 71-25 and
subject to review as specified in § 71-26 of this chapter:
(1) A change in stormwater management BMPs, conveyances, facilities
or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management BMPs,
conveyances, or facilities; or
(3) Soil or other site conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan
as determined by the Municipal Engineer, and the new conditions
necessitate design changes.
B. A revision to an approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.
§ 71-26 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-28
69A:357

ARTICLE V
Performance and Inspection of Regulated Activities; Final As-Built
Plans
§ 71-29. Performance and inspection of regulated activities.
§ 71-30. Final as-built plans.
A. All regulated activities shall be conducted, operated and maintained in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Articles III, VII, and VIII
of this chapter. When a SWM site plan is required by this chapter, all
regulated activities shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the final approved SWM site plan.
B. The Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee shall be provided
access to the site to inspect all phases of the erosion and sediment
control measures and installation of the permanent BMPs and
conveyances at such times as deemed appropriate by the Municipal
Engineer or other municipal designee.
C. Periodic inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee during construction. A set of design plans approved by the
municipality shall be on file and available for viewing at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity.
D. Inspections, including but not limited to a final inspection, of all
constructed BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater facilities, and
related improvements may be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or
other designee to confirm compliance with this chapter and with the
final approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy
permit, use permit, or other form of final approval of the project by the
municipality.
E. Upon completion of construction, every permanent stormwater BMP,
conveyance or other stormwater facility constructed or used as part of
the regulated activity shall be operated, maintained and inspected by
the landowner, or other designated person, in accordance with the
O&M plan and O&M agreement approved by the municipality.
F. The municipality or its designee may periodically inspect any
permanent stormwater BMP, conveyance or facility for compliance with
this chapter, an approved O&M plan, or an approved O&M agreement,
per the provisions of Article IX. The municipality may inspect at any
time it has reason to believe a violation exists. The municipality may
pursue enforcement for violations consistent with the provisions of
Article IX.
A. The applicant shall provide to the municipality final as-built plans
(signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional) of all BMPs,
conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related improvements
shown in the final approved SWM site plan.
§ 71-29 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-30
69A:359
B. The final as-built plans shall include the following for all BMPs,
conveyances, other stormwater facilities and related improvements:
(1) The location, elevations, dimensions, and as-built conditions of all
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related
improvements including topographic contours and all typical
details for storm drainage and conveyance systems, stormwater
management facilities and impervious surfaces (existing, proposed,
or constructed) included in the approved SWM site plan; and
(2) Explanation of any discrepancies or variations from the final
approved SWM site plan, other related approved construction
plans, calculations and specifications (and approved revisions
thereto).
C. The final as-built plans shall include a certification of completion signed
and sealed by a qualified licensed professional verifying that all
permanent BMPs and conveyances have been constructed according to
the final approved SWM site plan and related approved construction
plans, calculations and specifications.
D. All areas of the regulated activity draining to BMPs must be stabilized
prior to submittal of the as-built plans.
E. After receipt of the as-built plans by the municipality, the municipality
or its designee may review the as-built plans for consistency with this
chapter, the final approved SWM site plan, other related approved
construction plans, and subsequent approved revisions thereto, as well
as actual conditions at the site, and the municipality may conduct a final
inspection, as per § 71-29D.
F. The as-built plans must be received, reviewed and determined to be
acceptable by the municipality prior to:
(1) Close out of the drainage permit or other close out of the project by
the municipality;
(2) Release of the financial security or other performance guarantee;
and
(3) Dedication of the stormwater facilities to the municipality, or
conveyance to a homeowners' association, or other person
responsible for operation, maintenance and repair.
G. Final occupancy permit(s) or use permit or other final approval to use
or operate the constructed improvement may not be issued by the
municipality until the final as-built plans have been accepted.
H. Upon final acceptance of the final as-built plans by the municipality, the
applicant shall review and, if required by the municipality, revise and
rerecord the O&M plan and the O&M agreement to reflect the final asbuilt
conditions and information for each permanent BMP or
conveyance, in accordance with the requirements of Article VII.
§ 71-30 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-30
69A:360
I. All or portions of the final as-built plans shall be recorded if required by
the municipality.
§ 71-30 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-30
69A:361

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 71-31. SWM site plan review and inspection fees established.
§ 71-32. Expenses covered by fees.
A. Fees have been established by the municipality as adopted by
resolution or as otherwise allowed by law to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees
listed in § 71-32A shall be paid by the applicant at the time of SWM site
plan submission.
B. A review and inspection fee schedule has been established by resolution
of the municipal governing body based on the size of the regulated
activity and based on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site
plans, O&M plans and agreements and as-built plans, and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 71-29. The municipality shall periodically
update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review
costs are adequately reimbursed.
A. The fees required of the applicant by this chapter shall at a minimum
cover:
(1) Administrative costs;
(2) The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality, the Municipal
Engineer and other municipal consultants;
(3) Coordination and meetings with the applicant;
(4) The inspection of erosion and sediment control measures, BMPs,
conveyances and other related improvements during construction;
(5) Review of project communications, reports, and additional
supporting information;
(6) Other site inspections;
(7) The final inspection upon completion of the BMPs, conveyances,
and other stormwater management facilities and related
improvements presented in the SWM site plan; and
(8) Review of final as-built plan submission and revised calculations,
and inspections as needed.
B. The applicant shall also reimburse all expenses incurred by the
municipality for any additional work or municipal consultant fees
required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this chapter,
correct violations, and ensure proper completion of remedial actions.
§ 71-31 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-32
69A:363

ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Responsibilities and Easements
§ 71-33. General requirements for protection, operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs and conveyances.
The following shall apply to all regulated activities in accordance with the
requirements of the subsequent sections of this Article VII.
A. Continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities of all
permanent BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the municipality along with
the SWM site plan. The municipality may require an offer of a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of
the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the
municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any portion of or all of the BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
controls and facilities.
B. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be submitted to the
municipality for review and approval for all existing and proposed
permanent BMPs and man-made conveyances or other stormwater
facilities identified in the SWM site plan. Multiple BMPs or conveyances
may be addressed by a combined O&M plan where all such facilities are
similar in O&M requirements and ownership.
C. The O&M plan(s) and O&M agreement(s) shall name the person
identified in the SWM site plan who shall be the owner of and be
responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance
of each BMP or conveyance following completion of construction.
D. For any BMP or man-made conveyance (including any to be located on
any property other than the property being developed by the applicant)
to be owned by a person other than the municipality:
(1) An O&M agreement shall be submitted to the municipality for
review and approval; and
(2) The O&M plan shall be attached to, incorporated within, and
recorded as a public record along with a fully executed O&M
agreement, all of which shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant
that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner
and any heirs, administrators, successors in interest or assigns of
the landowner.
E. The following shall be provided for all BMPs and conveyances
(including any to be located on any property other than the property
being developed by the applicant) by an O&M or other agreement or by
otherwise establishing covenants, easements, deed restrictions, or by
dedication to the municipality:
§ 71-33 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-33
69A:365
§ 71-34. Operation and maintenance plans.
The following items shall be included in the O&M plan, unless otherwise
approved by the Municipal Engineer:
(1) Permanent protection of the BMP or conveyance from disturbance
or alteration;
(2) Right of entry and access for the municipality for inspection and
enforcement of this chapter (including § 71-44G) and any
applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; and
(3) Right of entry and access for the person owning the BMP or
conveyance and responsible for fulfilling the O&M requirements
when that person is not the municipality and is different from the
owner of the property on which the BMP or conveyance is located
(such as may be applicable for § 71-13G of this chapter).
F. All O&M and other agreements, covenants, easements and deed
restrictions shall:
(1) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval;
(2) Be recorded as a public record, upon approval, against each
parcel(s) which is part of the SWM site plan or otherwise contains
any BMP or conveyance comprising part of the regulated activity
which is the subject of an O&M agreement; and
(3) Run with the land and be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns.
G. The materials, documents and content required by this Article VII may
be prepared in conjunction with and incorporated with similar
materials, documents and content required for other permit or approval
applications, such as those required by PADEP for the postconstruction
stormwater management plan.
A. A plan sheet(s) or map(s) showing each BMP and man-made
conveyance and which shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Property(ies) identification (owner name and address; and property
address and/or lot and/or tax parcel number, etc.), property
boundaries and tax parcel number of the land parcel on which the
BMP or conveyance is located.
(2) Name, address, phone number, date prepared, signature and seal
of the licensed professional responsible for preparation of the plan
sheet or map.
(3) Clear identification of the location, dimensions, and function of
each BMP or conveyance covered by the O&M plan.
§ 71-33 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-34
69A:366
(4) The location of each BMP and conveyance relative to roadways,
property boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks and existing
natural drainage features such as streams, lakes, ponds, or other
bodies of water within the immediate vicinity of, or receiving
discharge from, the BMP or conveyance.
(5) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces and
conveyances draining to and from the BMP.
(6) Representative elevations and/or topographic contours at intervals
of two feet, or other as acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(7) Other features including FEMA floodplain and floodway
boundaries, sinkholes, etc. located within the immediate proximity
of each BMP and conveyance.
(8) Locations of areas of vegetation to be managed or preserved that
function as a BMP or conveyance.
(9) The locations of all surface and subsurface utilities, on-lot waste
water facilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines within 20 feet of
each BMP or conveyance.
(10) The following as it pertains to any easements, covenants and deed
restrictions established for each applicable BMP or conveyance:
(a) Boundaries delineated with bearings and distances shown that
encompass the BMP or conveyance and that includes a twentyfoot
perimeter area surrounding these features and sufficient
vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way and
roadway;
(b) Labels specifying the type and purpose of the easement,
covenant, or deed restriction and who it benefits; and
(c) Labels with reference to any corresponding easement
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other document to be
recorded.
(11) The plan sheet or map shall be prepared at sufficient scale for
municipal review, and ultimately for the use by the person
responsible for operation and maintenance, and shall also be
prepared at a legible scale that meets the requirements for
recordation along with (and as an attachment to) the O&M
agreement and O&M plan at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds.
B. The following information shall be included in the O&M plan and
written in a manner consistent with the knowledge and understanding
of the person who will be responsible for the maintenance activities:
(1) The name and address of the following:
§ 71-34 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-34
69A:367
(a) Property(ies) on which each BMP or conveyance is located;
(b) Owner of the property;
(c) Owner of each stormwater BMP or conveyance who is
responsible for implementation of the O&M plan;
(d) Person responsible for maintaining adequate liability
insurance and payment of taxes; and
(e) Person preparing the O&M plan.
(2) A description of each BMP and conveyance and how the BMPs and
conveyances are intended to function.
(3) A description of actions necessary to operate, inspect, and maintain
each BMP or conveyance, including but not limited to:
(a) Lawn care, vegetation maintenance, landscaping and planting;
(b) Clean out of accumulated debris and sediment (including from
grates, trash racks, inlets, etc.); and
(c) Other anticipated periodic maintenance and repair.
(4) The following statement shall be included: "The landowner
acknowledges that, per the provisions of the municipality's
Stormwater Management Ordinance, it is unlawful to modify,
remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the effectiveness of, or place
any structure, other vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or
other waste or debris into any permanent stormwater management
BMP or conveyance described in this O&M plan or to allow the
BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which does not conform
to this O&M plan, without written approval from the municipality."
(5) Inspection and maintenance schedules.
(6) Explanation of the purpose and limitations of any easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions associated with any BMP or
conveyance that are to be recorded against the property.
C. A statement that no BMP or man-made conveyance may be used by the
owner or others for any purpose other than its intended stormwater
control function, or, if approved by the Municipal Engineer, a statement
of specific allowable uses of the BMP (i.e., recreational benefits that
may be associated with certain BMPs owned by a homeowners
association, or allowable uses by an individual residential landowner).
D. A statement that establishes a reasonable time frame for remedy of
deficiencies found by the owner during their inspections.
E. Language needed to fulfill the requirements of § 71-37B, C and D of this
chapter.
§ 71-34 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-35
69A:368
§ 71-35. Operation and maintenance agreements.
§ 71-36. Easements and deed restrictions.
A. An O&M agreement shall be required for any BMP or man-made
conveyance to be owned by a person other than the municipality, and
the agreement shall:
(1) Be between the owner of the BMP or conveyance and the
municipality, and shall be substantially the same as the O&M
agreement in Appendix E;106
(2) Incorporate the approved O&M plan(s) for all BMPs or
conveyances to be covered by the O&M agreement;
(3) Set forth the rights, duties and obligations of the owner of the BMP
or conveyance and the municipality, and be consistent with the
approved O&M plan(s);
(4) Be recorded as a deed restriction or restrictive covenant that runs
with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review prior to approval of the
SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the designated
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted for signature by
the municipality; and
(7) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal
approval of the O&M plan and prior to the start of construction.
B. Other items or conditions may be required by the municipality to be
included in the O&M agreement where determined necessary by the
municipality to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance
of all permanent BMPs and conveyances.
C. After approval of the final as-built plans per the requirements of Article
V, the applicant shall review and, if necessary and if required by the
municipality, revise and rerecord the O&M plan and O&M agreement to
reflect the final as-built conditions of each BMP and conveyance if
different from the information included in the original recorded
documents.
A. Easements shall be established in connection with any regulated
activity for all permanent BMPs and conveyances that will not be
dedicated to or otherwise owned by the municipality, (including any to
be located on any property other than the property being developed by
the applicant), and shall:
106. Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Township offices.
§ 71-35 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-36
69A:369
(1) Include all land area occupied by each BMP or conveyance;
(2) Include a twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as determined
in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) surrounding the
feature(s);
(3) Provide sufficient vehicular ingress and egress from a public rightof-
way and roadway;
(4) Permanently protect every BMP and conveyance from disturbance
or alteration where not otherwise protected by a recorded O&M
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other means;
(5) Grant the municipality the right, but not the duty, to access every
BMP and conveyance from a public right-of-way or public roadway
to conduct periodic inspections and to undertake other actions that
may be necessary to enforce the requirements of this chapter, or of
any applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; where roadways will
not be dedicated to the municipality, the municipality shall be
granted access to the private roadways as necessary to access
every BMP and conveyance;
(6) Grant the owner of each BMP and conveyance the right to access,
inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or conveyance
when the feature is to be owned, operated and maintained by a
person other than the municipality and other than the owner of the
parcel on which it is located;
(7) Be shown, with bearings and distances noted, on the SWM site plan
map/plan sheets, O&M plan map/plan sheets, final as-built plans,
and be signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement
shall run with the land and bind the landowner granting the
easement, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity; and
(9) Be recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds
following municipal approval and prior to the start of construction.
B. For any BMP or conveyance to be owned by a person other than the
municipality or the landowner owning the parcel upon which a BMP or
conveyance is located, an easement agreement shall be prepared and
executed between the landowner and the owner of the BMP or
conveyance which shall:
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of the BMP or conveyance;
(2) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
§ 71-36 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-36
69A:370
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a qualified licensed
professional;
(3) Grant an easement from the landowner to the owner of each BMP
and conveyance, establishing the right and obligation to occupy,
access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or
conveyance;
(4) Include a description of the purpose of the easement and the
responsibilities of the parties involved;
(5) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(6) Restrict the landowner's use of the easement area of the parcel on
which the BMP or conveyance is located, consistent with the rights
granted to the owner of the BMP or conveyance;
(7) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(8) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the owner of the
BMP(s) or conveyance(s) and the landowner and submitted for
signature by the municipality;
(9) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land affected by the easement and that the easement
agreement is binding upon the parties to the easement agreement,
their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into
perpetuity;
(10) Contain additional provisions or information as required by the
municipality; and
(11) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds against all parcels affected
by the terms of the easement agreement, within 30 days of the
municipality's approval of the corresponding O&M plan.
C. For any BMP or conveyance which is designed to receive runoff from
another parcel or parcels and which is owned by the landowner of the
parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located, in addition to any
easement or easement agreement required pursuant to Subsection A or
B, an easement agreement shall be prepared and executed between the
landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance
and the owner of the BMP or conveyance. This easement agreement
shall:
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of all affected parcels and of
the BMP or conveyance;
§ 71-36 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-36
69A:371
(2) Provide for the grant of a drainage easement from the owner of the
BMP or conveyance to the landowner of the parcel(s) draining to
the BMP, which shall extend from the shared parcel boundary(ies)
to the receiving BMP and shall include the connecting flow path(s)
or conveyance;
(3) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a licensed professional.
(4) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(5) State that the purpose of the easement agreement is to ensure the
continuous right of the discharging parcel to discharge onto the
parcel containing the BMP and into the BMP or conveyance;
(6) Restrict the BMP or conveyance owner's use of the easement area
of the parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located,
consistent with the purpose of the easement granted;
(7) Establish the duty and responsibility of the landowner of the parcel
or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance to maintain the
existing drainages on the discharging parcel or parcels as designed
and constructed to discharge to the receiving BMP;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land and will bind all parties to the easement
agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity;
(9) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(10) Contain all additional provisions or information as the municipality
may require upon review; and
(11) Be executed by the parties to the easement agreement and
recorded at the Chester County Recorder of Deeds Office against
the draining parcel(s) and the parcel upon which the BMP or
conveyance is located within 30 days of the municipality's approval
of the corresponding O&M plan.
D. For any area(s) shown on the SWM site plan maps/plan sheets or asbuilt
plan sheets as requiring, or area(s) that is otherwise determined to
require, deed restriction(s) for the purpose of protecting and
prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, such deed restrictions
will be incorporated into a written deed, restrictive covenant, or
equivalent document. The deed or other document shall:
(1) Include a clear and understandable description of the purpose,
terms and conditions of the restricted use;
§ 71-36 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-36
69A:372
§ 71-37. Other postconstruction responsibilities.
(2) Include the written legal description (metes and bounds
description) of the area to which the restrictions apply that is
consistent with the boundary shown on the O&M plan sheets and
SWM site plan maps/plan sheets;
(3) Make reference to any corresponding O&M plan(s) and O&M
agreement(s);
(4) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the terms of the
restriction run with the land and shall be binding upon the
landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest, and
assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the landowner and
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted to the
municipality; and
(7) Be fully executed and recorded at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds within 30 days of the municipality's approval of
the O&M plan.
A. The provisions of § 71-41 of this chapter shall apply to any permanent
BMP or conveyance that is constructed as part of an approved SWM
site plan or covered by an approved O&M plan.
B. The person responsible for the operation and maintenance of a BMP or
conveyance shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least 10
years. These records shall be submitted to the municipality, if
requested.
C. Upon final inspection, the municipality shall inform the person
responsible for the operation and maintenance whether the submission
of periodic (annual or other frequency) inspection and maintenance
reports will be required.
D. The owner of each BMP and conveyance shall keep on file with the
municipality the name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for maintenance activities and implementation of the O&M
plan. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by
the BMP or conveyance owner to the municipality within 20 working
days of the change.
§ 71-36 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-37
69A:373

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 71-38. Prohibited Discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or the waters of the
commonwealth that are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by
the municipality to be significant contributors to pollution to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including water line and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air-conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(8) Diverted stream flows;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(11) Lawn watering;
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(14)Water from individual residential car washing; and
§ 71-38 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-38
69A:375
§ 71-39. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 71-38C
above:
§ 71-40. Roof drains and sump pumps.
(15) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth, or is notified of such significant contribution of
pollution by PADEP, the municipality will notify the responsible person
to cease the discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection D, the
discharger shall, within a reasonable time period, as determined by the
municipality consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge, cease the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the separate storm sewer system from indoor
drains and sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to a separate storm sewer system, which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains and sump pump discharges shall not be connected to
sanitary sewers.
B. Roof drain, sump pump, foundation and footing drain discharges:
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, shall discharge to infiltration
or vegetative BMPs, or to vegetated or other areas with adequate
capacity;
(2) May be connected to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches
only if determined necessary or acceptable by the Municipal
Engineer; and
(3) Shall be considered in stormwater management calculations to
demonstrate that conveyance and receiving facilities have
adequate capacity.
§ 71-38 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-41
69A:376
§ 71-41. Alteration of BMPs.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter, or impair the
effectiveness of any stormwater BMPs, conveyances, facilities, areas or
structures unless the activity is part of an approved maintenance
program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional
vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a
BMP or conveyance, or within a stormwater easement, that would limit
or alter the functioning of the stormwater BMP or conveyance, without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 71-41 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-41
69A:377

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 71-42. Public nuisance.
§ 71-43. Right of entry.
§ 71-44. Enforcement.
A. Any regulated activity conducted in the violation of any provision of this
chapter is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. A separate violation will be found to exist for each section of this
chapter found to have been violated.
D. To the extent that the municipality does not enforce any provision of
this chapter, such action or inaction shall not constitute a waiver by the
municipality of its rights of future enforcement hereunder.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized officers or
agents of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment
controls and permanent stormwater BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater facilities both during and after completion of a regulated
activity, or for compliance with any requirement of this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any BMP, conveyance or other stormwater
facility in the municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP or
conveyance, or other stormwater facilities.
C. Failure of the landowner or representative to grant access to the
municipality within 72 hours of notification, verbal or written, is a
violation of this chapter.
A. The Municipal Engineer or other designee is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The Municipal
governing body may delegate enforcement duties, including the initial
determination of ordinance violation and service of notice, if notice is
given, to such other officers or agents as the municipality shall deem
qualified for that purpose.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the real property on
which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has
occurred to comply with the applicable terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 71-42 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-44
69A:379
C. All municipal inspections for compliance with the approved SWM site
plan shall be the responsibility of the municipality or its designee.
D. During any stage of the work of any regulated activity, if the Municipal
Engineer or other designee determines that the erosion and sediment
control measures, permanent BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
facilities are not being installed or maintained in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan, the municipality may suspend or revoke any
existing permits or other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected
or until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, if and as
determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee.
E. In the event that the Municipal Engineer or other designee finds that a
person has violated a provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued by the municipality, or
any O&M plan or O&M agreement approved by the municipality, the
municipality may order compliance by written notice of the violation to
the landowner.
F. Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs
and/or forfeiture of financial security;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls, BMPs, and conveyances;
and
(7) Operation, maintenance or repair of BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities.
G. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the violation(s), citing to
specific sections of this chapter which have not been met, and establish
a time limit for commencement of correction and completion of
correction of the violations(s). The notice shall provide for a right of the
landowner's appeal to the Municipal governing body in accordance with
§ 71-47 of this chapter. Said notice shall further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the
established deadline, possible sanctions, clearly described, may be
imposed, or the work may be done by the municipality or designee, and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
§ 71-44 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-44
69A:380
§ 71-45. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 71-46. Violations and penalties.
H. Failure to comply within the time specified in such notice shall also
subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law
or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit or approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, or endangers the life, health, safety, or property of
others; or
(4) Failure to correct a violation within the allowed time period allowed
per notice given by the municipality.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, unless there is immediate
danger or threat of such danger to life, public health or property, at the
request of the applicant, the municipality's governing body shall
schedule a hearing on the violation and proposed revocation or
suspension, pursuant to public notice. The expense of a hearing shall be
the applicant's responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or other designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance;
and
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit or approval in
accordance with this chapter.
A. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
brought before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject
to the payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000,
§ 71-44 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 71-46
69A:381
§ 71-47. Appeals.
§ 71-48. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2014.
plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for
a term of not more than 30 days. Each section of this chapter violated
shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof
in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute
a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a
separate fine imposed by the District Justice of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution or, upon default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in
the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and
penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer.
B. In addition, the municipality may, through its solicitor, institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or
equitable forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may include costs, fees,
and charges, including the municipality's attorney's fees (charged at
the hourly rate approved by the governing body of the municipality) and
costs, as may be permitted by law.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the municipality
shall have the right at any or all times deemed necessary by the
Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any property within the
municipality to inspect and, upon determination of a violation of this
chapter, to correct the violation, with all expenses associated with
correcting the violation to be charged to the property owner
responsible for the violation.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer or other
designee relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
municipality's governing body within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality's governing
body relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 71-46 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 71-48
69A:382
Chapter 72
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Committee — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Numbering of subdivision lots — See Ch. 54.
Sewers — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 71-48 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 71-48
72:383

ARTICLE I
Purposes; Scope; Interpretation
§ 72-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1976."
§ 72-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 72-3. Scope. [Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
From and after the effective date of this chapter or any amendment hereof,
every subdivision and every land development shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and all standards and specifications adopted
as part of this chapter.
A. Provide for the harmonious, orderly, efficient and integrated growth of
the Township.
B. Assure that land to be developed shall be of such character that it can
be used safely without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, erosion,
excessive noise, smoke or other menace.
C. Provide for proper control of runoff and drainage, water supply, sewage
disposal and other utility services.
D. Provide for the coordination of existing and proposed land, parks,
streets and highway use.
E. Provide for a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, on streets and pathways of such width, grade and
location as to accommodate prospective traffic as determined by
existing and probable future land and building uses.
F. Provide for arrangement of building lots and streets so as to afford
adequate light, view and air and to facilitate fire protection.
G. Assure that land will be developed with full and constant regard to
topography and geologic conditions, so that the natural beauty of the
land and vegetation shall be protected and enhanced.
H. Provide for adequate open spaces for recreation, light and air and for
adequate sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other community
services, which shall be so located as to provide access to such facilities
for residents of all neighborhoods.
I. Secure equitable handling of subdivision and land development plans
by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance both by
subdividers and Township officials.
§ 72-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-4
72:385
§ 72-4. Interpretation and application of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, its
provisions shall be held to be the minimum required for the promotion and
protection of the public health, welfare and safety. Where the provisions
of this chapter and all standards and specifications pursuant to it impose
greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter and its standards and specifications shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 72-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-4
72:386
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 72-5. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meaning herein indicated:
§ 72-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words and/or phrases have the meanings indicated
below:
ALLEY — A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or
rear of two or more lots.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his or its heirs, personal
representatives, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, for the approval of a subdivision plan or for the
approval of a land development plan, which is required to be filed and
approved prior to the start of construction or development.[Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
BICYCLE — A pedal-propelled, two- or three-wheeled conveyance.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BUILDING — Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land and
has enclosing walls or a roof.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
minimum required distance between any structure or building to be erected
and an adjacent right-of-way.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The portion of a street or alley, right-of-way, paved
or unpaved, customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel over
the street.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
A. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular.
B. Words used in the present or past tense shall include the future tense.
C. The words "person," "applicant," "subdivider" and "owner" shall include
a corporation, unincorporated association, trust, partnership or other
legal entity, as well as an individual.
D. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
§ 72-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-6
72:387
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site, designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development, but
not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities. "Common open space" shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such improvements as are in the subdivision or development
plan, as finally approved, and as are appropriate for the recreation of
residents.
CRITICAL AREAS — Areas of a subdivision or land development particularly
subject to erosion and/or sedimentation, such as areas not covered with
vegetation due to grading, cutting or filling; or excessively long slopes or
steep grades; or low areas with poor drainage.
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-ofway
for pedestrian and bicycle use extending from a street into a block or
across a block to another street.
CUL-DE-SAC — A single access minor street intersecting with another
street and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other
end.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990; 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
DESIGN STANDARDS — Minimum standards for the layout by which a
subdivision or land development is developed.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water and the method of directing such flow,
whether natural or artificial.[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or structure, or part thereof, designed to
be occupied as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use
of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the
owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall
have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent
with the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The movement of soil by the action of wind and/or water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with material to the extent that it is resistant to infiltration by water,
including, but not limited to, conventional impervious surfaces such as
paved streets and driveways, compacted stone, sidewalks and walkways,
concrete pavers, patios, roofs, buildings, and structures. Paving includes
any hard surface, such as concrete, cobblestones, bricks, flagstones, gravel
(either compacted or used by motor vehicles), or any similar
§ 72-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-6
72:388
material.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990; amended 11-12-2003
by Ord. No. 12-2003; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, paving, curbing, streetlights, fire hydrants,
water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, detention basins, retention
basins, culverts, streets, sidewalks, monuments, open space improvements,
recreational facilities, buffer and screen plantings, street and replacement
trees and similar improvements.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS — Minimum standards for the
construction of the required improvements, such as streets, curbs,
sidewalks, water mains, sewers, drainage, public utilities and other items
required to render the land suitable for the use proposed.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having
a proprietary interest in land shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this chapter.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A divided highway for through traffic with
partial control of access and generally with grade separations at major
intersections.[Added 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
LOT AREA — As defined in the West Goshen Township Zoning
Ordinance.107[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure;
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features; or
(2)
The addition of any accessory building, including farm buildings,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(3)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-6
72:389
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which is surrounded on all sides by one or more
lots and adjoins a street only by an access strip designed and intended to
provide ingress and egress exclusively to the lot.[Added 11-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 15-1987]
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least
four inches in diameter or square and at least 36 inches in length. The
monument shall be tapered so that the dimensions at the bottom are at
least two inches greater than the top, to minimize movement caused by
frost.[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968,
as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as amended from time to time.108[Added
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building containing more than one
dwelling unit.109
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of streets,
drawings, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as required by
this chapter.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact land development plan or subdivision
plan prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor for
official recording as required by the MPC to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 7-1990]
PLAN, MAJOR STREET — The element of the County or Township
Comprehensive Plan, which shall show the general location, alignment
and dimensions, and the identification and classification of existing and
proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The West Goshen Township Planning
Commission.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan) and or Future
Land Use Plan and/or Ultimate Right-of-Way Plan and/or Official Map or
other such plans, or portions thereof, as may be adopted, pursuant to
ordinance or statute, for the area of the Township in which the subdivision
is located.
PLAN, OFFICIAL SEWAGE — The Township's comprehensive plan of
sewage facilities adopted in compliance with Pennsylvania Act
537.110[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative land development plan or subdivision
plan prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, in
lesser detail than the required final plan, showing approximate proposed
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
109. Editor's Note: The former definition of "plan, conservation," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 72-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-6
72:390
streets, drainage and lot layout and other improvements required by this
chapter to be shown on that plan as a basis for consideration prior to
preparation of a final plan.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
PLAN, PROFILE — A plan prepared by a registered engineer or registered
land surveyor showing the vertical section of the existing grade and
proposed grade along the center line of any proposed street or alley and
any street appurtenances to be constructed or installed, which must include
a typical cross section of the street construction and, whenever required
by the Township Engineer, the grades of all street rights-of-way and/or
curblines.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of the County Planning Commission and the Township Board
of Supervisors which is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder
of Deeds.111
PLAT — The map or plan of the subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Any persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners.[Added 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in the approval of a subdivision plan or land
development plan.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986, P.L. 388, No. 84, known as the "Sunshine Act."112[Added
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not
be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of the hearing.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No.
7-1990113]
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on two generally parallel streets (excluding service streets or alleys), with
vehicular access solely from one street.
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch plan, preliminary plan and/or
final plan by the Planning Commission Engineer and the West Goshen
111. Editor's Note: The former definition of "plan, sketch," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990.
112. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "resident property
owner" and "resubdivision." Ordinance No. 3-1993, adopted 5-25-1993, repealed the
former definition of "reserve strip," which immediately followed this definition.
§ 72-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-6
72:391
Township Board of Supervisors to determine compliance with this chapter
and the administrative regulations, design standards and improvement
specifications enacted pursuant thereto.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land reserved or dedicated as a street, alley,
crosswalk or for other public purposes.
ROADWAY — See "cartway."
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COMMUNITY — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a
system of pipes to a treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a
neighborhood area.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to treat
sanitary sewage within the boundaries of any individual lot.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a publicly owned central treatment and disposal plant.
SEDIMENT — The resulting residue from erosion.
SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which raw sewage is
changed into solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate further treatment
and final disposal.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from a
point 4.0 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5 foot
above the center line of road surface.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by
measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
STREET, PUBLIC — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, i.e.,
not limited to the cartway, intended for general public use as a means of
vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot.
The term "public street" includes any thoroughfare intended for public use.
Public streets are further classified according to the functions they perform:
MINOR LOCAL STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
A.
B. (Reserved)114
C. (Reserved)115
COLLECTOR STREET or FEEDER STREET — A street which, in
addition to providing access to abutting properties, intercepts minor
D.
114. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which defined the term "cul-de-sac street," was
repealed 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993.
115. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which defined the term "marginal access street," was
repealed 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993.
§ 72-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-6
72:392
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation or agent
authorized thereby, which undertakes the subdivision of land, as defined
by these regulations, as the owner, lessee or equitable owner or agent
authorized thereby of the land being subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the Court for distribution to heirs or devises,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or
any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 7-1990]
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen
Township.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TILE DISPOSAL FIELD — A system of open-jointed or perforated pipes laid
in the upper strata of the soil to distribute sewage effluent into the soil for
absorption and evaporation.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly designated by the Supervisors to
perform the duties of Township Engineer.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No.
7-1990]
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial swale, stream, channel, drain or
culvert in which water flows continuously or intermittently. Such term shall
include, but not be limited to, a channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run and
stream.[Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, COMMUNITY — A system for supplying
and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings but generally not confined to one neighborhood.
streets to provide a route serving 50 or more dwelling units to give
access to community facilities and/or other collector and major streets
(streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall generally be
considered collector streets); or which connects a local street system
with a major street or highway system.
MAJOR STREET or THROUGH HIGHWAY (ARTERIAL) — A street
serving a large volume of comparatively high-speed and long-distance
traffic, including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; or a highway on
which preference is given to the through movement of traffic at the
expense of cross traffic.
E.
§ 72-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-6
72:393
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system for supplying and
distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
§ 72-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-6
72:394
ARTICLE III
Subdivision and Land Development Control
§ 72-7. Adherence to requirements.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be affected and no
land development shall be effected and no street, alley, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer or water main or other facilities in connection therewith shall
be laid out, constructed opened or dedicated for public use or travel or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting or to abut thereon,
except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 72-8. Prerequisites to sale of lots and construction. [Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
No lot in a subdivision or land development may be sold, no permit to erect,
alter or repair any building or structure upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued and no building or structure may be erected
in a subdivision or land development unless and until a subdivision and/
or land development plan, as applicable, has been approved and recorded
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and until the required
improvements have been installed or their construction, installation and
completion have been guaranteed by deposit with the Township and the
West Goshen Sewer Authority, as applicable, of financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the costs of any such improvements.
§ 72-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-8
72:395

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
[Amended 3-28-1978 by Ord. No. 2-1978; 5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
5-1988; 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
§ 72-9. General.
All preliminary and final subdivision and land development plans shall be
reviewed and shall be either approved or disapproved by the Planning
Commission and Supervisors, as applicable, in accordance with the
procedure specified in this article. Any incomplete application received for
filing shall not be accepted but shall be returned to the parties submitting
the application within a reasonable time, together with an explanation of
the items of incompleteness. The time within which the Township must
review a plan, render a decision and communicate it to any applicant, as
specified in this chapter, shall not commence to run until such time as a
complete application is submitted and accepted by the Township for filing.
§ 72-10. Voluntary sketch plan.
§ 72-11. Sketch plan procedure.
A. A sketch plan for any subdivision or land development may, at the
developer's option, be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review. A sketch plan is not required to be filed, and submission of a
sketch plan does not constitute a formal submission of an application
for approval of a subdivision or a land development. The sketch plan
procedure is provided to afford the developer the opportunity to submit
information for review and informal discussion with the Planning
Commission before engaging in the detailed engineering design
required for the preparation of a preliminary plan.
B. The submission of a sketch plan shall not preclude the developer from
proceeding with preliminary or final subdivision or land development
applications, and the failure of the Planning Commission to act on any
sketch plan shall not result in a deemed approval thereof.
A. For informational purposes, three copies of the sketch plan may be
submitted to the Township Secretary for distribution to the Township
Engineer and Planning Commission. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 3-2004]
B. When submitted, the sketch plan shall show the following:
(1) A location map which highlights the location of the tract within the
Township and depicts adjoining and nearby roads.
(2) Tract boundaries, with dimensions and names of abutting owners.
(3) North arrow, scale and date.
§ 72-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-11
72:397
§ 72-12. Submission of preliminary plan.
(4) Streets on and adjacent to or near the tract, properly named or
identified.
(5) Natural features of the site related to existing topography, soils,
vegetation and watercourses, including such features as steep
slopes, very steep slopes, flood hazard areas, flood-fringe areas and
other critical environmental areas.
(6) Man-made features of the site, including existing buildings and
major structures.
(7) The proposed general street and lot layout.
(8) In the case of a land development plan, the proposed location of all
buildings and major structures, parking areas and other
construction and/or improvements.
(9) Proposed method(s) of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal.
C. The Planning Commission will endeavor to review submitted sketch
Plans on the next convenient date available to the Planning Commission
at a public work session, and the applicant will be notified. No time
limitation is imposed upon the Planning Commission in its review of a
sketch plan nor shall any formal procedure or time constraints be
construed to apply to any such review. The Planning Commission may
but shall not be required to make written comments to the developer
about any sketch plan, or it may report its comments orally at a public
work session.
A. A preliminary plan and profile plan for the subdivision or land
development prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth
hereinafter in this chapter shall be filed with the Township Secretary
during normal business hours. The Township Secretary or his designee
shall review each plan submitted for filing to ensure that the application
is complete as required by this section. Incomplete items shall be noted
on the face of the application or in a separate writing, and the
application, together with all plans and accompanying documents,
including the filing fees, shall be returned within a reasonable time to
the applicant.
B. Official submission of a preliminary plan shall consist of: [Amended
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999116, 11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
12-2003]
(1) Four copies of the application for preliminary plan review.
(2) Eight copies of the preliminary plan. [Amended 3-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 3-2004]
116. Editor's Note: This local law also provided that Subsection B(3), (4) and (5) be
renumbered as B(4), (5) and (6), respectively.
§ 72-11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-12
72:398
(3) A digital copy of the complete plan set of drawings in either a .DXF
or .DWG format. The digital plans shall be submitted on a compact
disc (CD) and shall not be compressed or zipped. The submission
shall not include externally referenced drawings (X-refs) and shall
have all redundant and unnecessary data purged. All raster images
shall be in a drawing file format. The digital submission shall be
prepared to meet commonly accepted CAD and engineering
standards for layers, but shall, as a minimum, include the following
standard layer names and colors. If the following minimum
standard layer names are not native to the original drawing, then a
layer translation to the standard layer names and colors noted
below shall be performed before submission. The (______) in the
layer name is the Township development application number.
Applicants shall contact the Township for this number prior to
submission and include this in their layer identification name.
Lot Lines:
— Lot lines in (_____) - RP - Lot Lines: #3 Green
— Lot line text in (_____) - RP - Text: #2 Yellow
Right of Way:
— Right-of-way lines in (_____) - RP - ROW: #3 Green
— Right-of-way lines text in (_____) - RP - Text: #2 Yellow
Street Center Lines:
— Street center lines in (_____) - RP - CL segmented to
intersections: #1 Red
— Street center lines text in (______ - RP - CL - Text: #2
Yellow
Public easements:
— Water easements in (_____) - PE - WEASE: #2 Yellow
— Sewer easements in (_____) - PE - SEASE: #2 Yellow
— Storm sewer easements in (_____) - PE - SSEASE: #2
Yellow
— Access in (_____) - PE - ACCESS: #2 Yellow
— Easement text in (_____) - PE - TEXT: #2 Yellow
Private or deed-restricted easements:
— Water easements in (_____) - RE - WEASE: #2 Yellow
— Sewer easements in (_____) - RE - SEASE: #2 Yellow
— Storm sewer easements in (_____) - RE - SSEASE: #2
Yellow
— Access in (____) - RE - ACCESS: #2 Yellow
— Easement text in (_____) - RE - TEXT: #2 Yellow
Topography:
§ 72-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-12
72:399
— Existing in (_____) - T - EXIST: #8 Grey
— Proposed in (_____) - T- PROP: #4 Cyan
— Benchmark and datum (see datum and monumentation
(_____) - TT - BANDD: #5 Blue
— Topography text in (_____) - TT - TEXT: #2 Yellow
Monumentation:
— Existing in (_____) - M - EXIST: #5 Blue
— Proposed in (_____) - M - PROP: #5 Blue
— Existing features in (_____) - EX - FEAT: #8 Grey
— Monumentation text in (_____) - EX - TEXT: #2 Yellow
Environmental features (where specifically required by
ordinance):
— Floodplain:
— FEMA in (_____) - EF-FP - FEMA: #2 Yellow
— Calculated in (_____) - EF-FP - CACL: #1 Red
— Wetlands in (_____) - EF - WETLANDS: #4 Cyan
— Alluvial soils in (_____) - EF - ASOILS: #5 Blue
— Steep slopes in (_____) - EF - SSLOPES: #9 Grey
— Environmental features text in (_____) - EF - TEXT: #2
Yellow
Utilities:
— Sanitary sewer in (_____) - U - SAN: #3 Green
— On-lot sanitary in (_____) - U - ONLOT-SAN: #1 Red
— Water (public) in (_____) - U - PWATER: #2 Yellow
— On-lot well in (_____) U - WELL: #1 Red
— Gas in (____) - U - GAS: #1 Red
— Electric in (_____) - U - ELEC: #2 Yellow
— Telephone in (_____) - U - TELE: #1 Red
— Utilities text in (_____) - U - TEXT: #2 Yellow
Stormwater:
— Stormwater facilities in (_____) - S - SWF: #3 Green
— Stormwater text in (_____) - S - TEXT: #2 Yellow
(4) Four completed copies of the planning modules for land
development.
(5) Four copies of any other document, report or other supplementary
data and plans required by any provision of this chapter.
§ 72-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-12
72:400
§ 72-13. Preliminary plan review.
(6) The filing fees established by resolution of the Supervisors for the
filing of the plan and to reimburse the Township for charges
incurred by it in the payment of its professional consultants and
engineer in reviewing and/or issuing reports with respect to the
plan submission.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application in accordance with the
preceding subsection, the Township Secretary shall forward complete
copies of the application for review, the plan and all supplementary
documents to the Township Engineer and the Township Planning
Commission and such parts of the application to other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction, as required. The number of copies for
distribution shall be as administratively determined by the Township
Secretary from time to time. One complete copy of the application and
plans submitted shall be retained for the Township master file.
A. Township Engineer. The Township Engineer's review shall include an
examination of the content of the plans to verify that all information
required by this chapter is presented in the plan submitted; an
investigation of the plan to verify compliance with this and all other
applicable Township ordinances; an examination of the engineering
feasibility of the scheme of development in compliance with this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the Township; and such
other review as he shall decide is relevant and material. The Township
Engineer may confer with the developer or the developer's engineer in
his review and analysis of the plan and shall forward his written
comments on the plan to the Planning Commission within a reasonable
time.
B. Township Planning Commission review and decision procedures.
[Amended 12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999; 5-9-2001 by Ord. No.
7-2001; 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
(1) Upon receipt of the Township Engineer's comments, the Planning
Commission shall, at a public meeting, examine the plan to
determine compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance117
and all other applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
When available, the written comments of the Chester County
Planning Commission and any other public agency shall be
considered, and the developer, his engineers and consultants may
appear at a designated Planning Commission public meeting at
which the application is scheduled for discussion to review and
discuss the plan. Before acting on a preliminary subdivision or land
development plan, the Planning Commission may hold a public
hearing thereon.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-13
72:401
(2) If, during the course of the Planning Commission's review of the
preliminary plan, and prior to final action by the Planning
Commission, the plan is revised by the applicant, such revision
shall be made on four copies of the plan and on the electronic
submission required by § 72-12B(3), each of which shall note the
date or dates of any such revisions. No revised plan shall be
accepted for filing or review unless it is preceded or accompanied
by a timely written extension, signed by the applicant, extending
the period within which the Township must render and
communicate a decision upon the initially filed plan then pending
for an additional 90 days calculated in accordance with Subsection
B(3). No additional filing fee shall be required for a revised plan
following this procedure. Revised plans shall be submitted to the
Township Secretary and shall be distributed by the Township
Secretary in accordance with § 72-12C.
C. Board of Supervisors review and decision procedures. [Added
8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision and communicate
it to the applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the
date the application is filed or after a final order of court remanding
an application, provided that should said next regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application of
the final order of court, said ninety-day period shall be measured
from the 30th day following the day the application has been filed.
The Board of Supervisors may specify conditions, changes,
modifications or additions to a plan and may make its decision to
grant preliminary approval subject to such reasonable conditions
as the Board shall determine are appropriate.
(2) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him
at the address appearing in his application not later than 15 days
following the Board of Supervisors' decision.
(3) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the Board of
Supervisors' decision shall specify the defects found in the
application and plans and shall describe the requirements which
have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the
statute or ordinance relied upon.
(4) In the event that the Board of Supervisors approves a preliminary
plan subject to conditions, the applicant shall notify the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, within 30 days of the date of the Board's
decision, of his acceptance of all the conditions. Upon such
acceptance, the conditional preliminary plan approval shall become
an approved preliminary plan subject to the accepted conditions as
of the date of the Board of Supervisors' conditional preliminary
plan approval. Should the applicant not notify the Board of
§ 72-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-13
72:402
§ 72-14. Submission of final plan.
Supervisors within said thirty-day period of his acceptance of all of
the conditions, the Board of Supervisors' decision shall be deemed
to be a rejection which shall constitute a final rejection of the
preliminary plan as of the date of the initial conditional approval
decision. The developer's notification shall be timely and physically
received by the Township within the required thirty-day period or, if
mailed within said thirty-day period when accompanied by a proof
of mailing within said period by submission to the Township of
present Post Office Form 3817, Certificate of Mailing, which shows
the date, the name of the sender, the name of the Township as
addressee and the development's name.
(5) Approval of the preliminary subdivision or land development plan
shall not authorize the sale or the advertisement of lots for sale, the
lease of land, buildings or portions of buildings or the subdivision
or development of land.
A. Within one year after the Board of Supervisors' approval of the
preliminary plan, a final plan for the subdivision or land development
prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall be
filed with the Township Secretary. An extension of time may, at the
Supervisors' discretion, be granted for cause shown upon request of the
developer. The Township Secretary or his designee shall review each
plan submitted for filing to ensure that the application is complete as
required by Subsection B. Incomplete items shall be noted on the face
of the application or in a separate writing, and the application, together
with all plans and accompanying documents, including the filing fees,
shall be returned within a reasonable time to the applicant. [Amended
8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
B. Official submission of a final plan shall consist of: [Amended
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999118 ; 11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
12-2003]
(1) Four copies of the application for final plan review.
(2) Eight copies of the final plan. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
3-2004]
(3) A digital copy of the complete plan set of drawings in either a .DXF
or .DWG format that is prepared in accordance with § 72-12.B(3) of
this chapter.
(4) Four copies of any other document, report or other supplementary
data and plans required by any provision of this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: This local law also provided that Subsection B(3), (4) and (5) be
renumbered as B(4), (5) and (6), respectively.
§ 72-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-14
72:403
§ 72-15. Review of final plan.
(5) The approval, issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, of the supplement of the revision of the
Township's sewage facilities plan; the water quality management
permit issued by that Department; and the approval of the Soil
Conservation Service and/or the permit issued by the Department
of Environmental Protection as appropriate for sedimentation and
erosion control, as applicable.
(6) The filing fees established by resolution of the Supervisors for the
filing of the plan and to reimburse the Township for charges
incurred by it in the payment of its professional consultants and
Engineer in reviewing and/or issuing reports with respect to the
plan submission.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application in accordance with the
preceding subsection, the Township Secretary shall forward complete
copies of the application for review, the plan and all supplementary
documents to the Township Engineer and the Township Planning
Commission and such parts of the application to the other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction, as required. The number of
copies for distribution shall be as administratively determined by the
Township Secretary from time to time. One complete copy of the
application and plans submitted shall be retained for the Township
master file.
D. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Supervisors may
permit approval of a final plan in sections or phases, each covering a
reasonable portion of the entire proposed development as shown on the
approved preliminary plan, provided that the first final plan section is
submitted for review and approval within the time required by
Subsection A and the last final plan section is submitted for review and
approval within three years of the preliminary plan approval. In any
such case, in addition to requiring the posting of financial security to
guarantee installation of improvements in the phase or section for
which approval is then sought, if the Supervisors, in the exercise of
their discretion, determine the same to be necessary, they may require
the posting of financial security and the construction, installation and
completion of all or a part of the required public improvements shown
on the preliminary plan even though those improvements are physically
to be located in a section or phase for which final approval is not then
being sought. This subsection shall be sufficient authority for the
Supervisors to make that determination and impose it as a condition of
approval of any section or phase of any final plan.
A. Township Engineer. The Township Engineer's review shall include an
examination of the content of the plans to verify that all information
required by this chapter is presented in the plan submitted; an
investigation of the plan to verify compliance with this chapter and all
other applicable Township ordinances and that the plan conforms to the
§ 72-14 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-15
72:404
preliminary plan approval; and examination of the engineering
feasibility of the final designs for compliance with this and all other
applicable Township ordinances; and such other review as he shall
determine to be relevant and material. The Township Engineer may
confer with the developer or the developer's engineer in his review and
analysis of the plan and shall forward his written comments on the plan
to the Planning Commission within a reasonable time.
B. Township Planning Commission.
(1) Upon receipt of the Township Engineer's comments, the Planning
Commission shall, at a public meeting, examine the plan to
determine compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance119
and all other applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
When available, the written comments of the Chester County
Planning Commission and any other public agency shall be
considered; and the developer, his engineers and consultants may
appear at a designated Planning Commission public meeting at
which the application is scheduled for discussion to review and
discuss the plan. The Planning Commission shall submit a written
report to the Supervisors, together with the Township Engineer's
review, and shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the
plan or approval of the plan subject to recommended conditions.
(2) If, during the course of the Planning Commission's review of the
preliminary plan, and prior to final action by the Planning
Commission, the plan is revised by the applicant, such revision
shall be made on four copies of the plan and on the electronic
submission required by § 72-12B(3), each of which shall note the
date or dates of any such revisions. No revised plan shall be
accepted for filing or review unless it is preceded or accompanied
by a timely written extension, signed by the applicant, extending
the period within which the Township must render and
communicate a decision upon the initially filed plan then pending
for an additional 90 days calculated in accordance with Subsection
C(3). No additional filing fee shall be required for a revised plan
following this procedure. Revised plans shall be submitted to the
Township Secretary and shall be distributed by the Township
Secretary in accordance with § 72-14C. [Amended 12-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 6-1999]
(3) Upon the Planning Commission's recommendation of approval of
the final plan, the applicant shall submit to the Township an
estimate of the costs of completion of the required improvements
for the purpose of determining the amount of financial security
required to guarantee their installation and completion. The
applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for the
cost of any improvements for which financial security is required
and provided to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-15
72:405
Transportation in connection with the issuance of a highway
occupancy permit pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1,
1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law."120
The estimate shall be prepared by a professional Pennsylvania
licensed engineer and shall be certified by such engineer to be the
fair and reasonable estimate of such costs. The costs estimate so
submitted shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer for accuracy
and completeness and he shall, within a reasonable time,
recommend to the Township acceptance or rejection of the
estimate. The Supervisors may refuse to accept such estimate for
good cause shown. In the event that the applicant and the
Supervisors are unable to agree upon an estimate, the estimate
shall be recalculated and recertified by an independent
Pennsylvania licensed professional engineer chosen mutually by
the Board and the applicant. The estimate certified by such
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the
final estimate. The fee for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally and promptly by the Township and the applicant.
[Amended 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
(4) Upon the Planning Commission's recommendation of approval of
the final plan, the applicant shall submit to the Township eight
original black-line prints/sets of plans containing all original
signatures and original certificates. [Added 12-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999; amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
C. Board of Supervisors.
(1) When a final plan has been officially reviewed and forwarded to the
Supervisors by the Planning Commission, such plan shall be placed
on its agenda for review and action. The Supervisors may, before
acting on a final subdivision or land development plan, hold a
public hearing thereon.
(2) In acting on the final plan, the Supervisors shall review the plan
and the written comments of the Township Engineer, the Planning
Commission, the Chester County Planning Commission and all
other reviewing agencies, together with comments from public
hearings, if any, to determine the plan's conformity to this chapter
and all other applicable Township ordinances. The Supervisors may
specify conditions, changes, modifications or additions to a plan
which they deem necessary and may make their decision to grant
final plan approval subject to such reasonable conditions as they
shall impose.
(3) The Supervisors shall render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the
complete final subdivision or land development application is filed
120. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq., particularly § 670-240.
§ 72-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-15
72:406
or after a final order of court remanding an application for
subdivision or final land development approval, provided that
should said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application or the final order of the
court, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th
day following the day the application has been filed. [Amended
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
(4) The decision of the Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at the
address appearing in his application not later than 15 days
following the Supervisors' decision.
(5) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the
Supervisors' decision shall specify the defects found in the
application and plans and shall describe the requirements which
have not been met and shall, in each instance, cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(6) In the event that the Supervisors approve a final plan subject to
conditions, the applicant shall notify the Supervisors, in writing,
within 30 days of the date of the Supervisors' decision, of his
acceptance of all of the conditions. Upon such acceptance, the
conditional final plan approval shall become an approved final plan,
subject to the accepted conditions, as of the date of the
Supervisors' conditional final plan approval. Should the applicant
not notify the Supervisors within said thirty-day period of his
acceptance of all of the conditions, the Supervisors' decision shall
be deemed to be a rejection, which shall constitute a final rejection
by the Supervisors of the final plan as of the date of the
Supervisors' initial conditional approval decision. The developer's
notification shall be timely if physically received by the Township
within the required thirty-day period or if mailed within said thirtyday
period when accompanied by a proof of mailing within said
period by submission to the Township of present Post Office Form
3817, certificate of mailing, which shows the date, the name of the
sender, the name of the Township as addressee and the
development's name.
(7) Approval of the final plan shall constitute approval of the
development in accordance with and only in accordance with the
final plan approval, subject, nevertheless, to compliance with
Subsection C(6) of this section in the event of a conditional
approval; provided, however, that approval of the final plan shall
not authorize the sale of lots, the lease of land, buildings or
portions of buildings or the subdivision or development of land until
such time as the financial security guaranteeing the required
improvements is posted with or secured to the Township, the
subdivision and the land development agreement, the financial
security agreement and developer's bond are fully executed and
§ 72-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-15
72:407
§ 72-16. Release of approved plan; recording.
§ 72-17. Preliminary plan submission requirements.
delivered to the Township, the plan is recorded and the Township
has issued all necessary and proper permits.
A. When requested by the applicant in order to facilitate financing, the
Supervisors shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a letter of
contingent approval, indicating approval of the final plan contingent
upon the applicant obtaining satisfactory financial security. This letter
shall not be issued until the applicant has accepted all conditions, if any,
attached by the Supervisors to a conditionally approved final plan. The
final plan shall not be signed by the Supervisors nor recorded until all
required security agreements have been fully executed by both the
applicant and, where required, the financial institution issuing or
providing the financial security and the financial security is delivered or
secured to the Township and is in place irrevocably guaranteeing the
completion of the required improvements. The letter of contingent
approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial
security agreements are not executed and the financial security is not in
place within 90 days of the date of the plan's contingent approval,
unless a written extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and
granted by the Supervisors. Such extension shall not be unreasonably
withheld and shall be placed in writing at the applicant's request.
B. Upon approval and signing of the final plan by the Supervisors and its
release to the applicant, the applicant shall within 90 days thereafter
record the final plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County. The final plan shall not be accepted for recording by the
Recorder unless the plan, on its face, contains the signatures of a
majority of the Supervisors and evidences review by the County
Planning Commission. After a final plan has been approved and
recorded, all streets and public grounds on such plan shall be and
become part of the Official Map of West Goshen Township121 without
public hearing.
C. Concurrently with the recording of the final plan, the applicant shall
record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County the
approved declaration of restrictions, covenants and easements,
together with any other recordable easements or other documents
required by the final plan approval. In no event shall lots be conveyed
from the approved plan prior to such recording.
A. The preliminary plan of a proposed development shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or a registered surveyor in accordance
with the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367, 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.),
known as the "Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration
Law," except that this requirement shall not preclude the preparation of
121. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 72-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-17
72:408
a plat in accordance with the Act of January 24, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1527,
No. 535, 63 P.S. § 901), known as the "Landscape Architects'
Registration Law," when it is appropriate to prepare the plat using
professional services as set forth in the definition of the "practice of
landscape architecture" under Section 2 (63 P.S. § 902) of that Act. The
plat shall bear the seal and signature of such registered professionals
and shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals
fifty feet or a scale approved by the Township Engineer. [Amended
7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 11-97]
B. The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on
sheets measuring 24 inches by 36 inches and no larger. If the
preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing
the relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each
sheet. [Amended 12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
C. The preliminary plan shall show:
(1) The name or any other identifying title of the proposed subdivision
and of the Township, county and state.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale and date, including the
month, day and year, that the original drawing was completed, the
month, day and year that the original drawing was revised for each
revision and a clear and concise description and location of the
changes made in each revision.
(3) The name of the record owner and the name of the developer.
(4) The name, address, license number and seal of the registered
professional engineer or surveyor responsible for the plan.
(5) The names of the owners of all abutting properties.
(6) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided or developed, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 600
feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone
or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal
boundaries and recorded subdivision or land development plans
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In addition,
the approximate distance to the nearest existing street shall be
shown and a title, scale and North point shall be indicated.
(7) Total tract boundaries of the property being developed, showing
bearings and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the
property.
(8) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for land
with an average natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of not
more than five feet for land with an average natural slope
exceeding 4%. The datum shall be United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey.
§ 72-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-17
72:409
(9) The location and elevation of the datum used, which shall be a
known established bench mark.
(10) All existing sewer lines, waterlines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, watercourses,
Township zoning and flood hazard district boundaries (if any),
easements, rights-of-way and other significant man-made or
natural features, such as major tree masses (above four-inch
caliper) and soil classification within the proposed subdivision and
within 300 feet of the boundaries of the proposed development.
(11) All existing structures.
(12) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed) on or abutting the tract, including names, right-of-way
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(13) The full plan of the proposed development, including:
(a) The location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Street names and utility easement locations. The applicant
shall submit to the Board written approval from the United
States Postal Service for all proposed street names. [Amended
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
(c) Building setback lines along each street.
(d) Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(f) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and
parcels.
(g) The location of sanitary and storm sewers and other drainage
facilities and any proposed connections with existing facilities.
(h) Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated for public use,
with any conditions governing such use.
(14) Conservation plan.
(15) Benchmarks based on horizontal controls utilizing the
Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate System and vertical controls
based on NAVD 1983 datum. These controls shall be established
utilizing an existing permanent monument as approved by the
Township. Benchmarks established for new land development and
subdivision proposals shall note the approved monument site
utilized, the horizontal and vertical values utilized, as well as the
new control values established for the proposal. The proposal shall
also contain a new permanent control monument with new
§ 72-17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-17
72:410
§ 72-18. Final plan submission requirements.
horizontal and vertical control values noted for future use. These
values shall be verified as part of the construction documentation
phase of the project. No project construction shall be deemed
complete until the required monument has been verified by the
Township. [Added 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
D. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary
plan or on profile sheets.
(2) Tentative profiles along the center line of each proposed street.
Such profiles shall show natural and finished grades at a scale of
one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(3) A drainage plan prepared in accordance with Chapter 71 of the
West Goshen Township Code. [Amended 11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
12-2003]
(4) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of
state regulatory agencies having jurisdiction and shall be subject to
approval of the Township Engineer.
(5) A conservation plan prepared in accordance with Chapter 69 of the
West Goshen Township Code, titled "Soil, Erosion and Sediment
Control," and in accordance with Chapter 102 of Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code. [Added 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
A. The final plan of a proposed development shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or a registered surveyor in accordance
with the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367, 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.),
known as the "Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration
Law," except that this requirement shall not preclude the preparation of
a plat in accordance with the Act of January 24, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1527,
No. 535, 63 P.S. § 901), known as the "Landscape Architects'
Registration Law", when it is appropriate to prepare the plat using
professional services as set forth in the definition of the "practice of
landscape architecture" under Section 2 (63 P.S. § 902) of that Act. The
plat shall bear the seal and signature of such registered professionals
and shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals fifty
feet or a scale approved by the Township Engineer. [Amended
7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 11-97]
B. The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made on
sheets measuring 24 inches by 36 inches and no larger. If the final plan
requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing the relative
§ 72-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-18
72:411
location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet.
[Amended 12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
C. The final plan shall include:
(1) The name of the proposed development (or other identifying title)
and of the Township, county and state.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale and date, including the
month, day and year, that the original drawing of the final plan was
completed, the month, day and year that the original drawing was
revised, for each revision, and a clear and concise description and
location of the change made in each revision.
(3) The name of the record owner and developer of the tract and the
source(s) of title to the land being developed, as shown by the
records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(4) The name, address, license number and seal of the registered
professional engineer or surveyor responsible for the plan.
(5) The names of the owners of all abutting properties, if any, with the
book and page numbers where recorded, and the names of the
owners of all adjacent unplatted land, if any, and the book and page
number where recorded.
(6) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided or developed, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 600
feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone
or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal
boundaries and recorded subdivision or land development plans
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In addition,
the approximate distance to the nearest street shall be shown and a
title, scale and North point shall be indicated.
(7) The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided or
developed with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and
bearings accurate to a second. These boundaries shall be balanced
and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000
feet; provided, however, that the boundary(s) adjoining additional
unplatted land of the developer (for example, between separately
submitted final plan sections) are not required to be based upon
field survey and may be calculated. The project boundaries shall be
tied into the Pennsylvania Coordinate System. The monuments
shall be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the
property being subdivided or developed. In addition, the surveyor
shall certify to the accuracy of the survey, the plan as drawn and
the placement of monuments. [Amended 12-8-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
§ 72-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-18
72:412
(8) The name or number and cartway width and right-of-way lines of all
existing public streets and the name and location of all other roads
within the property.
(9) The following data for the cartway edges (curblines) and right-ofway
lines of all recorded (except those which are to be vacated)
and/or proposed streets and, for the right-of-way lines of all
existing streets within the property:
(a) The length, in feet and hundredths of a foot, of all straight lines
and of the radius and the arc and chord of all curved lines
(including curved lot lines); and
(b) The width, in feet of, the cartway and right-of-way and, in
degrees, minutes and seconds, the delta angle of all curved
lines, including curved lot lines.
(10) All straight lot lines and chords and radii of curved lot lines
defined, in feet and hundredths of a foot, by distances and, in
degrees, minutes and quarters of a minute, either by magnetic
bearings or by angles of deflection from other lot and street lines.
(11) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and levels.
(12) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots; a
statement of restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed(s) for all lots contained wholly or in part in
the development and, if covenants are recorded, including the deed
book and page number.
(13) The proposed building envelope line for each lot or the proposed
placement of each building and, where applicable, the location of
on-site sewage and water facilities.
(14) The location and elevation, if established, of all existing and
proposed street monuments.
(15) All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by
public services or any other party who has secured them and any
limitations on such easements or rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall
be shown and accurately identified on the plan, and easements
shall either be shown or specifically described on the plan. Utility
easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate
public utility companies.
(16) The location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and storm
sewers and the location of all manholes, inlets and culverts. This
data may be submitted as a separate plan.
(17) When highway access is required. [Amended 12-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999]
§ 72-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-18
72:413
(a) If the plat will require access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PADOT), the plat shall contain a notice that a highway
occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the
Act of June 1, 1945, P.L. 1242, No. 428, known as the "State
Highway Law,"122 before driveway access to a state highway is
permitted.
(b) Where such access is proposed to a state street or highway, in
addition to the issuance of a highway occupancy permit by
PADOT, the applicant shall secure a highway occupancy permit
from the Township at the time of final plan approval, the
feasibility of which shall be demonstrated upon submission for
review of the preliminary plan. Highway occupancy permits
authorizing connection to state streets or highways shall be
approved subject to the condition that if PADOT denies a
highway occupancy permit for the proposed access, the
conditional approval of such permit by the Township shall be
deemed to have been denied and no such municipal permit
shall be issued. If the Township denies a Township highway
occupancy permit for said access, the approval of a PADOT
highway occupancy permit shall be deemed to have been
denied.
(18) A certificate of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer to
dedicate shall be lettered on the plan and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property and
notarized.
(19) Certificates on the title sheet requesting approval of the plan by the
Supervisors, Township Engineer and by the Planning Commission
and review by the County Planning Commission.
(20) A space, measuring three inches square, left along the lower edge
of the sheet, in order that the Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge
receipt and recording of the plan when it is presented.
(21) Benchmarks based on horizontal controls utilizing the
Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate System and vertical controls
based on NAVD 1983 datum. These controls shall be established
utilizing an existing permanent monument as approved by the
Township. Benchmarks established for new land development and
subdivision proposals shall note the approved monument site
utilized, the horizontal and vertical values utilized, as well as the
new control values established for the proposal. The proposal shall
also contain a new permanent control monument with new
horizontal and vertical control values noted for future use. These
values shall be verified as part of the construction documentation
phase of the project. No project construction shall be deemed
122. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 72-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-18
72:414
§ 72-19. Conservation plan.
complete until the required monument has been verified by the
Township. [Added 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
D. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary
data:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown either on the final plan or on
the profile sheets.
(2) Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract.
(a) Such profiles shall show at least the following information,
properly labeled:
[1] The existing natural profile along both cartway edges or
along the center line of each street.
[2] The proposed finished grade of the center line and the
proposed finished grade at both cartway (pavement)
edges.
[3] The length of all vertical curves.
[4] The existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes.
[5] The existing and proposed storm sewer facilities and
drainage improvements.
(b) The profile sheets shall be legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical.
(3) All offers of dedication and declarations of covenants, easements
and restrictions which shall be subject to approval of the Township
Solicitor.
(4) Such private deed restrictions as the developer intends to impose
upon the property as a condition of the sale of lots, together with a
statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect
the title to the land being developed.
(5) Conservation plan.
A. The conservation plan which is required to accompany the preliminary
and final subdivision or land development plan shall be clearly and
legibly drawn to the same scale as that of the preliminary and final plan
and shall be in the form of a transparent overlay to those plans.
B. Plan requirements.
§ 72-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-19
72:415
(1) The conservation plan shall show and shall designate with
explanatory notes the total tract boundaries of the property being
subdivided or developed and the following site features both within
the proposed development and at least 300 feet beyond its
boundaries.
(a) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet.
(b) The location and elevation to which contour elevations refer.
The datum used shall be a known, established bench mark.
(c) Areas with existing slope exceeding 20%, as measured
between two-foot contour lines, wherever contour lines are
separated by a horizontal distance of 10 feet or less.
(d) All existing watercourses and lakes, ponds, impoundments or
other bodies of water and all areas within the Flood Hazard
District, as defined in the West Goshen Township Zoning
Ordinance.123
(e) Generalized soil types, as mapped in the Soil Survey of Chester
and Delaware Counties, noting areas of poor drainage, alluvial
soils and soils with seasonal or perennial high-water table.
(f) The location and results of all soil percolation tests.
(g) Delineation of wetlands as defined by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, including those inventoried by the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service for the National Wetlands
Inventory and those determined to fall under the jurisdiction of
the United States Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(h) All existing vegetation denoted as to type or character, such as
woodland, orchard, pasture, cropland, meadow, wetland
vegetation, lawn or garden.
(i) All existing tree masses, tree lines and hedgerows, trees over
four inches in caliper as measured 36 inches from ground level
which are not part of a tree mass, denoted as to type and size,
and individual trees over four inches in caliper measured at
said height located within a tree mass, denoted as to type and
size, where clearing or removal of trees is proposed.
(j) Existing structures and other improvements.
(k) Historic resources or potential historic resources, including
structures, ruins, sites, traces, routes or trails, specifically
including all such resources or potential resources listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, the Pennsylvania Register
of Historic Places, the Chester County Historic Sites Survey,
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-19
72:416
the Historic American Building Survey and any such resources
identified in the Township's Comprehensive Plan, denoting
locational relationship to the boundaries of any Historic
District listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
designated by ordinance pursuant to Act 167 of 1961, as
amended.124
(l) Existing paths and trails devoted to pedestrian, equestrian or
bicycle use.
(m) Location and type of any existing erosion and sedimentation
control measures, whether natural or man-made, including
grassed waterways, diversions, debris basins and tile fields,
and, where applicable, supporting data assuring compliance
with the erosion and sedimentation control standards
established in this chapter.
(n) Any other significant existing natural or man-made features.
(2) The extent to which any of the site features identified pursuant to
this section are proposed to be cleared, removed or otherwise
altered to accommodate proposed development shall be shown on a
transparent overlay plan at the same scale identified in this section,
together with a narrative explaining the necessity for such action,
which, when required, shall be included as part of the
environmental impact assessment (EIA). All proposed alterations of
the natural grade, whether by cut or by fill, exceeding two feet,
together with the reasons and necessity for such alteration, shall be
supplied in narrative form as part of the EIA. Notations shall be
included on the face of the plan demonstrating the feasibility of
compliance with the provisions of § 72-36.
C. A subdivision or land development application which seeks preliminary
or final approval of a residential subdivision or land development of
more than five lots or units or a commercial, industrial, office or
professional use or combination thereof containing more than one lot or
building or one building in excess of 5,000 square feet in gross floor
area or any use which requires conditional use approval shall be
accompanied by an environmental impact assessment (EIA) report in
narrative form prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection and containing the following:
(1) Analysis of site features.
(a) The general character of the site features required by
Subsection B to be identified on the conservation plan. The
narrative shall describe existing characteristics of the property
with respect to geography, topography, ground and surface
water hydrology, soils, vegetation, existing improvements and
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 72-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-19
72:417
uses and other site feature categories designated in that
subsection.
(b) A visual analysis, including the scope and character of views
into the tract from outside the tract from public roads and from
private properties in relationship to identified site features; the
scope and character of views within the tract in relationship to
identified site features; and the scope and character of
external views from within the tract.
(c) A description accompanied by exhibits, diagrams or other
necessary documentation which depict and describe those
remedial, protective and mitigative measures proposed by the
applicant to control all adverse impacts upon site features
which will occur as a result of the proposed subdivision or land
development. An adverse impact is any development activity
which will alter the site features described in Subsection B.
These measures shall include those measures mandated by
current federal, state, county and Township statutes,
ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to
sedimentation and erosion control, stormwater runoff control,
water quality control, air quality control, wetlands and similar
requirements related to remediation of adverse impacts of a
specific project such as regrading, revegetation, screening and
the creation of landscaped areas, wetlands, fencing, emission
control, traffic control, noise control and similar requirements.
(d) The names, addresses, telephone numbers and qualifications
of persons directly responsible for preparing the EIA.
(2) Identification of community services and facilities. A community
facilities needs assessment, accompanied by supplemental plans or
maps necessary to identify the community facilities required to
serve the proposed development. The assessment shall describe
the extent to which existing community facilities and services, such
as schools, libraries, hospitals and other health care facilities, fire
protection, police protection, ambulance and rescue service, are
alleged to be sufficient to accommodate the demands of future
occupants of the proposed subdivision or land development and the
need for additional expanded community facilities and services.
(3) Natural resources impact. A study prepared by a registered
professional engineer indicating the likely impact of the proposed
development on the existing sewer, water, groundwater, solid waste
and drainage systems serving the Township. Said impact analysis
shall identify the existing capacity of facilities proposed to serve
the subdivision or land development, the prospects of those
facilities being able to provide service to it and any improvements
that are required as a direct result of the proposed subdivision or
land development. The study shall identify the ability of sewer,
water, solid waste and drainage systems to continue to provide
§ 72-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-19
72:418
efficient and economic service to existing users, considering the
added service requirements of the proposed subdivision or land
development.
(4) Recreation impact.
(a) A study prepared by a qualified professional which shall
analyze the demand for recreation facilities which the
proposed subdivision or land development will generate and
determine whether adequate facilities exist or are planned or
proposed. As a minimum, the study shall include the following:
[1] A description of the recreational facilities to be provided
by the developer.
[2] A description of the entity proposed by the developer to be
responsible for maintenance of the recreational facilities
to be provided by the developer.
[3] A description of existing municipal recreational facilities
and the impact of the proposed development on these
facilities.
[4] A description of accessibility of developer-proposed
recreational facilities to general Township residents.
(b) The developer shall be required, as a condition of final plan
approval, to provide for the construction of recreational
facilities suitable for the uses intended in any subdivision or
land development for residential use in accordance with the
formula contained in § 72-35B(1).
(5) Traffic impact study.
(a) Prepared by a qualified professional traffic engineer, the traffic
study shall include, at a minimum:
[1] Anticipated traffic volumes and patterns to be generated
by the proposed development.
[2] An analysis of the impact of the development as a
generator of both local and nonlocal traffic.
[3] A circulation inventory of the existing public street
network which can be reasonably anticipated to serve the
proposed development.
[4] The existing roadway conditions of those roads and streets
contiguous to the development or which may be
reasonably anticipated to service the access needs of the
development.
[5] Existing traffic volumes as determined by both weekday
morning and evening peak period traffic counts at those
§ 72-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-19
72:419
intersections in the immediate vicinity of the development
which are reasonably anticipated to serve as access
intersections to the development.
[6] A volume/capacity analysis to determine the levels of
service at the foregoing intersections.
[7] Projection of site-generated traffic demand, which shall be
combined with existing traffic volumes increased by 5%
per annum projected over a period of five years, to
determine future traffic projections.
[8] The projected costs of traffic improvements necessitated
by the development required to correct any deficiencies in
the foregoing road and street systems.
[9] Consideration of conditions existing on streets and
intersections immediately serving the development
identified in the West Goshen Township Master Traffic
Plan as requiring remediation.
[10] A determination as to whether the proposed street or
driveway access providing ingress and egress to the
proposed development or one or more of the lots therein is
adequate and provides for safe access. Elements
considered in the study shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, sight distance as measured from the
intersection sight triangle, required turning radius,
acceleration and/or deceleration lanes and any additional
considerations the Traffic Engineer determines relevant
utilizing accepted traffic engineering guidelines. [Added
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
(b) The study shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, the
Township Engineer and, at the Township's discretion, a traffic
consultant selected by the Township, who, collectively, shall
determine the accuracy of the study's information and
projections. All deficient service capacity caused or
contributed to by the proposed development occurring
because of existing inadequacies in the public streets,
intersections and other facilities to and/or servicing the
proposed development shall be identified, and the Supervisors
may, as a condition of approval of any plan, require the
applicant to provide, construct and install such off-site
improvements thereto as are reasonably caused by and/or
related to the proposed development. In lieu thereof, the
developer may, with the Supervisors' approval, but shall not be
required to make a contribution to the West Goshen Township
Highway and Traffic Improvement Fund in such amount as
determined in accordance with the procedure for establishing
§ 72-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-19
72:420
§ 72-19.1. Public water supply.
public improvements costs otherwise provided for in this
chapter.
(c) The required traffic study affirmatively demonstrate: [Added
9-27-1994 by Ord. No. 4-1994]
[1] That the level of service at unsignalized and signalized
intersections contiguous to the applicant's property
necessary to serve the proposed development by providing
egress and ingress thereto (intersections through which at
least 35% of the development's traffic must flow to gain
access to the development) shall not as a consequence of
the proposed use fall below Level of Service D, as specified
in the Transportation Research Board, Special Report 209,
Highway Capacity Manual 1985, published by the
Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 1985 or
latest edition, provided that the Supervisors may grant
relief from this criteria upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer following a traffic study supplied by
the applicant justifying waiver of this provision and proof
by the applicant that the waiver will not be contrary to
public safety. This provision shall not be reconstrued to
preclude improvement of such intersections to retain at
least a Level of Service D or better.
[2] The effect of the proposed development on the reserve
capacity of public roads and road intersections providing
access to the development and to and in the area of the
development property shall not have the effect of
materially increasing traffic congestion on those roads or
at those road intersections.
[3] That improvements to the roads contiguous to the
applicant's property proposed as part of the improvements
for the development, such as road widening, acceleration/
deceleration lanes, traffic control devices and similar
improvements, shall be sufficient to accommodate the
additional traffic generated by the proposed development
consistently with recognized traffic engineering design
principles, including but not limited to those promulgated
by PennDOT.
A. Purpose. The regulations established in this section have been adopted
to require that:
(1) Each dwelling unit and each commercial or industrial building in all
subdivisions and land developments hereafter granted approval
shall have an adequate supply of potable water for domestic use.
§ 72-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-19.1
72:421
(2) Each unit or building shall have an adequate supply of water for
purposes of fire protection.
(3) In each case where water is to be supplied to a subdivision or land
development by means of a public water supply system, such
system meets minimum standards controlling water storage and
production capabilities for domestic and fire use for the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of all Township residents affected.
B. Requirements. If the applicant for subdivision or land development
approval proposes that the subdivision or land development be served
by public water, the applicant shall:
(1) File with the preliminary subdivision application or, when no
preliminary plan is filed, the final plan application, a report from
the public water company proposing to provide public water which
describes the volume of flow, static pressure and residual pressure
at the fire hydrant nearest to the proposed subdivision.
(2) Based upon the foregoing information, submit a hydraulic study
which demonstrates what volume of water and pressures are to be
provided at the most critical points within the subdivision. Critical
points shall be determined by the developer's engineer, following
consultation with the public water company, determined on the
basis of the intensity of development and all other applicable
engineering criteria.
(3) Contemporaneously with submission of the final plan only, submit a
plan, provided by the public water company, showing the design of
the water distribution system.
C. Review procedure for proposed public water supply system.
(1) The submissions required by Subsection B of this § 72-19.1 shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer in conjunction with the
subdivision or land development application, who shall make a
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors with respect to the
applicant's compliance with the requirements of this section and
the adequacy of the public water supply system. The Board
expressly reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to require the
applicant, at the applicant's cost and expense, to provide an
independent engineering study and report verifying the adequacy
of the proposed public system to supply adequate public water for
the purposes described in Subsection A of this § 72-19.1 to the
proposed subdivision or land development.
(2) Submission by the applicant of the required report, hydraulic study
and plan shall be considered essential, and no subdivision or land
development application, whether preliminary or final, shall be
accepted for review or granted approval without such submission.
Modifications required by the Township Engineer to any proposed
water distribution system or required as a result of an independent
§ 72-19.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-19.1
72:422
engineering study shall, if based upon reasonable engineering or
design criteria, be a condition of any subdivision or land
development approval.
D. Minimum water supply requirements.
(1) In all subdivisions and land developments served by public water,
the following water pressure and gallonage requirements shall
apply:
(a) Residential use. A minimum domestic pressure of 30 pounds
per square inch shall be provided at each house to be
connected to the water supply main. The system to which the
residential unit is connected shall have sufficient capacity to
supply a minimum of 300 gallons of water per residential unit
per day within the subdivision or land development.
(b) Commercial or industrial use. A minimum domestic pressure of
30 pounds per square inch shall be provided at each
commercial or industrial building connected to the water
supply main. When a building wishes to connect to a public
water system, a study will be made to determine if there is
adequate water supply in the system to supply the building and
use.
(2) For purposes of fire protection in residential districts, the system
shall be demonstrably capable of providing fire flow water
requirements for a minimum duration of two hours of not less than
500 gallons per minute at residual pressures of 20 pounds per
square inch. Fire hydrants shall be spaced every six-hundred-foot
radius along the public water supply system within the subdivision
or land development.
(3) For purposes of fire protection in commercial and industrial
districts, a 1,000 gallons per minute (G/M) at 20 pounds per square
inch (psi) residual pressure is required. Spacing of hydrants should
be within 400 feet of all properties.
E. Approvals conditioned upon adequacy of public water supply. No
subdivision or land development application proposing a public water
supply system shall be granted preliminary or final approval unless the
applicant demonstrates by a fair preponderance of the credible
evidence full compliance with the provisions of this § 72-19.1.
§ 72-19.1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-19.1
72:423

ARTICLE V
Development and Design Standards
§ 72-20. Application of standards.
The following land subdivision principles, standards and requirements shall
be applied by the Board of Supervisors in evaluating plans for proposed
subdivisions. These principles, standards and requirements are minimum
provisions for the promotion of public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
§ 72-21. Land and use requirements.
§ 72-22. General standards for public streets.
A. All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall be suited for the
purpose for which they are to be subdivided or developed, and no
parcel of land shall be created, either by inclusion or exclusion from a
proposed subdivision, which cannot be properly utilized for a permitted
use under the existing zoning regulations.125
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease, exposure to toxic or noxious fumes or
excessive noise or other cause, shall not be subdivided for building
purposes or developed unless the hazards have been eliminated or
unless the plans show adequate safeguard against them.
C. Proposed developments shall be coordinated with existing nearby
neighborhoods and communities, with particular reference to street
layout and interconnection and the provision of sanitary sewage and
water facilities so that the community and region as a whole may
develop harmoniously.
D. Where either water supply or sanitary sewage disposal is provided by
on-lot facilities, applicable Township, Chester County and state
standards must be fully satisfied and the Chester County Board of
Health must issue a permit for the design and installation of these
facilities.
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts
thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the Township.
B. Proposed streets shall further conform to such Township, county and
state road and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or
filed as prescribed by law.
C. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-22
72:425
§ 72-23. Cul-de-sac streets.
D. Minor streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through traffic, but
provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas will
generally be required.
E. If lots resulting from original subdivisions are large enough to permit
resubdivision into additional lots or if a portion of the tract is not
subdivided, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision
shall be provided as necessary.
F. Where a development abuts an existing public street of improper width
or alignment, the Township may require the dedication of land
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment.
G. Wherever a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed
public street with a right-of-way of 80 feet or more, the Township shall
require restrictions of access to the major street by provision of
reverse-frontage lots. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
H. New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the
other requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in
addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of
the street can be secured.
I. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be shown within such tract.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
J. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as culs-desac.
126
A. A cul-de-sac, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 1,000 feet
in length. No cul-de-sac, permanently designed as such, shall be less
than 500 feet in length. This length shall be measured along the center
line of the street beginning at the intersection of said center line and
the circular right-of-way line of the paved turnaround and ending at the
center line intersection of the next intersecting street. [Amended
8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 16-1985; 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
B. The cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a paved
turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge or
curbline of 50 feet with a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
C. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the property line
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, which dealt with avoiding new reserve strips and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993.
§ 72-22 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-23
72:426
§ 72-24. Street widths.
§ 72-25. Street alignment.
and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the
property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street
into the adjoining tract.
A. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway (roadway) widths shall be as
follows: [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
Type of Street
Required Rightof-
Way
(feet)
Required Paved Cartway
With Curb
(feet)
Minor 50 32
Collector 50 36
Major 80 As per PennDOT
Limited access 150 As per PennDOT
B. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Board of Supervisors for the following purposes:
(1) To promote public safety and convenience.
(2) To provide parking space in commercial and industrial districts and
in areas of high-density residential development.
C. Construction of all streets and accessory installations thereto, including
but not limited to curbs, sidewalks and storm drainage structures, shall
conform to the minimum specifications of Appendix I to this chapter.
[Amended 2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 2-1990]
D. Short extensions of existing streets with lesser right-of-way and/or
cartway widths than prescribed by § 72-24A may be permitted;
provided, however, that no section of the new right-of-way is less than
50 feet in width.
E. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width in conformance with
§ 72-24A is required.
A. Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection shall be
made by horizontal curves.
B. To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center-line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows:
§ 72-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-25
72:427
§ 72-26. Street grades.
Type of Street
Radius
(feet)
Minor 150
Collector 300
Major 500
C. A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be required between curves.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
A. Center-line grades should, whenever possible, be not less than 1%.
B. Center-line grades shall, wherever determined feasible by the Township
Engineer, not exceed the following: [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
Type of Street Grade of Center Line
Minor 7%
Collector 6%
Major 6%
Street intersection, right-of-way to right-ofway
2%
Cul-de-sac, diameter of turnaround 4%
C. Vertical curves shall be used at change of grade exceeding 1% and shall
be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change and to provide
the following minimum sight distances: [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord.
No. 3-1993]
Type of Street
Sight Distance
(feet)
Minor 200
Collector 300
Major 400
D. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 6%, a leveling area shall be provided having a grade not
greater than 2% for a distance of 50 feet measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street. [Amended 5-25-1993 by
Ord. No. 3-1993]
E. All streets shall be graded to:
(1) The grades shown on the profile and the cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the final plan.
§ 72-25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-26
72:428
§ 72-27. Street intersections.
(2) Two to one beyond the right-of-way line where cut or fill is
necessary. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
(3) The satisfaction of the Township Engineer or other person
designated by the Board of Supervisors to inspect and check the
grading of streets for accuracy.
A. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60°.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
B. Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets shall
be avoided. Where it proves impossible, such intersections shall be
designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
C. Clear-sight triangles shall be provided at all public street intersections.
Within such triangles, no vision-obstructing object shall be permitted.
Such triangles shall be established from a distance of 100 feet from the
point of intersection of the center lines. Clear-sight distances for streets
intersecting with collector and/or major streets shall be determined in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
Publication No. 201 (current issue), entitled "Engineering and Traffic
Studies." [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
D. Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs behind the
normal building setback line viewed from the street, such portion shall
be shown on the final plan of the development and shall be considered a
building setback line, as defined in Chapter 84, Zoning, of this Code.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
E. To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic streets
shall be located not less than 1,000 feet apart, measured from center
line to center line.
F. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
directly opposite one another. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
G. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 20 feet for
intersections involving only minor streets, 30 feet for all other
intersections or such greater radius as is suitable to the specific
intersection as determined by the Township Engineer. [Amended
5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
H. Public street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with)
curb arcs at intersections.
I. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections prior to
the issuance of the first use and occupancy permit by the Township
Building Official. The design and placement of such signs and the
§ 72-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-27
72:429
§ 72-28. Traffic flow and parking. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
Traffic flow patterns and parking arrangements in commercial, industrial
and multifamily residential areas shall follow prevailing engineering
standards and shall meet the approval of the Township Engineer and of the
Planning Commission.
§ 72-29. Blocks. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
§ 72-30. Stormwater drainage, erosion and sedimentation control.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
names of streets shall be subject to the approval of the Supervisors.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed,
zoning requirements, topography, and requirements for safe and
convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with major public streets, and to providing
adequate access for emergency vehicles.
B. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,200 feet and a minimum
length of 800 feet.
C. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots.
A. Storm drainage required. For all subdivision and land development
proposals which are regulated by this chapter, a drainage plan
prepared in accordance with Chapter 71 of the West Goshen Code shall
be prepared and approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to final
subdivision and land development approval. [Amended 11-12-2003
by Ord. No. 12-2003]
B. The drainage plan shall be designed in accordance with the regulations
in Chapter 71 of the West Goshen Code, titled "Stormwater
Management." [Amended 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003127 ]
C. Minimum grade and size. All storm drain pipes shall be designated to
maintain a minimum grade of 1/2%. All storm pipes shall have a
minimum inside diameter of 15 inches.
D. The Supervisors reserve the right to order a cease and desist of all
construction where runoff problems arise, even though an approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan is being followed. This order
shall be effective until such time as the problem has been resolved to
the satisfaction of the Supervisors.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsections C, D, F, G, H, I, J, K and L;
renumbered former Subsection E as C and former Subsection M as D.
§ 72-27 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-31
72:430
§ 72-31. Lots and lot sizes.
A. Lot dimensions and areas and building setback lines shall meet the
requirements of the West Goshen Township Zoning Ordinance.128
B. Property lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
C. All residential lots shall front on a public street. Every residential
subdivision of more than 25 single-family dwellings, whether attached
or detached, shall be served by a minimum of two or more public streets
constructed with the subdivision, both of which shall be attached to and
provide vehicular access to and from an existing public street. In
determining compliance with this regulation, the following minimum
requirements shall apply: [Amended 5-10-1988 by Ord. No. 6-1988;
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
(1) The existing public street providing such access shall be attached
to and provide vehicular access to and from at least two other
existing public streets.
(2) The requirement stated in this section shall not be satisfied by
connection of a new subdivision to an existing subdivision having
two or more streets, regardless of the number of proposed housing
units, unless the existing subdivision has direct vehicular access to
and from at least two existing public streets satisfying the
requirement of this § 72-31C(1).
(3) The requirement stated in this section shall not be satisfied if the
existing public street providing the required access is either a culde-
sac street or, at the point at which it is attached to and provides
vehicular access to the new subdivision, there is only one means of
ingress and egress over the existing public street to the two other
existing public streets required by § 72-31C(1).
D. Double-frontage lots should be avoided, except where employed to
prevent vehicular access to major traffic streets.
E. Wherever feasible, lot lines shall follow Township boundaries rather
than cross them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
F. All lots shall have direct access to a public street and shall have at least
50 feet of frontage on such streets.
G. On any lot abutting a railroad, no dwelling shall be placed within 75 feet
of the nearest existing track, nor within 25 feet of any portion of the
right-of-way line.
H. Every building lot shall have a minimum area in accordance with
Chapter 84, Zoning, of this Code. [Added 12-4-1979 by Ord. No.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 72-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-31
72:431
§ 72-32. Alleys, driveways and easements.
9-1979; amended 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 1-1986; 8-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 8-1986; 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
I. (Reserved)
J. Interior lots shall be permitted subject to the following minimum
regulations: [Added 11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
(1) No more than two contiguous interior lots shall be formed. The
creation of such lots shall be minimized and limited to those
circumstances dictated by the configuration of the development
tract. The subdivider shall not be permitted to use interior lot
design to avoid constructing an interior residential street.
(2) No more than two lots in depth, i.e., one tier of interior lots, shall be
created along a new or existing street.
(3) The access strip shall be required to meet the minimum lot width at
the street right-of-way line and for its entire depth established for
the use by the applicable zoning district regulations and shall be
entirely included within the title lines of the lot. The minimum lot
area and other dimensional requirements for an entire lot shall be
those of the applicable zoning district and shall be met on that
portion of the lot exclusive of the access strip.
(4) The lot shall have a front line, which shall be most nearly parallel to
the street right-of-way line and shall extend along the full length of
the rear lot line or lines of those contiguous lots abutting the street
right-of-way line and shall extend across the access strip.
(5) The building setback line mandated by the district regulations shall
be measured from the contiguous lot's rear property line rather
than the adjacent right-of-way or street line.
A. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 80 feet from
the point of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way lines.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
B. In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades on
private driveways shall not exceed 2% for the first 20 feet from the
curbline and for the balance shall not exceed 10%. Driveways shall be
paved for the first 20 feet and shall be totally paved if the balance of the
drive exceeds a grade of 7%. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
C. In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private
driveway entrances shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet or
shall have a flare constructed that is equivalent to this radius, at the
point of intersection with the cartway edge (curbline).
§ 72-31 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-32
72:432
§ 72-33. Off-street parking area. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
Residential lots shall be provided with paved off-street parking spaces in
accordance with Chapter 84, Zoning, of this Code.
§ 72-34. (Reserved)129
§ 72-35. Community facilities and recreation areas. [Amended
4-26-1988 by Ord. No. 4-1988]
D. Alleys are prohibited in developments of single-family detached
residences.
E. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided as
necessary for utilities. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
F. Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
[Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
G. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for
maintenance.
H. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the shortest
distance, between any building and any petroleum products or natural
gas transmission line which traverses the subdivision.
I. Every driveway shall have a minimum paved cartway width of 10 feet,
and shall be located a minimum distance of five feet from the lot line.
[Added 12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
J. There shall be only one driveway with one curb cut for each singlefamily
residential lot. [Added 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
A. Review procedures; reservation of land required.
(1) Upon its review of a plan for subdivision or land development, the
Township Planning Commission shall consider the open space and
recreational needs of the additional residents that will result upon
implementation of the subdivision or land development, discuss its
findings and the further requirements of this section with the
subdivider or land developer as it deems necessary in the
furtherance of the public interest and the provisions of this section,
and make such report thereon as it deems necessary for
consideration by the Board of Supervisors in its review and
processing of the development application.
129. Editor's Note: Former § 72-34, Streetlighting, was repealed 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993.
§ 72-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-35
72:433
(2) Subdividers and land developers shall be required to provide or
reserve areas for facilities normally required in residential
neighborhoods, including open space, parks, playgrounds and
playfields. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities
shall be adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and offstreet
parking as appropriate to the types of facilities required or
likely to develop in the future. Prior to the preparation of plans,
subdividers and land developers shall review with the Township
Planning Commission and the Park and Recreation Board the
minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to
the tract being subdivided.
B. Amount of land required to be set aside; fee in lieu of acreage.
(1) In residential subdivisions or land developments which are
proposed to contain, or by resubdivision could contain, 10 or more
residential units, the developer shall be required to set aside,
design and develop for park, open space and recreation
(hereinafter called "POR") use of the residents within the
development the amount of land determined by application of the
following formula:
Approved Dwelling
Units per Acre
Required Park and Recreation Area for
Each 10 Dwelling Units
(square feet)
Less than 2 10,000
Less than 5 12,000
5 or more 16,000
(2) In residential subdivisions proposed to contain less than 10
dwelling units or in those residential subdivisions where
application of the requirements of Subsection A are impracticable
in terms of the criteria and standards established in Subsection C
of this section or in those instances where the Board of
Supervisors, in the exercise of its discretion, shall require, the
Board's general policy is to require a fee in lieu of the minimum
acreage otherwise required by application of Subsection A of this
section.
(3) The Supervisors may require the public dedication of land by the
developer for all POR, the payment of fees in lieu thereof or the
private reservation of land for such purpose, or combination
thereof, in accordance with the formally adopted West Goshen
Township Recreation Plan. In such instance, the required POR
areas and facilities shall be in accordance with the principles and
standards otherwise provided for in this chapter or in Chapter 84.
[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
§ 72-35 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-35
72:434
(4) The amount of any fee in lieu of the dedication or reservation of
land and provision of recreational facilities shall be fixed from time
to time by the Supervisors in a resolution designated for that
purpose. All fees so collected shall, upon their receipt by the
Township, be deposited in the West Goshen Township Park, Open
Space and Recreation Reserve Fund, which shall be an interestbearing
account. Such fees shall be expended only for the
acquisition of land or recreation facilities within West Goshen
Township at such locations as shall be selected by the Supervisors
for the establishment, enlargement or improvement of community
or neighborhood parks and recreational facilities accessible to the
subdivision or land development for which such fees have been
paid. [Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
(5) Funds from such accounts shall be expended for only and properly
allocable portions of the costs incurred to acquire or construct the
recreational land and facilities for which the fees were collected.
Upon request of the developer who has paid such fees, the
Township shall refund such fees, plus interest accumulated thereon
from the date of payment, if the Township fails to utilize the fees so
paid for such purposes within three years from the date on which
such fees were paid, unless the developer specifically waives, in
writing, the requirement that such fees be expended within such
time or waives, in writing, that such fees be repaid. [Added
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
C. In designating areas for POR within a subdivision or land development,
the following criteria and standards shall be followed by the subdivider
or land developer. All land designated for the foregoing purposes shall
be:
(1) Suitable for both active and passive recreational uses to the extent
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors, without interfering with adjacent dwelling units,
parking, driveways and roads. Active recreational uses include but
are not necessarily limited to playfields, ball fields, tennis and
racquetball courts, basketball courts, fitness trails, picnic areas,
recreational buildings and similar facilities. The minimum area
required for active recreational open space use, which shall be
comprised of ground suitable for development and construction of
such uses thereon, shall not be less than 50% of the total required
POR located as determined reasonably necessary by the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors.
(2) Comprised of no more than 30% environmentally sensitive lands,
including floodplains, woodlands, surface waters and steep slopes.
(3) Comprised of areas not less than 100 feet in width, except when
part of a trail system or pathway network.
§ 72-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-35
72:435
§ 72-36. Trees. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
(4) Interconnected with common POR areas on abutting parcels
wherever possible, including provisions for pedestrian pathways
for general public use to create a linked pathway system within the
Township. The POR shall be accessible to all dwelling units within
the development, either by abutting the POR or over easements
expressly dedicated for that purpose, but must, nevertheless, be
accessible by one or more public streets.
(5) Provided with sufficient parking when determined reasonably
necessary by the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors
for the residents' safe and convenient access and utilization for the
POR, and with safe and convenient access by adjoining street
frontage or other rights-of-way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, maintenance and vehicle
traffic, and containing customary and appropriate access
improvements.
(6) Free of all buildings and structures, except those related to POR
use.
(7) Suitably landscaped, either by retaining existing natural cover and
wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan designed to enhance
POR areas by utilization of plantings which are consistent with the
purposes of this section, which minimize maintenance costs and
which comply with § 84-55C, as applicable.
(8) Made subject to such declarations, restrictions and covenants and
other requirements as specified in § 72-40 of this chapter.
[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]
D. It shall be incumbent upon the subdivider or land developer to preserve
and protect all natural features, such as trees, watercourses, steep
slopes, natural drainage areas, historic areas and structures and similar
community assets, which will add attractiveness and value to the
remainder of the subdivision. Trees shall not be disturbed or removed
without the designated approval of the Planning Commission, made a
part of the subdivision and land development plan approval, unless in
strict compliance with § 69-9N of Chapter 69. Wherever feasible, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission and the Board, natural vegetation
shall be retained and protected and natural grade alterations shall be
kept to a minimum.
A. Developments shall be designed to preserve the maximum number of
existing trees consistent with accomplishing the development. This
shall be in strict compliance with § 69-9N of Chapter 69, Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control, of this Code.
B. In selecting and approving trees for removal, the developer and the
Township Engineer or the Building Inspector shall consider the likely
§ 72-35 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-36
72:436
aesthetic worth, durability, longevity and other arboreal values of the
trees.
C. All lots within a land development and/or a subdivision that are vacant
of trees shall have a minimum of one deciduous tree planted for every
5,000 square feet of lot or part thereof and one nondeciduous tree for
every 10,000 square feet of lot or part thereof. This requirement shall
be in addition to § 84-55A and C of Chapter 84, Zoning, of this Code:
D. Trees required by this § 72-36 shall have a minimum caliper of 11/2
inches measured at breast height after planting and shall be listed and
shown on the conservation plan required by § 72-19 of this chapter.
§ 72-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-36
72:437

ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 72-37. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at all comers and angle points of boundaries
of the original tract to be subdivided, and at such intermediate points as
may be required to facilitate the location of lots and streets. All lot comer
markers shall be so located that the individual properties may be readily
ascertained after development of the subdivision. Markers shall be set in
the ground one inch above finished grade. Any certificate of occupancy shall
be conditional until markers are clearly located.
§ 72-38. Agreements and performance guaranties. [Added
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990130]
A. No plan shall be finally approved unless all improvements required by
this chapter have been installed, constructed, completed and approved
by the Township or, as a condition of final plan approval, the developer
has provided for the deposit with the Township of financial security and
Township inspection fees in an amount sufficient to completely pay for
the costs of any such improvements and necessary Township
inspections and has executed the agreements specified in Subsection
A(1). Where public sanitary sewer lines are to be installed in any
subdivision or land development subject to the jurisdiction of the West
Goshen Sewer Authority, the financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with
the regulations of that Authority and need not be included within the
financial security posted with the Township.
(1) The developer shall execute the Township's standard form
subdivision and land development agreement, in which he shall
agree to timely complete the approved plan and to lay out and
improve the roads, streets, alleys and all other traffic facilities and
to construct all of the other required improvements, including but
not limited to grading, paving, curbs, gutters and other road
improvements, walkways, bicycle trails, streetlights, fire hydrants,
water mains and water systems, storm systems, stormwater
detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage
facilities, sanitary sewers and sewer systems and related facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, buffer and screen
plantings and all other improvements as shown on the approved
plan and as represented on the application and related documents
submitted to the Township for approval with the plan and any
improvements required as a condition of approval of the plan by the
Supervisors.
(2) The developer shall agree to install all electric and telephone
utilities underground and to provide sufficient easements and
130. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 72-38, Curbs.
§ 72-37 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-38
72:439
rights-of-way for such installation and maintenance by the
respective utility companies. In all cases where sanitary sewer
trunk facilities are available, the developer shall be required to
install sanitary sewers and to connect the same to the public sewer
facilities, irrespective of the size of the lots, units or buildings
designated on the plan. If the facilities are not available but will
become available within a reasonable time or if mandated by the
Supervisors, such sewers, together with all necessary laterals
extended from the main sewer to the street curb, shall be installed
and capped.
(3) The developer and the financial institution issuing the financial
security guaranteeing completion of the required improvements
shall execute the Township standard form financial security
agreement, specifying the terms and conditions under which such
security shall be held, dispersed and released, and the developer
shall execute the Township's standard form developer's
performance bond as additional security to guarantee the
completion of required improvements. The terms and conditions of
these agreements shall not be amended or modified except as
approved by the Township Solicitor and the Supervisors.
(4) The developer shall also post with the Township at the time the
financial security is posted such amount as established by
resolution of the Supervisors to reimburse the Township for the
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the Township for
the Township Engineer's inspection of and reports about the
required improvements. Such fees shall include the fees of those
acting under the direct supervision and control of the Township
Engineer for such purpose, including consultants and the
Municipal Authority's engineer. The fees so established shall be
reasonable and shall be the ordinary and customary fees charged
by the Township when such fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on developers. The Township Engineer or consultant shall
periodically bill the Township for all inspection fees and shall send
a copy of the bill to the developer. In the event that the developer
disputes the amount of any such fee, the procedure established in
MPC Section 510(g)(1) through (5)131 shall be mandatory for the
resolution of any such dispute.
B. The types of financial security acceptable to the Township include
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable
letters of credit, a restrictive account or an escrow account in such
lending institutions or such other security as the Supervisors, in their
sole discretion, deem acceptable financial security for the purposes of
this section. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding
company or federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
chosen by the developer, provided that said institution is authorized to
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510(g)(1) through (5).
§ 72-38 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-38
72:440
§ 72-39. Release from improvement guaranties. [Added 10-9-1990
by Ord. No. 7-1990132]
conduct business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
developer shall also execute and post an unsecured bond which secures
to the public the completion of all improvements required by the final
plan on or before the date fixed by the Supervisors in approving the
plan or in the subdivision and land development agreement.
C. The amount of financial security to be posted for completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the costs of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual costs of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated costs for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
Township may require the developer to post additional security in
conformity with this section in order to assure that the financial
security equals 110% at all times.
D. If the developer requires more than one year from the date of posting of
financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount
of financial security determined pursuant to § 72-15B(3) shall be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from the posting of the financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the costs of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period.
E. When definite stages of work of installation of the required
improvements have been completed, the developer may make written
request to the Supervisors to release or authorize release, from time to
time, of such portions of the financial security as are necessary for
payment to the contractor or subcontractors performing such stages of
work. The Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request
within which to permit the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to
the Supervisors that such portion of the work for which release is
sought has been completed in accordance with this chapter and the
approved final plan. Upon such certification, the Supervisors shall
authorize release or reduction by the financial institution issuing the
financial security of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
which fairly represents the value of the completed improvements. If the
Supervisors fail to act within 45 days, the Supervisors shall be deemed
to have approved the release or reduction as requested; provided,
however, that prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by the Township Engineer, the Board shall require
retention of 10% of the estimated costs of the improvements.
§ 72-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-39
72:441
A. When the developer has completed all of the required improvements,
the developer shall give written notice to the Supervisors, by certified
or registered mail, of such completion and shall send a copy of such
notice to the Township Engineer. The Supervisors shall, within 10 days
after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer
to inspect all of the public improvements. The Township Engineer shall
file a written inspection report with the Supervisors and shall promptly
mail a copy of the report to the developer by certified or registered
mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt
by the Township Engineer of the Board's written authorization to him to
inspect the improvements. The Township Engineer's report shall be
reasonably detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of the
improvements, either in whole or in part. If any of the improvements or
any portion thereof are not approved or are rejected by him, his report
shall contain a statement of the reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection. Within 15 days of the Supervisors' receipt of the Township
Engineer's report, the Supervisors shall give written notice to the
developer by certified or registered mail of their action with relation
thereto. Failure of the Supervisors or the Township Engineer to act
within these time limitations shall constitute a deemed approval that
the improvements are acceptable and a release of the financial security.
B. If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to complete
those improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined in Subsection A shall be followed.
C. Where the Supervisors accept dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following their completion and approval by the
Township, the Supervisors shall require the posting of financial security
to secure structural integrity and functioning of those improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the
approved final plan and in the supplementary data and documents
approved as a part thereof for a term of 18 months from the date of the
Supervisors' acceptance of dedication. This financial security shall be of
the same type as otherwise required in § 72-38 for the installation,
construction and completion of such improvements, and the amount of
the required financial security shall equal 15% of the actual costs of
installation of said improvements as finally calculated.
D. The Supervisors may require dedication to the Township of one or more
elements of the required improvements but shall not be required to
accept dedication, except as the Supervisors determine necessary for
the promotion and protection of the public welfare. Prior to acceptance
of any such dedication, the Board may require that the developer supply
a title insurance certificate from a reputable title insurance company
which proves that the proposed elements to be dedicated are free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances of any kind. Such dedication shall
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 72-39, Conditions for approval, as
amended.
§ 72-39 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-39
72:442
§ 72-40. Required documents for ownership of common facilities;
enforcement remedies. [Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990133]
be made and accepted only by deeds and agreements approved as to
form and content by the Township Solicitor, subject to the Supervisors'
approval. Each proposed deed of dedication shall be accompanied by
all required public filing fees, and no dedication shall be accepted until
approved by resolution of the Supervisors duly adopted at a public
meeting. The as-built plan required by § 72-41 shall be filed of record
with the Township Secretary as a condition precedent to any offer of
dedication.
E. Whenever a developer proposes to establish or continue a street which
is not offered for dedication or not required to be offered for dedication,
prior to the release of the final plan for recording he shall enter into an
agreement with the Township in form suitable for recording, approved
by the Township Solicitor, binding himself, his heirs, successors,
administrators and assigns, which shall establish the conditions under
which the street may later be offered for dedication. This agreement
shall contain and require the following and shall be recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds, together with the final plan:
(1) An irrevocable offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for
the street as a whole.
(2) The street shall comply with all minimum specifications required by
this chapter and shall require that the owners of the lots along the
street agree to include with the offer of dedication sufficient
financial security, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to
restore the street to Township specifications and thereafter
maintain the street for a period of 18 months from the date of such
dedication.
(3) The method of assessing such repair and maintenance costs among
the various owners along the street shall be stipulated in the offer
of dedication.
(4) A copy of the developer's agreement offering future dedication
shall be and become a part of each deed with respect to each lot
sold by the developer along the proposed street to be dedicated,
binding the owners of said lots to the terms of the agreement. The
existence of this agreement shall appear on the face of the final
plan, as approved and recorded.
A. The final plan shall be accompanied by the declaration of covenants,
easements and restrictions to which the subdivision or land
development will be subject, together with the bylaws of any legal
entity or organization by which such entity or organization will be
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 72-40, Revision and amendments, of Art.
VII of this chapter.
§ 72-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-40
72:443
governed. In addition, any easements for utilities, vehicular or
pedestrian access, drainage or similar easements required to be
depicted on the final plan shall be described by metes and bounds and
incorporated in and made a part of the declaration in form suitable for
public recordation. If no declaration is required for the development,
such easements shall be separately recorded in suitable form so as
to bind each affected lot in the development. The declaration and/or
easements, which shall be in form and content reasonably acceptable to
the Township Solicitor, shall be recorded with the final plan in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania. [Amended
12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
B. The following methods may be used to preserve, own and maintain
common open space, community recreation facilities, community
sewage facilities, central water supply facilities, stormwater
management facilities, common parking areas and driveways, private
streets or any other common or community facilities, hereinafter
referred to as "common facilities": condominium association,
homeowners' association, dedication in fee simple, easements and
transfer to a private conservation organization. The following specific
requirements are associated with each of the various methods:
(1) Homeowners' association. The common facilities may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners' association. If a
homeowners' association is formed, it shall be governed according
to the following regulations:
(a) The developer shall provide to the Township a description of
the association, including its bylaws and documents governing
maintenance requirements and use restrictions for common
facilities.
(b) The association shall be legally established or incorporated by
the applicant and shall be operating with adequate financial
subsidization by the developer before the sale of any buildings
or dwelling units in the development.
(c) Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all
purchasers and subsequent owners of lots, buildings or
dwelling units.
(d) The association shall be responsible to continuously maintain
and insure the common facilities.
(e) The association shall be responsible for all real estate taxes on
common facilities.
(f) The members of the association shall share equitably the costs
of maintaining, replacing when necessary, insuring and
operating common facilities.
§ 72-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-40
72:444
(g) In the event of any proposed transfer of common facilities by
the homeowners' association to or the assumption of their
maintenance by the Township as hereinafter provided, notice
of such action shall be given to all members of the
homeowners' association by said association.
(h) The association shall have or hire adequate staff, as necessary,
to administer, maintain and operate common facilities.
(2) Condominium association. Common facilities may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements
shall be in conformance with the Uniform Condominium Act134 in
effect at the time of construction or transfer. All of the abovedescribed
land and facilities shall be held as common elements.
(3) Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. With
permission of the Township, the developer may transfer easements
on open space lands to a private nonprofit organization, among
whose purposes is to conserve open space land and/or natural
resources, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona
fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions; and
(c) A maintenance arrangement acceptable to the Township is
established between the developer and the grantee.
(4) Fee simple dedication. The Township or other public agency
acceptable to the Township may but shall not be required to accept
dedication of any portion or portions of the common facilities,
provided that:
(a) Any common facilities so dedicated are accessible to the
residents of the Township;
(b) There is no cost to the Township of acquisition; and
(c) The Township is given adequate access at no cost which is
acceptable to the Township to maintain such common facilities.
(5) Dedication of easements. The Township may but shall not be
required to accept easements for public use of any portion or
portions of the common facilities, title to which is to remain in
ownership by a condominium or homeowners' association,
provided that:
134. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 72-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-40
72:445
(a) Any common facilities so dedicated are accessible to the
residents of the Township;
(b) There is no cost to the Township of easement acquisition; and
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer and the Township.
C. Maintenance and operation of common facilities.
(1) Each preliminary plan application shall be accompanied by a
narrative description of the maintenance and operation of common
facilities which shall define ownership; establish necessary regular
and periodic operation and maintenance responsibilities; estimate
staffing needs, insurance requirements and associated costs; and
define the means for funding such facilities on an ongoing basis. In
form and content approved by the Supervisors, upon approval of
and as a condition of the final plan, the Supervisors may require the
establishment of an escrow fund by the applicant, under the control
of the Supervisors and the homeowners' association or other entity
formed to own and maintain common facilities, to guarantee that
sufficient capital is available at all times for their maintenance,
upkeep and replacement. The amount of such fund shall be
determined by the Supervisors upon recommendations of the
Township Engineer based upon the size and extent of such common
facilities and may be funded as lots or buildings are initially sold off
by the developer. Dispute about such amount shall be resolved by
the procedure established in § 72-15B(3). Funds so established
shall be segregated in a separate account in the name of the
Township and such entity, and no funds shall be released from such
account without the written authorization of the Chairman of the
Supervisors, who shall be the accounts authorized signatory.
(2) In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
the common facilities or any successor organization shall at any
time after its establishment fail to maintain, repair or replace all or
any portion of them, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization describing the deficiencies with respect to the
common facilities, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance, repair or replacement be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of hearing
thereon, which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At such
hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the original notice
as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within
which said deficiencies shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not
be corrected within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the premises
and to prevent the common facilities from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon the premises on which the common
facilities are located and maintain them for a period of one year.
§ 72-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-40
72:446
§ 72-41. As-built plans. [Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990135]
Said entry and maintenance shall not constitute a taking of the
common facilities except when they are voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the residents and owners and such dedication is
acceptable to the Township. Before the expiration of said year,
the Township shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common facilities, call a public hearing upon notice to said
organization or to the residents and owners of the dwelling units
attendant thereto, at which hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the aforesaid dwelling units shall show
cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the
election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the
Township shall determine that such organization is ready and able
to maintain said common facilities in a reasonable condition, the
Township shall cease to maintain said common facilities. If they
are not ready and able to maintain the common facilities in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain them during the next succeeding year and, subject to
a similar hearing and determination, in the year thereafter. The
decision of the Township in any such case shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(3) The cost of such maintenance, repair and replacement and the
enforcement proceedings by the Township shall be assessed
ratably, in accordance with tax assessments, against the properties
that have the right of enjoyment of the common facilities and shall
become a lien on said properties. The Township, at the time of
entering upon such common facilities for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a lien in the office of the Prothonotary of
Chester County upon those properties to recover all such costs and
expenses.
A. Upon completion of a subdivision or land development,
contemporaneously with the filing by the developer of the maintenance
agreement and maintenance escrow, but in no event later than 90 days
from substantial completion of the development, the developer shall file
of record with the Township an as-built plan and profile sheets, which
shall be drawn at the same scale as the final plan. The plan shall be
dated and clearly labeled "as-built plan" and shall indicate the actual
location, dimensions and/or elevations of all completed improvements,
including but not limited to:
(1) Concrete monuments and iron pins.
(2) Cartway edges or top of curbs for both sides of each street.
135. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 72-41, Enforcement; inspections, of Art.
VII of this chapter.
§ 72-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-41
72:447
(3) Sanitary sewer main, manholes and laterals.
(4) Storm sewers, mains, manholes, inlets and culverts.
(5) Waterlines and fire hydrants.
(6) Streetlights, where applicable.
(7) Electrical and all other underground utilities.
(8) Permanent sedimentation control structures or basins.
(9) Landscaping and planting material.
(10) All easements.
B. Such plan shall be certified by the engineer who prepared the final plan
or the project engineer to be in accordance with the actual details of
construction.
C. The placement of the monuments shall be certified by a registered
surveyor in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 12-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 6-1999]
D. Four sets of the as-built drawings and deed descriptions shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer, who shall review and approve the
same. Upon the Township Engineer's approval of the as-built drawings,
the developer shall submit one digital copy of the complete as-built plan
set in either a .DXF or .DWG format (must be same as previous digital
submissions). The digital plans shall be submitted on a compact disc
(CD) and shall not be compressed or zipped. The submission shall not
include externally referenced (X-ref) drawings and all raster images
shall be in a drawing file format. The digital submission shall be
prepared to meet commonly accepted CAD standards for layering, but
shall, at a minimum, include the standard layer names, line type, and
color specified in § 72-12B(3) of this chapter. [Amended 11-12-2003
by Ord. No. 12-2003]
§ 72-41 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-41
72:448
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 5-7-1985 by Ord. No. 5-1985; 10-9-1990 by Ord. No.
7-1990]
§ 72-42. Enforcement and preventive remedies.
A. In the event that any improvements required by any final plan approval
have not been timely installed and completed as provided in this
chapter or in accord with the approved final plan, the developer shall be
in default, and the Supervisors shall enforce any corporate bond,
financial security agreement or other security by any appropriate legal
or equitable remedies. Upon the Supervisors' written notice of default
to the financial institution posting the financial security or corporate
bond guaranteeing installation, construction and completion of any
required improvement or maintenance thereof, said financial institution
shall forthwith pay over to the Township any amount or amounts
demanded by the Township comprising the bond or financial security. If
the proceeds of any corporate bond or other financial security are
insufficient to pay the costs of installing or making repairs or
corrections to all of the improvements covered by the security, the
Supervisors may, at their option, install all or part of the improvements
in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable actions to recover the moneys necessary
to complete the remainder of these improvements, including
proceeding against the developer on the developer's performance bond.
All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation or maintenance, as applicable, of the
improvements covered by such security and the recovery of all court
costs and legal fees incurred by the Township in any such action or
actions.
B. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations of this chapter, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring lots or parcels of ground in any subdivision or land
development shall not exempt the seller or transferor from any such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided for.
C. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property within a
subdivision or land development which has been developed or which
has resulted from a subdivision or land development of real property in
violation of this chapter or any ordinance adopted pursuant to the
MPC136 or other statute. This authority to deny such permit or approval
shall apply to any of the following:
§ 72-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-42
72:449
§ 72-43. Fees. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
Applicants for subdivision and land development approval shall pay a filing
fee to cover the administrative cost for the Township's review of plans and a
fee to be placed in escrow to cover the Township's professional consultants'
costs relating to the review of the application and any supporting
documents and materials, and report to the Township on the same. The term
"professional consultants" shall include any persons who provide expert
or professional advice, including but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners. Any amount in the escrow funds which
exceeds the Township's professional consultants' review costs shall be
returned to the applicant, without interest. If the amount in the escrow
fund is not sufficient to meet all of the Township's professional consultants'
review costs, the applicant shall be billed therefor and shall pay the amount
due within 30 days of such billing. The filing fees and escrow fees shall be
as established or amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 72-44. Modifications of requirements.
The Supervisors may grant a modification of one or more of the
requirements of this chapter if the literal enforcement thereof will exact
undue hardship upon the developer because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land which is the subject of the application. The granting
of such modification shall be discretionary with the Supervisors who must
be satisfied that the undue hardship results from the circumstances
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee has
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of the violation, without regard
as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
D. As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of
an approval to any owner, current owner, vendee or lessee described in
the preceding subsection for any such property, the Township shall
require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable
to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such
real property.
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 72-42 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-44
72:450
described in MPC Section 910.2(a)137 and will not be detrimental or
contrary to the public interest and welfare and will not be contrary to the
purposes and intent of this chapter. All requests for modification shall be in
writing and must accompany and be a part of the application for subdivision
or land development. Such request shall state in full the grounds and facts
of unreasonableness or hardship upon which the request is based, cite the
provision or provisions of this chapter involved and describe the minimum
requested modification. The Supervisors shall keep a written record of their
action with respect to any such request, but the failure of the Supervisors
to act on any such request shall not result in a deemed approval thereof.
§ 72-45. Violations and civil enforcement proceedings.
§ 72-46. Amendments and regulations.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who or which
has violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there
has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership, corporation or other entity violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of violation by the
District Justice, and, thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. This chapter may be enforced by the Supervisors, the Township Zoning
Officer or his Deputy(s), the Township Engineer and the Township
Solicitor.
A. The Supervisors may, from time to time, revise, modify and amend this
chapter by appropriate action taken at a scheduled public hearing held
pursuant to public notice, subject to the requirements of MPC Sections
505 and 506, as those sections may be changed, renumbered or
amended from time to time.138
B. The Supervisors may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations adopted at a public meeting to implement any provision of
this chapter or to establish additional development and design
standards pursuant to Article V.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2(a).
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10505 and 10506.
§ 72-44 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-47
72:451
§ 72-47. Appeals.
Appeals from the action of the Planning Commission or, as applicable, the
Supervisors in either approving or disapproving a preliminary plan or a final
plan or from a conditional final plan approval unacceptable to the applicant
shall be taken and made in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
MPC.139
§ 72-48. Time limit on implementation of plan.
When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the
applicant, no subsequent change or amendment of this chapter or the
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 84) shall be applied to affect adversely the
right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the
approved development in accordance with the terms of such final approval
within five years from such approval, as provided for in Section 508(4) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,140 as amended, but subject,
nevertheless, to the terms and conditions of the provisions of the latter
section.
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 72-47 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-48
72:452
Chapter 74
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Social security — See Ch. 18.
§ 72-48 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 72-48
72:453

ARTICLE I
Delinquent Tax Collector141
§ 74-1. Appointment of Tax Collector as collector of delinquent
taxes.
§ 74-2. through § 74-6. (Reserved)
A. The elected Tax Collector of West Goshen Township ("Tax Collector") is
hereby appointed, authorized and directed to act as the collector of
delinquent taxes ("Delinquent Tax Collector") within West Goshen
Township for taxes collected after the end of the tax year but before the
taxes remaining unpaid are submitted to the Chester County Tax Claim
Bureau for collection.
B. This appointment and authorization shall remain in effect until the
Board of Supervisors, by ordinance, takes further action, as required by
law.
C. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Tax Collector during the term of
this appointment, the successor tax collector shall automatically
succeed to the powers and duties set forth herein.
D. The Delinquent Tax Collector shall not be required to give additional
bond on account of this appointment.
E. The Delinquent Tax Collector shall have all of the authority and power
to collect delinquent Township taxes as is now vested by law in the Tax
Collector with respect to the collection of nondelinquent Township
taxes.
F. The Delinquent Tax Collector shall account to the Board of Supervisors
for all delinquent tax collections made in the same manner as is
required for the reporting of nondelinquent tax collections.
G. The Delinquent Tax Collector shall be compensated in the same manner
as provided for collection of nondelinquent Township taxes within the
Township.
141. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Per Capita Tax, adopted 4-6-1966 by Ord. No. 1-1966, was
repealed 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 11-1988.
§ 74-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-2
72:455

ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 06-2010142]
§ 74-7. Title.
This article shall be known as the "West Goshen Township Earned Income
Tax Ordinance of 2010."
§ 74-8. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following terms shall have
the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed by the Board of Supervisors
as Tax Officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act143 to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2011.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — West Goshen Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.144
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.145
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.146
THIS ENACTMENT — This article.
§ 74-9. Imposition of tax; rate.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Earned Income Tax, adopted
11-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-1970, as amended. This ordinance also provided an effective
date of 1-1-2011.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 74-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-9
72:457
§ 74-10. Exemption.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income, or other factors.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority, subject to
§ 74-9D below.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority
subject to § 74-9E below.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act147 applicable. The tax is imposed under
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that
relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
147. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 74-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-11
72:458
§ 74-11. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay the tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.148
§ 74-12. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.149
§ 74-13. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 74-14. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act,150 including costs imposed
by the collector in accordance with authorization by the TCC having
jurisdiction.
§ 74-15. Severability.
The provisions of this enactment are severable and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this enactment. It is
declared to be the intention of the governing body that this enactment
would have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had
not been included.
§ 74-16. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act,151
as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the
time frame required by Act 32. Any prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected in any manner by adoption of this enactment. The provisions
of this enactment shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall
such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 74-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-16
72:459
enforce any right or penalty or to punish an offense under the authority
of any enactment in force prior to adoption of this enactment. Subject to
the foregoing provisions of this section, this enactment shall supersede and
repeal on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on earned income
or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.152
§ 74-16.1. Effective date.
This article shall become effective five days after its enactment as law
provides, and the tax imposed herein shall be collected commencing on
January 1, 2011.
152. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 74-16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-16.1
72:460
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-2-1986 by Ord. No. 15-1986153]
§ 74-17. Tax levied; title.
§ 74-18. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACQUIRED COMPANY — A real estate company is an acquired company
upon a change in the ownership interest in the company, however effected,
if the change does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself
or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or
indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company
within a period of three years.
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise, owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trusts or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
A. Pursuant to the authority contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, and Article XI-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971, a tax for the purpose of providing revenue for general
Township purposes is hereby levied, assessed and imposed upon the
transfer of real property or an interest in real property within the limits
of West Goshen Township, regardless of where the instruments making
the transfers are made, executed or delivered or where the actual
settlements on the transfer took place, at the rate of 1% of the amount
of the value of said real property or interest therein, as herein defined.
[Amended 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007]
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance."
153. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Realty Transfer Tax, adopted
4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981. See § 74-35, Repealer.
§ 74-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-18
72:461
vest or confirm a public utility easement. A document shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording pursuant
to § 74-22B hereof.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The "business of agriculture" shall not be deemed to include
recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing, camping,
skiing, show competition or racing; the raising, breeding or training of
game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended
for use in sporting or recreational activities; fur farming; stockyard and
slaughterhouse operations; and manufacturing or processing operations of
any kind. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a
family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary
or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer
of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the
minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this act.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal decedents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including, without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables
or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
D. Real property.
§ 74-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-18
72:462
and which derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate or holds real estate, the value of
which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible asset
holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and
actively traded on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity; provided, however, in determining
the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew
or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is
fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
B.
§ 74-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-18
72:463
§ 74-19. Persons subject to tax.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof or for and
in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such document is
written or printed, a tax payable to the Township of West Goshen, Chester
County, Pennsylvania, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier
of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of
acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired
company.
§ 74-20. Governmental bodies exempt.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 74-21. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon the following
transactions:
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
§ 74-18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-21
72:464
C. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
that the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was
acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the
granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the
spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or
sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or sister and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw, party; or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this subsection.
§ 74-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-21
72:465
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock or the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee or property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 68A Stat. 3,
26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open-space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
§ 74-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-21
72:466
§ 74-22. Documents relating to associations, corporations and
acquired companies.
§ 74-23. Credits against tax.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. Except as excluded in § 74-21 hereof, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders
or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
B. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present for recording a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County for the purpose of noting thereon or the
affixation thereto of such documentary stamps or other evidence of the
payment of this tax as required by law. Such declaration shall set forth
the value of the real estate holdings of the acquired company in Chester
County.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax upon
the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
§ 74-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-23
72:467
§ 74-24. Tax to be paid out of proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or cost of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting such sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 74-25. Real estate partially located in Township.
Where real estate or an interest in real estate lying partly within the
boundaries of West Goshen Township and partly without said boundaries is
transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be calculated upon such portion
of the value as shall be represented by the portion of the real estate or
interest therein lying within the boundaries of the Township as determined
by the realty transfer tax statement of value filed with the Recorder of
Deeds or, if no such filing is required, by affidavit of the transferor or
as separately stated in the document of transfer; provided, however, such
value shall in no event be less than the highest assessed valuation for local
tax purposes placed upon the real estate or the interest in the real estate in
the assessment of the property within the Township.
§ 74-26. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County for recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such
document the true, full and complete value thereof. When the full, complete
and actual consideration for the transfer which is subject to the tax is
not set forth in the document, the person liable for the tax shall,
contemporaneously with the filing of the document, file with the Recorder of
Deeds a realty transfer tax statement of value identical to that promulgated
by the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or,
in the instance of an acquired company, a realty transfer tax declaration
of acquisition identical to that promulgated by the Department of Revenue
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from
taxation based on family relationship.
§ 74-27. Recorder of Deeds to act as agent for Township.
The tax imposed hereby, including any amount payable to the Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania pursuant to § 74-29 hereof, shall be collected by the
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 74-23 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-27
72:468
Recorder of Deeds of Chester County who shall act as agent for the
Township in the collection of the transfer tax as provided in 16 P.S.
§ 11011-6, as amended. The tax thus collected shall be payable by the
Recorder to the Treasurer of West Goshen Township at least monthly or
at such other intervals as the Township and the Recorder of Deeds shall
mutually determine.
§ 74-28. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article when received by the
Recorder of Deeds shall be evidenced by the affixing of a documentary
stamp or stamps or other evidence of payment as approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
§ 74-29. Determination or redetermination of tax due.
In the event that a determination or redetermination of transfer tax due
is made by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue pursuant to § 1111-C
of Act 1986-77, 72 P.S. § 8111-C, such determination or redetermination
shall be deemed to have been also made by the Secretary of West Goshen
Township, and there shall be due and owing to the Township, as additional
transfer tax, the amount determined or redetermined by the Department to
be due the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Upon a redetermination of the
amount of realty transfer tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
the Recorder shall rerecord the document only when the transfer tax
imposed by this article has been paid.
§ 74-30. Enforcement.
The Secretary of West Goshen Township is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby authorized and
empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating
to the registration and notation of transactions, the collection of transfer
taxes, interest and penalties due hereunder, the prosecution of violations
hereunder, and any other matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., as the same are from time to time
amended, are incorporated into and made a part of this article and shall be
deemed to have been adopted by the Township Secretary.
§ 74-31. Collection of delinquent tax, interest and penalties.
A. If for any reason the transfer tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate of 9% per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional
penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of
§ 74-27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-31
72:469
§ 74-32. Violations and penalties.
§ 74-33. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its sections,
phrases, clauses or sentences shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
provisions shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, phrases,
clauses or sentences. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed. [Amended
1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007]
B. The transfer tax when due and unpaid, together with all interest and
penalties thereon, shall be a lien in favor of the Township on the real
estate or interest in the real estate which is described in the document
on which the tax is imposed and upon any other property, both real and
personal, of the person failing to pay the tax due, after said lien has
been entered and docketed of record by the Prothonotary of Chester
County in accordance with the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Law.154
C. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
D. The tax imposed by this article and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be collected, administered and enforced in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act,155 provided that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid when due, the Township pursuant to Section 1102-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971, (72 P.S. § 8102-D) authorizes and directs the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to determine,
collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties. [Amended
1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accept or present for recording or cause to be accepted or
presented for recording any document, without the full amount of
the tax thereon being duly paid; or
(2) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the provisions of
this article or the rules and regulations prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Secretary under the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be liable, upon conviction thereof,
to a fine not exceeding $300, together with the cost of prosecution, and
in default of payment of such fine and cost, shall be liable to a term of
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 74-31 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-33
72:470
Supervisors of the West Goshen Township that this article would have been
adopted if such illegal provision had not been included herein.
§ 74-34. When effective.
This article and the tax herein levied shall be effective five days after
enactment as by law provided and shall remain in effect until amended or
repealed.
§ 74-35. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 3-1981, adopted April 14, 1981, being Article III of Chapter
74 of the Code of the Township of West Goshen, is hereby repealed in its
entirety, such repealer to be effective concurrently with the effective date of
this article.
§ 74-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-35
72:471

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 10-26-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005156]
§ 74-36. Short title. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
This article shall be known as the "West Goshen Township Local Services
Tax Ordinance."
§ 74-37. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
COLLECTOR or TAX COLLECTOR — The person appointed by the
Board of Supervisors to collect the local services tax levied by this
article and to administer the provisions thereof.[Amended
10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
CORPORATION — Any corporation or joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or
dependency
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity who or that
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission, or other
compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, fiduciary, partnership or other entity
domiciled outside of West Goshen Township.
OCCUPATION — Any enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking
of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit,
whether by an individual, association, or any other entity, whereby any
wage, salary, commission or other remuneration is earned.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in West Goshen Township.
SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION —
Includes salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees and tips that may accrue or be received by an individual for
services rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether in
cash or in property, but shall not include periodic payments for sick or
156. Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of Art. IV from Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax to Local Services Tax.
§ 74-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-37
72:473
§ 74-38. Imposition and rate.
§ 74-39. Exemption and rebates. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
12-2007]
disability benefits and those commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay, or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment, not
public assistance or unemployment compensation payments, nor any
wages or compensation paid by the United States to any person for
active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States, not
any bonus or additional compensation paid by the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state for such service.
TAXPAYER — A person required hereunder to file a return on earnings
or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
TOWNSHIP — West Goshen Township.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine should include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. A tax is levied at the amount of $52 per year for any of the following
purposes: [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
(1) Police, fire, medical or emergency services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Real estate tax reduction; or
(4) Property tax relief through the implementation of a homestead or
farmstead exclusion.157
B. The taxes levied under Subsection A shall be imposed upon:
(1) All nonresidents who hold an occupation in West Goshen Township;
and
(2) All residents who hold an occupation in West Goshen Township.
A. Any and all individuals earning less than $12,000 per year from all
sources shall be exempt from payment of the local services tax.
B. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the Township and with the
person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. The Township shall provide a copy of the
tax exemption certificate to the Tax Collector. Upon receipt of the
exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the person or
157. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 74-37 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-39
72:474
the Township, the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person
during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate applies.
C. If a person claims an exemption from the local services tax for a given
calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the person or by the
Township that the person has received earned income and net profits
from all sources within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year, or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the
person of earned income within the Township in an amount equal to or
in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person pursuant to the procedure
specified in Subsection D below.
D. If a person who claimed an exemption from the local services tax for a
given calendar year thereafter becomes subject to the tax for that
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of
that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the
first payroll period after receipt of the notification that the person is
subject to the tax, a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not
withheld from the person due to the claim of exemption, plus the perpayroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax
withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees.
In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of the
tax under this subsection is subsequently severed in that calendar year,
the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due.
E. Any individual who has paid a local services tax for a calendar year may,
between January 1 and April 15 of the next succeeding calendar year,
file an application for a rebate, and said individual shall be entitled to a
rebate, provided that an application is timely filed and provided that it
is proven to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the individual
earned income in the calendar year for which the rebate is sought in an
amount less than $12,000.
F. Additionally, the following persons shall be exempt from the local
services tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States of America was engaged and is honorably
discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active
service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind,
paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or has a serviceconnected
disability that has been declared by the Veteran's
Administration or its successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent
permanent disability; and
§ 74-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-39
72:475
§ 74-40. Collection at source. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
12-2007]
Every employer who employs one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis whose earnings are subject to the
tax imposed by this article shall deduct the amount of tax levied by this
article from the salaries, wages or compensation paid to the employee,
which deduction shall be made at a maximum rate of $1 per week, with
the employer being required to withhold the tax at the frequency of the
employee's payroll schedule and with payments made to the Tax Collector
on a quarterly basis.
§ 74-41. Tax returns; employer's commission; failure to file returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation
of the tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Tax Collector. If the
employer fails to file said return and pay said tax, whether or not he makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him from
his employees, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax
in full as though the tax had originally been levied against him.
§ 74-42. Dates for determining tax liability and payment. [Amended
10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
Each employer shall use his employment records from the first day of
January of each fiscal year for determining the number of employees from
whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Tax Collector on or
before April 30 of each year. Supplemental reports and payment of taxes
collected shall be made by each employer on the following schedule:
§ 74-43. Multiple occupations.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Township shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal
occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to
him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to the employer by
the Tax Collector, which form shall be evidence of deduction having been
made and, when presented to any other employer, shall be authority for
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year.
A. For employees hired April 1 through June 30: pay tax and file report by
July 31.
B. For employees hired July 1 to September 30: file report and pay tax
before October 31.
C. For employees hired October 1 through December 31: pay tax and file
report on or before January 31 of the following year.
§ 74-39 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-43
72:476
such employer to not deduct this tax from the employee's wages but to
include such employee on his return by setting forth his name, address and
the name and account number of the employer who deducted this tax.
§ 74-44. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind or
are engaged in any occupation or profession within the Township shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the Tax Collector on
April 30 of each year or as soon thereafter as he engages in an occupation
or profession within the Township.
§ 74-45. Employers and self-employed individuals residing outside
the Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of
business outside the Township but who perform services of any type or kind
or engage in any occupation or profession within the Township do, by virtue
thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions,
penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same
force and effect as though they were residents of the Township. Further, any
individual engaged in an occupation within the Township and an employee
of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered
a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid, the Township
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 74-46. Designation of Tax Collector.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township shall designate a Tax
Collector by resolution, and the compensation of such Tax Collector shall be
fixed by the Board of Supervisors by resolution. The Collector shall collect
and receive all taxes imposed by this article; furnish receipts for their
payment; keep records showing amounts received by him from all taxpayers
and the dates of such receipts; and keep such other records as may be from
time to time required by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 74-47. Powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions
of this article and is authorized and empowered as follows:
A. To administer and enforce the provisions of this article and all rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted, and promulgated by the Board of
Supervisors of West Goshen Township relating to the enforcement and
administration hereof. Consistent with such rules and regulations, the
Collector shall have the power and authority to reexamine and correct
any and all returns filed hereunder, and to compute, settle, resettle and
discharge all taxes hereby levied.
§ 74-43 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-47
72:477
§ 74-48. Additional regulations authorized.
The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township shall be empowered
from time to time to adopt by resolution additional rules and regulations
pertaining to this article.
§ 74-49. Interest and penalty for late payment.
All taxes imposed by this article remaining unpaid after they become due
shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per year beginning with the due date
for said tax, and the persons upon whom said taxes are imposed shall be
further liable to pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the unpaid tax for
each month or fraction of a month during which the tax remains unpaid.
§ 74-50. Recovery.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest and penalties
accruing thereon, shall be recoverable by the Township as other debts of
like amounts are recoverable.
§ 74-51. Violations and penalties.
Any violator of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs and, in default of
payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
B. The Collector, or any agent of the Township authorized in writing by the
Collector, is hereby authorized and empowered to examine the books,
papers and records of any employer or taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax imposed by this article. Every such employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the said Collector or a duly authorized
agent or employee of the Township, the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine any person
under oath concerning any income which was or should have been
returned for taxation, and to this end may compel the production of
books, papers and records and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, who he believes to have
knowledge of such income.
C. Any information gained by the Collector or any authorized agent or
employee of the Township as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verification required or authorized by this article shall be
confidential except for official purposes and except where disclosure of
the contents thereof is required by proper judicial order or decree, or as
otherwise provided by law, and any person or agent who divulges any
information so obtained shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 and costs for such offense, or to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days for the nonpayment of
such fine or penalty and costs.
§ 74-47 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-51
72:478
30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 74-52. Applicability.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any person as to whom it is
beyond the legal power of West Goshen Township to impose a tax or duties
herein provided.
§ 74-53. Effective date. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
This article and the tax herein levied shall be effective January 1, 2008, and
on a continuing annual basis, unless the rate of said tax is subsequently
changed.
§ 74-51 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 74-53
72:479
Chapter 75
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 74-53 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 74-53
72:480
ARTICLE I
Annual Reports
[Adopted 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2-1995]
§ 75-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable collection of
earned income taxes levied within West Goshen Township.
§ 75-2. Reporting requirement.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every rental unit located within West
Goshen Township to prepare and file an annual report with the Township
Secretary which shall contain the complete name and address of each
person eighteen years of age and older who is currently residing or who
during the preceding calendar year resided in each rental unit owned by the
person required to file the report.
§ 75-3. Filing deadlines.
The report, which shall be filed on a township-designated reporting form,
shall be filed not later than 60 days following the effective date of this article
and annually thereafter within 60 days of the end of each calendar year.
§ 75-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed
below:
OWNER — The person(s) in whose name(s) the property on which the rental
unit is located is recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County, as reflected on the Tax Duplicate issued by the Chester County
Assessor.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, trust, estate,
association or other legal entity capable of holding title to real estate.
PROPERTY — A parcel of real estate located in West Goshen Township
to which a Chester County tax parcel number has been assigned by the
Chester County Assessor.
RENTAL UNIT — Any space used for human occupancy located within a
building used for residential use and occupancy that is rented for human
occupancy under either a written or oral lease or other rental agreement,
regardless of the term of the rental or lease, but excluding units within a
motel or hotel rented by the day for transient occupancy.
§ 75-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate § 75-2 or 75-3 of this article by failing or
refusing to timely file the required report within 10 days of the due date
thereof shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
§ 75-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 75-5
72:481
District Justice having jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $600, together with the costs of prosecution,
and, upon default in the timely payment of the fine and costs, shall be
subject to a period of imprisonment in the county prison not exceeding 30
days. Each day that a violation shall continue following the initial notice by
the Township Secretary to such person that such person is in violation of
this article shall constitute a single and separate offense, punishable by a
separate fine.
§ 75-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 75-5
72:482
ARTICLE II
Registration and Inspection of Rental Units
[Adopted 8-21-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
§ 75-6. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
LANDLORD — A lessor, owner, or person who acts as agent for a lessor
or owner who leases or otherwise allows a tenant to live and/or sleep in a
rental unit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, or other
corporate entity.
RENTAL UNIT — Any space used for human occupancy located within a
building used for residential use and occupancy, including but not limited to
apartment units, that is rented for human occupancy under either a written
or oral lease or other rental agreement, regardless of the term of the rental
or lease, but excluding units within a motel or hotel rented by the day for
transient occupancy.
TENANT — A person or persons who have the use, either separately or with
others, of a rental unit.
§ 75-7. Annual rental license required.
On or before December 30 of each year, every landlord must apply for
and receive a rental license for each rental unit for the following year.
Applications shall be filed with the West Goshen Township Codes
Department and shall contain, at a minimum, the name, address and contact
information for the landlord and the names, addresses and contact
information for all tenants. Landlords shall file updated rental license
applications within 10 days of any change in ownership of a rental unit and
within 10 days of any change in tenant(s).
§ 75-8. Registration fee.
Each application for a rental license shall be accompanied by a fee
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The fee may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
The fee shall cover an initial inspection and one follow-up inspection, if
necessary, of each rental unit. Additional inspections beyond the follow-up
inspection, if necessary, shall require the payment of an additional fee to
be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, which may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 75-9. Inspection of rental units.
A. Following the submission of an application for a rental license, and
prior to the issuance of a rental license, the West Goshen Codes
§ 75-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 75-9
72:483
Department shall inspect each rental unit. The landlord shall provide
access to the rental unit for inspection in a timely manner during
regular business hours. The inspection requirement may be waived in
the sole discretion of the Codes Department if an inspection has been
conducted within the preceding 90 days. The inspection shall confirm
compliance with all applicable statutes and ordinances, including, but
not limited to, the International Property Maintenance Code and the
following requirements:
(1) Each dwelling unit has the required smoke detectors in proper
working order on each floor and in every bedroom and outside of
the bedroom area, and that all multiple-dwelling units have
properly marked fire exit routes, fire exit signs, and emergency
lighting.
(2) All windows operate properly with no broken, cracked, or missing
glass, have appropriate insect screening installed and are in
satisfactory condition. All windows, other than fixed windows, shall
be easily openable and able to be held in position by window
hardware.
(3) All stairways, both interior and exterior, are unobstructed and clear
of all trash and debris and that all stairways with three or more
risers have appropriate handrails installed. Any landing 30 inches
above a floor or grade shall have a properly installed guard.
(4) All doors, including garage doors, are in proper working order,
shall close smoothly, and egress door locks shall comply with
Section 702.3 of the Property Maintenance Code, as may be
amended.
(5) All elevators are in operating condition and display a current
certificate of inspection and capacity.
(6) All porches, balconies, and decks are in safe condition, in good
repair, and have appropriate railings installed.
(7) Each dwelling unit complies with the applicable parking
requirements of the current Zoning Ordinance,158 except if the unit
was functioning in its current use prior to the requirements of the
current or prior Zoning Ordinance.
(8) All parking lots, driveways, and parking spaces are in good paved
condition and free of all debris.
(9) No cars, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, or other motor vehicles
are on the property with expired tags and/or inspection and/or
emission stickers and that no fuel-driven motors of any type are
stored inside any dwelling unit.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 75-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 75-9
72:484
(10) Curbs, sidewalks, steps, stairways, and walkways are in good
condition and repair and free from any trip hazards.
(11) Gutters and downspouts are in good condition and repair and that
neither they nor any sump pump is connected to the sanitary sewer.
(12) All central heating devices, hot-water heating devices, and
plumbing fixtures are in safe and proper working order. Water
levels in toilets shall not be above the fill line so that the fixture is
not losing water. Water heater relief valves must have a drop pipe
installed six inches from the floor.
(13) All fencing is in good repair.
(14) All lawn areas are trimmed so that the height does not exceed six
inches and that all trees, hedges, and bushes are properly trimmed.
(15) The property is clear of all debris.
(16) The property is being used in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(17) The property is clearly identified on the building and on the
mailbox as required by the Property Maintenance Code.
(18) All vegetation shall be at least three feet from the roadway and not
less that 15 feet above the roadway. No signs shall be obstructed by
vegetation.
(19)Working carbon monoxide detectors are required for all homes
built under the 2009 Building Code. It is recommended that all
homes built prior to the 2009 Building Code that burn fossil fuel or
have an attached garage install a carbon monoxide detector
outside of the sleeping rooms.
(20) Ground fault circuit interrupters shall be installed within six feet of
the edge of any sink, tub, or laundry tub.
(21) Knockout bushings shall be installed in all openings within the
main service panel.
(22) If a swimming pool or hot tub is installed, all specifications for
barriers and gates under Section 303 of the Property Maintenance
Code, as may be amended, must be followed.
(23) If the property is not connected to the public water system, a well
test must be completed to show that the water is bacteria free.
(24) Sanitary sewer vents and cleanouts shall be installed above grade
and must be properly capped. Nothing may cover these vents,
including landscaping and mulch.
(25) Properties served by a private sewer system must provide
documentation with the date of the last pump out.
§ 75-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 75-9
72:485
§ 75-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article II, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a magisterial district judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus costs and attorneys'
fees expended by the Township in prosecuting such case and, in default
of payment of said fine, costs, and fees, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Article II continues or each
provision of this Article II which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. If any of the above-referenced requirements are not in compliance with
the applicable code, the Codes Department shall notify the landlord
accordingly, and no rental license will be issued for the noncomplying
rental units until they are brought into compliance with the provisions
of the applicable code. A follow-up inspection shall be scheduled once
the appropriate repairs have been made.
§ 75-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 75-10
72:486
Chapter 78
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 57.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 69A.
All-terrain vehicles and dirt bikes — See Ch.
78A.
§ 75-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 75-10
72:487

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 78-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Vehicle and Traffic Code."
§ 78-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 78-3. Manner of adopting permanent regulations.
All traffic, vehicle and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be
set forth in this chapter and shall be enacted as ordinances or amendments
thereto.
§ 78-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as now in force, or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The terms "highway," "road" and "street" are used synonymously
throughout and shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes a
roadway open to the use of the public for vehicular travel on the
grounds of a college or university or public or private school or public,
historical or Township park, shopping center or private roads in
subdivisions or land developments utilized as means of egress and
ingress by members of the traveling public.
C. The term "vehicle" includes every motor vehicle, motor-driven cycle,
motorized pedacycle, trailer, semitrailer or other vehicle designed or
used for travel on a highway.
D. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter. The following designated abbreviations shall mean as
indicated: "N" means north, "S" means south, "E" means east, "W"
means west and "B" means bound. The "governing authority" means the
Board of Supervisors.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the following powers to
regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conducting of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
§ 78-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-4
72:489
§ 78-5. Experimental regulations.
§ 78-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the West Goshen
Township Police Department, who shall have and are hereby given authority
to direct traffic on the highways and intersections of the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 78-7. Traffic control devices.
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 consecutive hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township's Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle in violation
of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of
any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty established in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or elsewhere in
this chapter for such violation, as applicable.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the highways in the Township where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and such locations shall be
designated by proper signs and markings. Such regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been
specified in this chapter and shall be authorized by resolution. No
person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Violation of this section shall subject the
violator to the penalty provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code or elsewhere in this chapter for such violation, as applicable.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in this chapter relative to traffic, vehicles and parking.
A. All presently erected signs, signals, markings and devices erected and
in place on the effective date of this chapter are ratified and confirmed
as fully as if they had been placed and erected under the respective
applicable sections of this chapter.
B. All official traffic control devices and traffic control signals shall be of
the size and configuration and shall be located required by regulations
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or as mandated in
§ 78-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-7
72:490
§ 78-8. Authorization.
On all highways under Township jurisdiction, the Board of Supervisors or
the Chief of Police is authorized to establish traffic and vehicle regulations
authorized to be established by local authorities by the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code. Such regulations shall be effective upon their approval by the
governing authority.
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or as directed by the Chief of Police, as
applicable.
§ 78-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-8
72:491

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 78-9. Stop intersections.
The intersections below are hereby established, ratified and confirmed as
stop intersections, and stop signs or official traffic control devices or traffic
control signals, as authorized by the governing authority, shall be erected
in such a position upon the controlled highway or at the intersection as
to face traffic approaching the intersection on the controlled highway in
the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles approaching any such
intersection upon the controlled highway in the direction or directions
herein designated shall come to a full and complete stop at the place
designated and marked on the highway, or within a reasonable distance,
before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Afton Way Both Exeter Drive
Airport Road North Greenhill Road
Airport Road North Wooded Way
Airport Road South Nottingham Drive
Airport Road South Wilson Drive
Albermaple Grove North Oxford Road
Amelia Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Pine Valley Circle
Amelia Drive West South Concord Road
Anderson Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East Mary Jane Lane
Anderson Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
West Morstein Road
Andrew Drive [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
West Saunders Lane
Anna Road East Hamlet Hill Drive
Anna Road South Karen Lane
Anthony Lane North Matlack Street
Arlington Avenue North Boot Road
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:493
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Arlington Avenue [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Laurel Drive
Arlington Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Laurel Lane
Ashbridge Road Both Greenhill Road
Ashbridge Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
Both Howard Road
Ashbridge Road North Kirkland Avenue
Ashbridge Road South Phoenixville Pike
Banbury Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Victoria Lane
Barbara Drive South Westtown Road
Barbara Drive [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
West Edward Lane
Basin Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Warren Road
Baylowell Drive South Goshen Road
Berkeley Lane North Oxford Road
Bicking Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Halvorsen Drive
Bolmar Street North East Neild Street
Boulder Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East Falcon Lane
Boulder Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Rockland Avenue
Box Elder Drive South Hawthorne Lane
Bridgewater Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Bridgewater Drive
Brinton Avenue West Fernhill Road
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:494
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Brinton Circle West Green Avenue
Brookwood Drive South Trinity Drive
Burke Road East Pottstown Pike
Camaro Lane West Phoenixville Pike
Carlson Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
East Maule Lane
Carlson Avenue West South Concord Road
Carlton Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Sylvan Road
Carol Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Melvin Drive
Carter Drive West South Matlack Street
Caswallen Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Caswallen Drive (end of loop)
Caswallen Drive West Pottstown Pike
Cedar Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East Maple Lane
Cedar Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East South Concord Road
Ceredo Avenue North Norfolk Avenue
Ceredo Avenue North West Rosedale Avenue
Charlotte Way South Cloverly Lane
Chatwood Avenue South Route No. 3
Chiswick Drive North Kirkland Avenue
Chiswick Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Windridge Drive
Chrislena Lane South Taylors Mill Road
Chrislena Lane West North New Street
Circle Avenue North Route No. 3
Cloverly Lane West North New Street
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:495
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Collins Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Owen Road
Collins Drive South Goshen Road
Collins Drive [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009; 4-14-2010 by
Ord. No. 01-2010]
South Owen Road
Cromwell Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Cotswold Lane
Daisy Lane East Falcon Lane
Daisy Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
North Eagle Road
Daisy Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
North Ravens Lane
Daisy Lane South Eagle Road
David Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
North West Warren Road
David Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South Stoney Brook Lane
Delancey Place Both Glen Avenue
Delancey Place West Glen Acres School
Delaware Avenue North Grove Road
Delmar Avenue North Boot Road
Delmar Avenue [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Laurel Drive
Devonshire Circle North Oxford Road
Dogwood Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Greenbank Avenue
Dorothy Lane North Paoli Pike
Downing Avenue South Paoli Pike
Eachus Mill Road North Old Westtown Road
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:496
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Eachus Mill Road [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
South South Bolmar Street
Eagle Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East Daisy Lane
Eagle Road East Falcon Lane
Eagle Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Mallard Road
Eagle Road West Daisy Lane
East Chestnut Street East Montgomery Avenue
Easter Circle [Added
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
West Easter Lane
Easter Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Pomona Hill Drive
East Goshen Road East Fernhill Road
East Goshen Road East Marshall Street
East Penn Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East and
West
North Penn Drive
East Penn Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North North Penn Drive
East Rhodes Avenue [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North East Rhodes Avenue
East Union Street [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
Both South Bolmar Street
Edkin Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East South Concord Road
Edward Lane South Westtown Road
Edward Lane West South Five Points Road
Ellis Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
South Box Elder Drive
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:497
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ellis Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
South Hawthorn Lane
Elm Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
West Maple Lane
Elton Circle North West Warren Road
Embree Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Chrislena Lane
Embree Lane South Taylors Mill Road
Emily Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Amelia Drive
Exeter Drive North Fernhill Road
Exeter Drive [Amended
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South Oxford Road
Falcon Lane Both Daisy Lane
Falcon Lane Both Eagle Road
Falcon Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Ravens Lane
Falcon Lane Both Sylvan Road
Falcon Lane South Westtown Road
Faustina Drive East South Five Points Road
Fernhill Lane Both Gateway Lane
Fernhill Lane North Paoli Pike
Flagg Lane West Maule Lane
Fowler Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North West Warren Road
Fowler Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South Stoney Brook Lane
Francis Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Maule Lane
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:498
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Frederick Drive [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
Both Melvin Drive
Frederick Drive North Caswallen Drive
Gail Road Both Marlene Drive
Gail Road [Added 1-23-2008
by Ord. No. 2-2008]
South Anna Road
Gateway Lane Both Hightop Road
Gateway Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
West Fern Hill Lane
Georgia Lane North Paoli Pike
Georgia Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Paul Lane
Georgia Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Isabel Lane
Glen Avenue Both Schoolhouse Lane
Glen Avenue Both Sylvan Road
Glen Avenue North Delancey Place
Glen Avenue North West Chester Park
Glen Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Mallard Road
Green Avenue South Paoli Pike
Greenbank Avenue West Pottstown Pike
Greenhill Avenue [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both Howard Road
Greenhill Avenue North Kirkland Avenue
Greenhill Avenue South Greenhill Road
Greenview Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Fairview Drive
Greenview Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Faustina Drive
Grey Stone Drive East Goshen Road
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:499
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Grove Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Grove Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Sunset Hollow Road
Grove Road [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
South Delaware Avenue
Grubbs Mill Road South Sunset Hollow Road
Guinta Lane East South Matlack Street
Guinta Lane West South High Street
Hallowell Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Maule Lane
Hallowell Drive South Westtown Road
Halvorsen Drive North Old Westtown Road
Halvorsen Drive West South Concord Road
Hamlet Hill Drive North Boot Road
Hamlet Hill Drive South Greenhill Road
Hamlet Hill Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Anna Road
Hawthorne Lane East Ellis Lane
Hawthorne Lane West Jay Lane
Hightop Road North Paoli Pike
Hightop Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Cavalier Lane
Howard Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both Greenhill Avenue
Howard Road East Ashbridge Road
Howard Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
North, east
and west
Howards Road (Western Loop)
Howard Road (East) [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Howard Road
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:500
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Huber Place [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Halvorsen Drive
Inverness Court North Oxford Road
Isabel Lane East Powell Lane
Isabel Lane West North Five Points Road
Joeck Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Joeck Drive
Joeck Drive South Westtown Road
Jones Lane North Spruce Avenue
Jones Lane [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
West Rosary Lane
Joy Lane Both Spring Valley Lane
Joy Lane South East Strasburg Road
Justin Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East South Concord Road
Karen Lane South Phoenixville Pike
Karen Lane West Greenhill Road
Knollwood Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Knollwood Drive
Lauber Road West Westtown Road
Laurel Road North Boot Road
Laurel Road South Delmar Avenue
Laurel Road West Phoenixville Pike
Lexington Avenue North South High Street
Lincoln Avenue East Montgomery Avenue
Lincoln Avenue East North Five Points Road
Lincoln Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
East Turner Lane
Lincoln Avenue West Garfield Avenue
Lincoln Avenue West Maple Avenue
Lincoln Avenue West Turner Lane
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:501
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Little Shiloh Road East Westtown Road
Little Shiloh Road West Shiloh Road
Little Shiloh Road West South Concord Road
Little Shiloh Road West South Five Points Road
Locksley Lane [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
West Cotswold Lane
Long Lane North Paoli Pike
Longview Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
North Tree Lane
Longford Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Longford Boulevard
Longford Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Longford Road
Lorient Drive East Shaumont Drive
MacElroy Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South MacKenzie Drive
MacKenzie Drive [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
East Cotswold Lane
MacKenzie Drive East Grove Road
MacKenzie Drive South Sunset Hollow Road
MacPherson Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South MacKenzie Drive
Mallard Road East Eagle Road
Mallard Road South Midvale Road
Mallard Road South Ravens Lane
Mallard Road South Westtown Road
Manley Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
West Green Lane
Manor Drive West Pottstown Pike
Maple Avenue East Montgomery Avenue
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:502
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Maple Lane North Route No. 3
Marker Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Little Shiloh Road (U-shaped
road; signs at both ends)
Marple Drive South Little Shiloh Road
Marple Drive West South Concord Road
Mary Jane Lane South Boot Road
Matlack Street North East Rosedale Avenue
Maule Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Norma Drive
Maule Lane East South Five Points Road
Maule Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Hallowell Drive
Meeting House Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Delancy Place
Meeting House Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990; 4-14-2010 by Ord.
No. 01-2010]
South Schoolhouse Lane
Melvin Drive West Caswallen Drive
Midvale Road East Mallard Road
Midvale Road West Warren Road
Montbard Drive North Old Westtown Road
Morris Road North Route No. 3
Morris Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Lauber Avenue
Morstein Road South Boot Road
Mystery Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Trinity Drive
Mystery Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Pomona Hill Drive
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:503
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
New Jersey Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Pennsylvania Avenue
New Jersey Avenue
[Amended 1-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-1990]
South Delaware Avenue
New York Avenue [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
North Pennsylvania Avenue
New York Avenue [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
South Delaware Avenue
Nield Street East Westtown Road
Nield Street North Bolmar Street
Norfolk Avenue Both Ceredo Avenue
Norfolk Avenue East South Church Street
Norfolk Avenue East South High Street
Norfolk Avenue West Roslyn Avenue
Norfolk Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
West South Church Street
Norma Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Wilnor Drive
Normandy Court East South Concord Road
North Crownpoint Lane
[Added 1-28-2004 by Ord.
No. 1-2004]
South Crosspointe Drive
North Five Points Road North Fernhill Road
North Hill Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Owen Road
North Hill Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Owen Road (East)
North Hill Drive West Goshen Road
North New Street Both Route No. 322
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:504
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
North New Street [Amended
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
Both Taylors Mill Road North
North New Street [Amended
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
Both Taylors Mill Road South
North New Street North Sunset Hollow Road
North New Street [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
West North New Street and Taylors
Mill Road, except right turn
North Penn Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South South Penn Drive
North Veronica Road South Paoli Pike
Nottingham Drive North Greenhill Road
Nottingham Drive [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
South Nottingham Drive
Nottingham Drive West Airport Road
Oak Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
East Parkside Avenue
Oak Lane South Spruce Avenue
Old Fernhill Road [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
North Lincoln Avenue
Old Fernhill Road West Fernhill Road
Old Westtown Road Both South Concord Road
Old Westtown Road Both Westtown Road
Orchard Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East South Concord Road
Owen Road West North Penn Drive
Oxford Road North Oxford Road
Oxford Road West North Five Points Road
Parkside Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Spruce Avenue
Partridge Lane South Westtown Road
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:505
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Patrice Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Clearbrook Road
Patrick Avenue South Route No. 3
Paul Lane Both Powell Lane
Pembroke Avenue North Kirkland Avenue
Pembroke Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Windridge Drive
Penn Lane [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003; amended
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
North Delancey Place
Penn Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
North Schoolhouse Lane
Penn Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
South Schoolhouse Lane
Penn Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Sylvan Road
Pennsylvania Avenue East Grove Road
Pennsylvania Avenue [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
West Carolina Avenue
Pietro Place [Added
11-12-2014 by Res. No.
20-2014]
North Giunta Lane
Pine Valley Circle [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Carlson Avenue
Pomona Hill Drive East South New Street
Powell Lane North Paoli Pike
Primrose Lane South Caswallen Drive
Primrose Lane West Pottstown Pike
Pritchard Lane North East Rhodes Avenue
Prospect Avenue Both Paoli Pike
Prospect Avenue South Route No. 3
Raleigh Drive East Victoria Lane
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:506
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Raleigh Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Laurel Lane
Ravens Lane East Daisy Lane
Ravens Lane East Falcon Lane
Ravens Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Eagle Road
Reims Lane North Montbard Drive
Rhodes Avenue Both South High Street
Richfield Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
East North Five Points Road
Richfield Lane South Route No. 3
Richmond Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
North Gateway Lane
Richmond Road North Paoli Pike
Richmond Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
South Gateway Lane
Ridgewood Lane East South Five Points Road
Ridgewood Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
West Hallowell Lane
Roberts Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
Both Schoolhouse Lane
Roberts Lane South Sylvan Road
Rockland Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Sylvan Road
Rockwood Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Bridgewater Drive
Rosary Lane [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
East Jones Lane
Rosary Lane West South New Street
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:507
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Rose Avenue South Route No. 3
Rosedale Avenue East Matlack Street
Rosedale Avenue East South Church Street
Rosedale Avenue East South New Street
Roslyn Avenue North Rosedale Avenue
Roslyn Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Oak Lane
St. James Road North Paoli Pike
St. James Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Isabel Lane
Sandwell Drive [Added
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
North Derby Drive
Sandy Lane West Spruce Avenue
Saunders Lane West Phoenixville Pike
Schoolhouse Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Roberts Lane
Schoolhouse Lane Both Warren Road
Shaumont Drive Both Snyder Avenue
Sheridan Drive North Spruce Avenue
Snyder Avenue Both Matlack Street
Snyder Avenue East South Concord Road
Snyder Avenue West High Street
South Bolmar Street [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
Both East Union Street
South Church Avenue East South High Street
South Church Street Both Norfolk Avenue
South Church Street East Parkside Avenue
South Concord Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Synder Avenue
South Concord Road Both Westtown Road
South Concord Road North Halvorsen Road
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:508
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
South Concord Road North Route No. 3
South Concord Road South Normandy Court
South Crownpoint Lane
[Added 1-28-2004 by Ord.
No. 1-2004]
North Crosspointe Drive
South Five Points Road Both Westtown Road
South Five Points Road
[Added 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-1990]
South Little Shiloh Road
South Five Points Road
[Added 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-1990]
West Little Shiloh Road
South New Street Both Pomona Hill Drive
South New Street Both Trinity Drive
South New Street North Rosedale Avenue
Spindle Lane North Cloverly Lane
Spring Lane South Route No. 3
Spring Valley Drive Both Valley Circle
Spring Valley Drive East Ellis Lane
Spring Valley Drive West Joy Lane
Spruce Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
Both Oak Lane
Spruce Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
Both Parkside Avenue
Spruce Avenue East South High Street
Spruce Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Roslyn Avenue
Staghorn Way North Box Elder Drive
Staghorn Way South Hawthorne Lane
Steward Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Ridgewood Lane
Steward Lane South Westtown Road
Stoneybrook Lane West South Five Points Road
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:509
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Story Road [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
East Owen Road
Sunset Hollow Road Both Grove Road
Sunset Hollow Road [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
Both Grubbs Mill Road
Sunset Hollow Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both North Ashbrooke Drive
Sunset Hollow Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both North New Street and
MacKenzie Drive
Susan Drive East North New Street
Sylvan Road Both Falcon Lane
Sylvan Road [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
Both Roberts Lane
Sylvan Road Both Warren Road
Sylvan Road Both Westbrook Drive
Sylvan Road [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
Both Wildwood Avenue
Sylvan Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Basin Road
Tanager Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Daisy Lane
Taylors Mill Road North
[Amended 1-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 2-2008]
West North New Street
Taylors Mill Road South
[Added 3-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 6-1997; amended
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
East North New Street
Thistlewood Lane East Richmond Road
Thistlewood Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
West Hightop Road
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-9
72:510
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Todd Way East North New Street
Todd Way [Added 1-24-2007
by Ord. No. 1-2007[
West Susan Drive
Toulon Court East Shaumont Drive
Trafalgar Lane Both Hamlet Hill Drive
Tree Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
North Susan Drive
Trinity Drive East South New Street
Turner Lane Both Lincoln Avenue
Turner Lane North Fernhill Road
Turner Lane North Paoli Pike
Turner Lane South Route No. 3
Union Street East Westtown Road
Union Street West South Bolmar Avenue
Valley Circle North Spring Valley Drive
Veronica Avenue North Paoli Pike
Veronica Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Isabel Lane
Victoria Lane East Hamlet Hill Drive
Victoria Lane South Anna Road
Virginia Avenue West Montgomery Avenue
Ware Circle East South Concord Road
Warren Road Both Schoolhouse Lane
Warren Road South Midvale Road
Warren Road West Edward Lane
Washington Avenue Both Garfield Avenue
Washington Avenue West Montgomery Avenue
Wellington Road North Paoli Pike
Wellington Road [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Isabel Lane
Westbrook Drive [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
North Schoolhouse Lane
Westbrook Drive South Sylvan Road
§ 78-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-9
72:511
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
West Penn Drive [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North North Penn Drive
West Rosedale Avenue
[Added 1-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 1-1998]
East College Avenue
West Warren Road Both David Lane
West Warren Road West South Five Points Road
Wildwood Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North Sylvan Road
Wildwood Avenue South Mallard Road
Willowbrook Lane East South Matlock Street
Willow Way Both Gateway Lane
Willow Way [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South Farmington Lane
Wilson Avenue North East Market Street
Wilson Circle North Edward Lane
Wilson Drive East Airport Road
Windridge Drive East Greenhill Avenue
Windsor Drive North Boot Road
Windsor Drive North Greenhill Road
Winthrop Circle [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
North Killington Circle
Wooded Way East Airport Road
Woodview Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
South Caswallen Drive
Yorktown Avenue East South High Street
§ 78-10. Truck restrictions.
The following highways and locations are established, confirmed and
ratified as restricted highways upon which no truck, truck trailer or tractortrailer
having a registered gross weight, either solely or in combination,
exceeding 10,000 pounds shall be operated, except for such vehicles as
are legitimately making a local pickup or delivery of goods or merchandise
at a place located within the limits of the highway where such traffic is
§ 78-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-10
72:512
prohibited; otherwise, all such truck traffic is excluded from and shall not
be operated upon such highways in the locations indicated below:
Name of Street Limits
Airport Road [Added 3-26-1997
by Ord. No. 6-1997]
Wooded Way/Nottingham Drive to
Greenhill Road
Ashbridge Road Route No. 29 to Kirkland Avenue
Burke Road Pottstown Pike to Township Lane
Circle Avenue [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
West Chester Pike to Lauber Road
East Rhodes Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
South High Street to Snyder Avenue
Ellis Lane East Strasburg Road to Paoli Pike
Falcon Lane Route No. 3 to Westtown Road
Five Points Road (west of 202)
[Added 3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Dead-end to Fern Hill Road
Greenhill Avenue Kirkland Avenue to Greenhill Road
Grove Road [Added 3-26-1997
by Ord. No. 6-1997]
Pottstown Pike to Township line
Guinta Lane South Matlack Street to South High
Street
Hamlet Hill Drive Boot Road to Greenhill Road
Jones Lane Rosary Lane to Spruce Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
Turner Lane to Five Points Road (west
of 202)
Lincoln Avenue Turner Lane to North Five Points Road
Maple Lane [Added 2-18-2009
by Ord. No. 01-2009]
West Chester Pike to dead end
Marguerite Avenue [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
West Chester Pike to Lauber Road
Marple Drive South Concord Road to Little Shiloh
Road
Montbard Drive Old Westtown Road to Reimes Lane
Morris Road [Added 2-18-2009
by Ord. No. 01-2009]
West Chester Pike to Lauber Road
Norfolk Avenue [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
South High Street to South Church
Street
Normandy Court South Concord Road to Shaumont Lane
§ 78-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-10
72:513
Name of Street Limits
North Concord Road Route No. 3 to Paoli Pike
North New Street [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Route No. 322 (SR 0322) to Township
border with the Borough of West
Chester
North New Street [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Route No. 322 (SR 0322) to Sunset
Hollow Road
North New Street Sunset Hollow Road to West Chester
Road to West Chester Borough line
Nottingham Drive Greenhill Road to Airport Road
Old Westtown Road Westtown Road to South Concord Road
Patrick Avenue Route No. 3 to Paoli Pike
Rhoades Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 1-2000]
South High Street to Snyder Avenue
Rosary Lane South New Street to South New Street
Rosedale Avenue [Added
9-1-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Matlack Street to South Franklin Street
Rosedale Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
South side from South High Street to
South Matlack Street
Roslyn Avenue [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Norfolk Avenue to Spruce Avenue
Shaumont Drive Snyder Avenue to Normandy Court
Shaumont Drive Snyder Avenue to Reimes Lane
Snyder Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
South Concord Road West to Tributary
1 of Westtown Road Run
Snyder Avenue South Matlack Street to South High
Street
South Church Street [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Rosedale Avenue to South High Street
South Concord Road [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
West Chester Pike to Fairmont Drive
South Five Points Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
Westtown Road to Little Shiloh Road
Spruce Avenue South High Street to Roslyn Avenue
§ 78-11. One-way highways.
The following one-way highways are established, ratified and confirmed
as one-way streets. All vehicles operated upon any such street designated
for one-way traffic shall proceed only in the direction designated at all or
§ 78-10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-11
72:514
such times as shall be indicated by the official signs or other official traffic
control devices.
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Ceredo Avenue North Between Norfolk Avenue and West
Rosedale Avenue
Grove Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord.
No. 6-1997]
North Between Route 100 (Pottstown Pike)
and Delaware Avenue
North Bolmar Street North Between East Market Street and
East Gay Street
North Concord Road North Between Route No. 3 and Paoli Pike
Patrick Avenue South Between Paoli Pike and Route No. 3
South Church Street South Between Rosedale Avenue and
Norfolk Avenue
§ 78-12. Speed limits.
The following speed-limit zones are established, ratified and confirmed. The
maximum speed at which a vehicle may proceed on or along those highways
and within those zones as designated hereinbelow shall be limited to the
speed limit described below for each such location, and no vehicle shall be
operated at a speed in excess of the established maximum limit within any
such zone:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Airport Road 35 From Paoli Pike to Greenhill Road
Anna Road [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
25 From Karen Lane to Hamlet Hill
Drive
Arlington Avenue [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
25 From Boot Road to Laurel Drive
Ashbridge Road 25 From Greenhill Road to Kirkland
Avenue
Ashbridge Road [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
25 From Phoenixville Pike to
Greenhill Road
Basin Road [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From Warren Road to Warren Road
§ 78-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:515
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Bolmar Road 25 From East Union Street to East
Miner Street
Bolmar Street [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From East Union Street to East
Nield Street
Bolmar Street 35 From Snyder Avenue to East Nield
Street
Boot Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
35 West Whiteland/West Goshen
Township line to Phoenixville Pike
Box Elder Drive 25 From Hawthorne to Staghorn Way
Burke Road [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
35 From Pottstown Pike to Township
line
Carolina Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
25 From Delaware Avenue to cul-desac
Caswallen Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
25 From Pottstown Pike to Caswallen
Drive
Chiswick Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Windridge Drive to Kirkland
Avenue
Chrislena Lane [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000; amended
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
25 From Taylors Mill Road to cul-desac
Collins Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
30 From Goshen Road north to end
Concord Avenue [Added
2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
01-2012]
25 West Chester Pike to Paoli Pike
Cork Circle [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From the beginning of Cork Circle
to end of Cork Circle
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-12
72:516
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Cotswold Lane [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
25 Cotswold Lane, cul-de-sac to culde-
sac
Crosspointe Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Pottstown Pike to Melvin
Drive
Delancy Place [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From Roberts Lane to Glen Acres
School property
Delaware Avenue [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Carolina Avenue to Grove
Road
Delmar Avenue [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Laurel Drive to Boot Road
Derby Drive [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From Ashbridge Road to end of
Ashbridge Road cul-de-sac
Downing Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by Res. No.
20-2014]
25 Paoli Pike to dead end
Eagle Road [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From Mallard Road to Falcon Lane
East Goshen Road 35 From High Street to Fern Hill Road
East Nields Street [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
35 From Westtown Road to South
Bolmar Street
East Penn Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From North Penn Drive to dead
end
Edward Lane [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From South Five Points Road to
Westtown Road
Ellis Lane 35 From Paoli Pike to East Strasburg
Road
§ 78-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:517
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Exeter Drive [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Fernhill Road to Oxford Road
Falcon Lane 25 From Route No. 3 to Westtown
Road
Farren Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Hidden Hollow Lane to
Hamilton Drive
Fowler Drive [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
25 From West Warren Road to
Stoneybrook Lane
Fox Knoll Lane [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
25 From North New Street to cul-desac
Frederick Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Caswallen Drive south to end
Garfield Avenue [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
35 From Gay Street to Lincoln Avenue
Garlington Circle [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Monteray Lane to Monteray
Lane
Giunta Lane [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004; amended
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From South High Street to South
Matlack Street
Glen Avenue [Added
2-9-2011 by Ord. No.
01-2011; 2-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 01-2012
25 Mallard Road to School House
Lane
Glen Avenue [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From School House Lane to West
Chester Pike
Green Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by Res. No.
20-2014]
25 Paoli Pike to Brinton Avenue
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-12
72:518
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Greenhill Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From Kirkland Avenue to Greenhill
Avenue
Greenhill Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
35 From Pottstown Pike, Route 100,
to Phoenixville Pike, Route 29
Hallowell Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
25 Westtown Road to Maule Lane
Hamlet Hill Drive 25 From Boot Road to Greenhill Road
Hamilton Drive [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
25 Howard Road to Greenhill Road
Hawthorne Lane 25 From Joy Lane to Ellis Lane
Hidden Hollow Lane
[Added 1-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 1-2006]
25 From Greenhill Avenue to Farren
Lane
Holly Road [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Richmond Road to
Farmington Lane
Isabel Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From North Five Points Road to
Powell Lane
Jones Lane [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
25 From Rosary Lane to Spruce
Avenue
Joy Lane 25 From Strasburg Road to end
Judson Drive [Added
8-13-2014 by Res. No.
14-2014]
25 From Penn Drive to cul-de-sac
Karen Lane [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Green Hill Road to
Phoenixville Pike
Kirby Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
30 From Owen Road to Goshen Road
Kirkland Avenue [Added
2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
01-2012]
25 Pottstown Pike to Boot Road
§ 78-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:519
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Kirkland Avenue 30 From Township line to Township
line
Laurel Drive [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Phoenixville Pike to Boot
Road
Lincoln Avenue [Repealed
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
Lincoln Avenue [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Garfield Avenue to Turner
Lane
Lincoln Avenue [Added
2-9-2011 by Ord. No.
01-2011]
15,
during
school
hours
Maple Avenue to Garfield Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; amended
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
35 From Montgomery Avenue to
Garfield Avenue, 15 miles per hour
during school hours
Lincoln Avenue [Amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From Turner Lane to Old Fern Hill
Road
Little Shiloh Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From Westtown Road to South
Concord Road
Longford Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Longford Boulevard to
Longford Road
Longford Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Longford Boulevard to
Morstein Road
Longview Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From North New Street to Tree
Lane
Longview Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 South from Tree Lane a distance of
1,200 feet
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-12
72:520
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
MacKenzie Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
25 From Sunset Hollow Road to Grove
Road
Mallard Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Westtown Road to Ravens
Lane
Manley Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by Res. No.
20-2014]
25 Green Avenue to Downing Avenue
Maple Lane [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From West Chester Pike to Edkin
Avenue
Matlack Street 35 From East Rosedale to Route No.
202
Maule Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
25 Hallowell Lane to South Five
Points Road
Meetinghouse Lane
[Added 1-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 1-1998;
amended 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-2019]
25 From School House Lane to
Delancy Place
Merrit Circle [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Monteray Lane to cul-de-sac
Melvin Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Crosspointe Drive to
Caswallen Drive
Monteray Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From New Street West to
Township Line
Morris Road [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
25 West Chester Pike to Lauber Road
Morstein Road [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
35 From Boot Road to Township line
New Jersey Avenue [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Delaware Avenue
§ 78-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:521
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
New York Avenue [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Pennsylvania Avenue to
Delaware Avenue
North Ashbrooke Drive
[Added 1-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
25 From Sunset Hollow to cul-de-sac
North Five Points Road
[Added 1-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
25 From Fernhill Road north to culde-
sac
North Five Points Road 25 From Route No. 3 to Fern Hill
Road
North Hill Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Goshen Road to Owen Road
North New Street [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 Route 322 south to borough line
North New Street
[Amended 6-10-2015 by
Res. No. 8-2015]
25 From Sunset Hollow Road to Route
No. 322 bypass
North Penn Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From Story Road to South Penn
Drive
Nottingham Drive [Added
2-14-2001 by Ord. No.
2-2001]
25 From Airport Road to Greenhill
Road
Olivia Court [Added
8-13-2014 by Res. No.
14-2014]
25 From Judson Drive to cul-de-sac
Owen Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From North Hill Drive to Owen
Road cul-de-sac
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-12
72:522
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Oxford Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From North Five Points Road to
Oxford Road
Patrick Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From Paoli Pike to West Chester
Pike
Pembroke Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Windridge Drive to Kirkland
Avenue
Penn Lane [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From School House Lane to
Delancy Place
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 1-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 1-2004]
25 From Carolina Avenue to Grove
Road
Primrose Lane [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
25 Pottstown Pike to Caswallen Drive
Rhodes Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
25 South High Street to Snyder
Avenue
Richfield Avenue [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
25 North Five Points Road to West
Chester Pike
Ridgewood Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
25 Hallowell Lane to Westtown Road
Roberts Lane [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No.
12-2019]
25 From School House Lane to
Delancy Place
Rock Creek Road [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
25 Longview Drive to cul-de-sac
§ 78-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:523
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Rosary Lane [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
25 From South New Street to South
New Street
Rosedale Avenue 25 From South Franklin Street to
Route No. 52
Rose Lane [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
25 From Richfield Avenue to West
Chester Pike
Roslyn Avenue 25 From Spruce Avenue to Oak Lane
School House Lane [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
25 Warren Road to Roberts Lane
Snyder Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From South High Street to South
Matlack Street
South Ashbrooke Drive
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
25 From Grove Road to Sunset Hollow
Road
South Concord Road 25 From West Chester Pike
southbound to end
South Concord Road
[Added 1-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
25 From Westtown Road north to culde-
sac
South Concord Road 35 From Westtown Road to Little
Shiloh Road
South Five Points Road
[Repealed 1-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-1990]
South Five Points Road
[Added 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-1990]
25 From West Chester Pike to
Westtown Road
South Five Points Road
[Added 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-1990]
35 From Westtown Road to Little
Shiloh Road
South Matlack Street 35 From U.S. 202 to Township line
South New Street
[Amended 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
25 From Rosedale Avenue to
Township line
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-12
72:524
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
South Penn Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From West Penn Drive to dead end
Spring Lane [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
25 West Chester Pike to Coopersmith
Park
Spring Valley Drive 25 From Ellis Lane to Joy Lane
Spruce Avenue 25 From South High Street to Roslyn
Avenue
Staghorn Way 25 From Hawthorne Lane to Box
Elder Drive
Story Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From North Penn Drive to Collins
Drive
Story Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
30 From Owen Road to North Penn
Drive
Sunset Hollow Road
[Added 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-1990]
35 From Pottstown Pike, Route 100,
to the East Bradford Township line
Sussex Road [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
25 From Burke Road to Locksley Road
Sylvan Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
25 From Warren Road to Falcon Lane
Taylor's Mill Road [Added
2-9-2011 by Ord. No.
01-2011]
25 North New Street to dead end
Taylor's Mill Road [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From Pottstown Pike to North New
Street
Trafalgar Lane [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
25 From Hamlet Hills Drive north side
to the cul-de-sac
§ 78-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-12
72:525
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Trinity Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; 1-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 1-2006]
25 From South New Street to East
Bradford Township Line
Turner Lane 25 From Paoli Pike to Fern Hill Road
Victoria Lane [Amended
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
25 From Hamlet Hills Drive to Anna
Road
Westbrook Drive [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
25 Schoolhouse Lane to Sylvan Road
West Penn Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999; amended
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
25 From South Penn Drive to North
Penn Drive
West Warren Road 25 From South Five Points Road to
Warren Road
Wexford Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Windridge Drive to Kirkland
Avenue
Whiticar Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
25 From Monteray Lane to cul-de-sac
Wildwood Avenue [Added
10-10-2012 by Res. No.
18-2012]
25 From Sylvan Road to Mallard Road
Windridge Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Wexford Drive to Greenhill
Avenue
Windsor Drive [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
25 From Greenhill Road to Boot Road
Woodmint Drive [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
25 From Burke Road to Township line
(development partially in West
Goshen and West Whiteland
Townships)
Woodview Lane [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
25 Caswallen Drive to cul-de-sac
§ 78-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-13
72:526
§ 78-13. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established, ratified and confirmed
as no-passing zones. Where signs and markings are in place to define a
no-passing zone, no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the
roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark a no-passing zone throughout its length.
Name of Street Limits
Little Shiloh Road Between South Five Points Road and
Shiloh Road
South Five Points Road Between Westtown Road and Little
Shiloh Road
South Matlack Street [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Between Route 202 and Rosedale
Avenue
Sunset Hollow Road Between Pottstown Pike and Grove
Road
§ 78-14. Yield intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established, ratified and
confirmed as yield right-of-way intersections. All vehicles approaching any
such intersection upon the controlled highway, in the direction or directions
indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the uncontrolled highway so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time that the operator of such vehicle
is moving across or within such intersection. No operator of a vehicle
operating upon any such controlled highway shall fail to yield the right-ofway.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Meetinghouse Lane [Repealed
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Oak Lane [Repealed 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Parkside Avenue [Repealed
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Penn Lane [Repealed 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Rosary Avenue North Jones Lane
Roslyn Avenue [Repealed
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
Spruce Avenue [Repealed
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
§ 78-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-15
72:527
§ 78-15. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person operating a vehicle on any of the below-designated highways
in the direction of travel designated below while approaching any of the
designated intersections below shall operate his vehicle by executing a turn
at the intersection in the designated prohibited direction of travel at the
intersection. The turns which shall be prohibited shall be left-hand turns
and right-hand turns, as indicated by the erection of signs designating NO
LEFT TURN or NO RIGHT TURN, as applicable, or other official traffic
control device.
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Boot Road [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
West Left, 7:00
a.m. to 9:30
a.m. Mon. -
Fri.
Arlington Avenue
Boot Road [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
West Left, 7:00
a.m. to 9:30
a.m. Mon. -
Fri.
Delmar Avenue
Boot Road [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
West Left Hamlet Hill Drive
Boot Road [Added
1-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
West Left, 7:00
a.m. to 9:30
a.m. Mon. -
Fri.
Laurel Drive
Delaware Avenue
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
East Left Grove Road
Driveway at 1015 West
Chester Pike [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
West Right Rose Lane
Driveway at 1015 West
Chester Pike [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
01-2010]
East Left Richfield Avenue
Driveway at 1081 West
Chester Pike [Added
9-8-2010 by Res. No.
24-2010]
East Left North Five Points
Road
East Union Street
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
East Left Westtown Road
§ 78-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-15
72:528
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Goshen Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
West Left North High Street
Green Avenue [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
South Left Paoli Pike
Laurel Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Northeast Left Boot Road
Norfolk Avenue [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
West Left Roslyn Avenue
Norfolk Avenue West Right South Church Street
North Bolmar Street North Right East Gay Street
North Five Points Road
[Added 9-8-2010 by
Res. No. 24-2010]
North Left Driveway at 1081
West Chester Pike
Rosary Lane [Added
8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
06-2012]
South Left Jones Lane
Rosedale Avenue
[Added 7-11-2012 by
Res. No. 11-2012]
East Right Roslyn Avenue
Roslyn Parking Lot
[Added 8-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 06-2012]
East Right Roslyn Avenue (both
entrances)
Snyder Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
East Right Rhodes Avenue
Snyder Avenue [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
West Left Rhodes Avenue
South Bolmar Street North Left East Market Street
South New Street
[Added 8-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 06-2012]
North Right Rosary Lane
(southernmost
intersection)
South New Street
[Added 8-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 06-2012]
South Left Rosary Lane
(southernmost
intersection)
Sylvan Road West Left Falcon Lane
§ 78-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-16
72:529
§ 78-16. Prohibited U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the highways or parts thereof described below at the designated locations:
Name of Street Location
Boot Road [Added 2-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
At Hamlet Hill Drive
Boot Road [Added 2-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
Between Hamlet Hill Drive and
Mary Jane Lane
Boot Road [Added 2-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
At Mary Jane Lane
Boot Road [Added 2-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
At Morstein Road
Hamlet Hill Drive At Boot Road
Hamlet Hill Drive [Added 3-26-1997
by Ord. No. 6-1997]
Victoria Lane
North Five Points Road [Added
5-13-2015 by Res. No. 6-2015]
North of Paoli Pike
Rosary Lane [Added 8-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 06-2012]
South of Jones Lane
§ 78-17. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall operate a vehicle by turning to the right or to the left
from the below-designated controlled highway onto the below-designated
intersecting highway when the operator thereof is confronted by a steady
red signal from a traffic control signal as described in the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3112(a)(3)(i). Such turn shall be prohibited by
the erection of a sign bearing the words NO TURN ON RED or other official
traffic control device erected at or about the location of the traffic control
signal controlling traffic on the controlled highway and facing traffic to be
controlled thereby. No controlled vehicle shall proceed to turn right or left
onto the intersecting highway until the traffic control signal permits such
movement by a green signal in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3112(a)(1).
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ellis Lane South West Chester Pike
Five Points Road North Paoli Pike
Five Points Road North West Chester Pike
Five Points Road South Paoli Pike
Five Points Road South West Chester Pike
§ 78-16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-17
72:530
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Greenhill Road [Added
2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
West Boot Road
Parkway Center Exit [Amended
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1-1990]
North South High Street from
7:00 am. to 8:00 p.m.
Rosedale Avenue East South High Street, from
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Rosedale Avenue West South High Street, from
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 78-18. Intersections controlled by traffic control devices.
§ 78-19. Lane reservations.
Lanes for right- or left-hand turns only, as indicated, are hereby reserved
upon the highways or parts of highways described below, and traffic for
any other purpose upon such lanes is hereby excluded. No operator of a
vehicle shall operate a vehicle within such lane except to execute a turn in
the permitted direction.
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Lane
Reserved
Permitted
Turn Location
Five Points Road South Left Left West Chester Pike
South Matlack
Street
Both Center Left Between U.S. 202
and Carter Drive
A. On all highways under Township jurisdiction, the Board of Supervisors
or the Chief of Police is authorized to create and designate intersections
which shall be controlled by traffic control signals. The design, location
and placement of such signals at the designated intersections shall be
in accordance with regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
B. The intersections designated below are hereby ratified, confirmed and
established as traffic-control-signal-controlled intersections. The
operator of any vehicle approaching any such intersection shall operate
and control his vehicle in accordance with the signals displayed on any
such traffic control signal, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code.
Name of Street Type of Signal At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 78-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-19
72:531

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 78-20. Parking prohibited at all times.
The following locations are established, ratified and confirmed as zones
where no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time upon any
highway of the Township or parts thereof at the locations where parking is
prohibited as described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Bolmar Street East From East Nield Street to 50 feet north
Box Elder Drive [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both From Ellis Lane to 75 feet west
Chatwood Avenue Both From West Chester Pike to cul-de-sac
Ceredo Avenue East From Jeffries Avenue to Norfolk Avenue
Ceredo Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
East From Norfolk Avenue 200 feet north
(alley)
Ceredo Avenue West From Norfolk Avenue to Rosedale
Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South From Montgomery Avenue 360 plus
feet west
Derry Lane [Added
7-8-2015 by Res. No.
9-2015]
Both Along guiderail
East Gay Street [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both Approximately 250 feet east of
Montgomery Avenue for a distance of
275 feet in an easterly direction
East Goshen Road North From North High Street to North
Franklin Street
East Market Street
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
North Approximately 250 feet east of Bolmar
Street for a distance of 275 feet in an
easterly direction
Edkin Avenue South From South Concord Road to Maple
Lane
Elton Circle [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
West From West Warren Road to cul-de-sac
Fairview Drive Both From South Five Points Road to
Greenview Avenue
Falcon Lane West From Boulder Lane to Ravens Lane
§ 78-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-20
72:533
Name of Street Side Location
Fern Hill Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both From 50 feet north of Brinton Woods
development to 50 feet south of Brinton
Woods development
Fern Hill Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both From North Five Points Road to Brinton
Woods Development
Garfield Avenue East From Lincoln Avenue to 50 feet north
Garfield Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
West From Lincoln Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Gateway Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990; amended
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
North From Richmond Road to West Chester
Area School District property line
Gateway Lane [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
South From Richmond Road to West Chester
Area School District property line
Goshen Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990]
North From Greystone Drive for a distance
200 feet east
Goshen Road [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
South From North Hill Drive West to
Township Line
Hightop Road [Added
1-28-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both From Paoli Pike to Gateway Lane
Jefferies Avenue South From South Church Street to Ceredo
Avenue
Jones Lane [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000; amended
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
Both From Spruce Avenue to Rosary Lane
Justin Lane [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
South From South Concord Road through the
cul-de-sac
Lawrence Drive [Added
2-27-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
Both From the Lawrence Drive cul-de-sac to
the West Goshen Township parking lot
Lawrence Drive [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
South From North Five Points Road to cul-desac
§ 78-20 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-20
72:534
Name of Street Side Location
Lincoln Avenue [Added
1-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998]
Both From Turner Lane to Old Fernhill Road
Lincoln Avenue South From Maple Avenue to Montgomery
Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
East From intersection of Montgomery
Avenue south 260 feet
Maple Avenue West From Montgomery Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
Monteray Lane [Added
1-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2-2008]
Both 50 feet west of North New Street to
north New Street
Montgomery Avenue
[Amended 1-26-2005
by Ord. No. 2-2005]
East From 200 feet south of Lincoln Avenue
to Lincoln Avenue
Montgomery Avenue
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
East From Lincoln Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Montgomery Avenue West From Maple Avenue to 75 feet north
(GFAC)
Morstein Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South From Boot Road to Mary Jane Lane
Mystery Lane West From Pomona Hill Drive to Trinity Lane
Nields Street [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
Both From Westtown Road to 500 feet west
Norfolk Avenue Both From South High Street to Roslyn
Avenue
North Five Points Road
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
Both From Oxford Road north to end
Old Fernhill Road
[Added 1-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 1-2007]
East Fern Hill Road to Fern Hill Road
Pomona Hill Drive Both From South New Street to Mystery
Lane
Prospect Avenue East From Paoli Pike to 50 feet north
Richmond Road [Repealed 3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
§ 78-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-20
72:535
Name of Street Side Location
Rosary Lane [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
South South New Street to South New Street
and East
Rosedale Avenue South From South Matlack Street to 50 feet
east
Rosedale Avenue South From South Matlack Street to South
Bradford Avenue
Rosedale Avenue South From South New Street to South
Bradford Avenue
Roslyn Avenue Both From Rosedale Avenue to Oak Lane
Saunders Court [Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
1-2007]
Both From Saunders Lane to cul-de-sac
Sheridan Drive [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
Both 30 feet south of Spruce Avenue to
Spruce Avenue
South Church Street Both From West Rosedale Avenue to Jefferies
Avenue
South Concord Road
[Added 1-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 2-2005]
East From 15 feet south of Cedar Avenue to
15 feet north of 125 South Concord
Road
South Concord Road
[Added 2-27-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
West From West Chester Pike to the end of
the South Concord Road cul-de-sac
South Five Points Road Both From Route No. 3 to West Warren Road
South High Street
[Added 1-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
Both 300 feet north and south of East
Rhodes Avenue
South High Street East From Rosedale Avenue to Guinta Lane
South High Street West From Rosedale Avenue to 500 feet
south
Spring Court North From cul-de-sac to Spring Lane
Spring Lane West From Coopersmith Park to Route No. 3
Spruce Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both From Oak Lane to Parkside Avenue
Spruce Avenue Both From Oak Lane to Roslyn Avenue
Strasburg Road [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both From Joy Lane to West Chester Pike
§ 78-20 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-20
72:536
Name of Street Side Location
Trinity Drive Both From South New Street to Mystery
Lane
Union Street [Added
2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1-2000]
Both South Bolmar Street to Westtown Road
Virginia Avenue [Added
3-26-1997 by Ord. No.
6-1997]
South From Montgomery Avenue to Garfield
Avenue
West Chester Pike
[Added 1-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-1990]
North From Chatwood Avenue to Rose Drive
West Chester Pike
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
North Approximately 450 feet west of East
Strasburg Road for a distance of 500
feet in a westerly direction
West Chester Pike
[Added 3-26-1997] by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
North From Strasburg Road 800 feet east
West Chester Pike
[Added 3-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-1997]
South From South Five Points Road to
approximately 800 feet west
West Warren Road South From South Five Points Road to David
Lane
Willowbrook Lane
[Added 2-27-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Both From Matlack Street to the end of the
Matlack Street cul-de-sac
Wrangley Court [Added
7-8-2015 by Res. No.
9-2015]
Both From the beginning of the cul-de-sac to
the end of the cul-de-sac
§ 78-21. Parking prohibited at certain times.
The following locations are established, ratified and confirmed as zones
where no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any of the
highways or parts thereof described below between the hours or periods
specified below:
§ 78-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-21
72:537
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Box Elder Drive
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Ellis Lane 1,200
feet west and north
Cavalier Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Willow Way to
Farmington Lane
Ceredo Avenue
[Added
1-9-1990 by
Ord. No.
1-1990]
West 8:00 am. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Jefferies Avenue to
Norfolk Avenue
Cork Circle
[Added
1-23-2008 by
Ord. No.
2-2008]
North Snow From Longford Road to
Longford Road
Delancey Place North School hours From Glen Avenue to
school
Farmington Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Richmond Road to
Cavalier Lane
Galway Drive
[Added
1-23-2008 by
Ord. No.
2-2008]
North Snow From Longford Road to
Longford Road
Gateway Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Willow Way to
Hightop Road
Gateway Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Willow Way to
Richmond Road
Glen Avenue East School hours From Schoolhouse Lane
to Sylvan Road
§ 78-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-21
72:538
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Holly Road
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Richmond Road to
Farmington Lane
Jefferies Avenue
[Added
1-9-1990 by
Ord. No.
1-1990]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From South Church
Street to Ceredo Avenue
Longford Road
[Added
1-23-2008 by
Ord. No.
2-2008]
North Snow From Longford Boulevard
to Morstein Road
Lotus Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Willow Way to
Hightop Road
Morstein Road
[Added
1-23-2008 by
Ord. No.
12-2007]
North Snow From Boot Road to
Longford Road
Mystery Lane
[Added
1-9-1990 by
Ord. No.
1-1990]
East/
West
2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Daily
From Trinity Drive to
Pomona Hill Drive
Richmond Road
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Holly Road to
Farmington Lane
Richmond Road
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Thistlewood Lane to
Holly Road
South High
Street [Amended
1-9-1990 by
Ord. No.
1-1990]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Norfolk Avenue to
South Church Street
§ 78-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-21
72:539
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Staghorn Way
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Box Elder Drive 420
feet south
Staghorn Way
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From 420 feet south of
Box Elder Drive to
Hawthorn Lane
Thistlewood Lane
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Richmond Road to
Hightop Road
Trinity Drive South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From South New Street
to end
Willow Way
[Added
3-26-1997 by
Ord. No.
6-1997]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From Thistlewood Lane to
Farmington Lane
§ 78-21.1. Handicapped parking. [Added 5-13-1998 by Ord. No.
6-1998]
At the request of any handicapped person or severely disabled veteran,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize the erection of a sign on any
Township street, unless parking on such street is prohibited by either
§ 78-20 or 78-21 of this chapter, as close as possible to such person's place
of residence, designating and assigning a parking space for such person
and indicating thereon that such parking space is reserved exclusively for
such handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, as the case may be,
that no parking is allowed there by others and that any unauthorized person
parking there shall be subject to the fine mandated by § 78-25B of this
chapter. Such authorized handicapped parking spaces shall be designated
as follows:
Location
322 Courtney Circle [Added 1-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1-1999]
§ 78-21.2. Parking of certain vehicles, dumpsters and storage units
prohibited. [Added 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 01-2009; amended
10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 8-2017]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile home, motor home,
trailer, truck camper, boat, boat trailer or utility trailer on any street,
§ 78-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-21.2
72:540
highway or road in the Township; provided, however, that the parking
of such vehicles shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed
seven consecutive days. A permit must be obtained from the Township
Police Department and be attached to the vehicle during the temporary
parking period.
B. At no time shall any of the vehicles designated in Subsection A above be
permitted to park on any street, highway or road where parking has
been prohibited under Article IV of this chapter, titled "Snow and Ice
Emergencies," during the period from December 1 through and
including April 1.
C. A maximum of 10 temporary parking permits per year will be issued for
the same vehicle and a permit will not be issued until a period of five
days has elapsed since the issuance of the last permit.
D. It shall be unlawful to place any type of dumpster or any type of
portable storage unit within the public rights-of-way of any highway,
street or road within the Township, or to place such dumpster or
portable storage unit in such a manner upon private property that
would obstruct visual lines-of-sight for vehicles entering or exiting such
highways, streets or roads. No permits shall be issued for any such
placement even upon a temporary basis.
§ 78-21.2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-21.2
72:541

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 78-22. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways designated
in § 78-23 below, the Board of Supervisors or the Chief of Police is
authorized to create and designate highways which are subject to the
provisions of this article and to declare an emergency due to the hazards of
excessive snow and ice.
§ 78-23. Parking prohibitions.
§ 78-24. Placement of signs; announcement of emergency.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be
unlawful, during the period of such emergency, for any person to stop,
stand or park a vehicle or to allow the same to remain stopped or
parked on any highway or portion thereof designated in Subsection B
below or to operate any vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof,
unless such vehicle shall be equipped with adequate equipment to
provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle in motion so that other
traffic on such highway will not be blocked or seriously impeded.
Adequate equipment shall be deemed to include only snow tires,
studded snow tires, all-season tires or chains designed to be attached to
tires for use in snow.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of declared emergency shall be as
described below:
Name of Highway Limits
Derry Lane [Added 7-8-2015
by Res. No. 9-2015]
East side of street from Phoenixville
Pike to end of cul-de-sac
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Board of
Supervisors or the Chief of Police shall cause to be erected on the
highways or portions thereof designated in § 78-23, signs reading as
follows: SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE. SNOW TIRES, STUDDED SNOW
TIRES, ALL SEASON TIRES OR CHAINS REQUIRED. NO PARKING
DURING SNOW EMERGENCY. VEHICLES TOWED AWAY DURING
SNOW EMERGENCY.
B. The Chief of Police shall, in addition, through radio or other available
media, disseminate information as to the existence of any such
emergency.
§ 78-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-24
72:543

ARTICLE V
Violations
§ 78-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
9-1992; 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 6-1998; 2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
01-2009]
A. Parking; notice of violation for a violation of §§ 78-20 and 78-21.
(1) Any person parked in violation of any of the provisions of § 78-20 or
§ 78-21 of this chapter shall be issued a notice of violation and be
ordered to pay a fine of $35, payable to West Goshen Township
within seven days of the issuance of such notice, provided that if
the fine is paid within 72 hours of the date and time appearing on
the face of the notice, the fine shall be $15.
(2) Any person failing to respond to the notice of violation by payment
of the fine, as aforesaid, shall be issued a citation pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Upon conviction of the
offense stated in the citation, such person shall be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $35, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced
to a term of imprisonment in the County Prison for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
B. Parking; notice of violation for a violation of § 78-21.2.
(1) Any person parking in violation of the provisions of § 78-21.2 of this
chapter shall be issued a notice of violation and be ordered to pay a
fine of $50 payable to West Goshen Township within seven days of
the issuance of such notice.
(2) Any person failing to respond to the notice of violation by payment
of the fine, as aforesaid, shall be issued a citation pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Upon conviction of the
offense stated in the citation, such person shall be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $50, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced
to a term of imprisonment in the county prison for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 78-9, 78-10,
78-11, 78-12, 78-13, 78-14, 78-15, 78-16, 78-17, 78-18, 78-19, 78-21.1
or 78-23 shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than the maximum fine
permitted by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code159 for that violation,
together with the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment of
the fine and costs, or as otherwise required by law, shall be sentenced
to a term of imprisonment in the county prison for not more than the
159. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 78-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-25
72:545
period permitted by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for such violation,
or both.
§ 78-25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78-25
72:546
ARTICLE VI
Severability; Repealer; Interpretation
§ 78-26. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and, if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as the legislated intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 78-27. Repealer; effect on previous ordinances.
A. Existing Chapter 78 of the Code of the Township of West Goshen,
§§ 78-1 through and including 78-20, comprising Articles I, II, III, IV and
V of Chapter 78 of the existing Code, is repealed in its entirety.160
B. The repeal of the ordinances set forth in Chapter 78 of the Code, as it
presently exists, provided for in Subsection A above, shall not affect,
impair or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any such code or ordinance
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
160. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 78, Vehicles and Traffic, was comprised of the following: Art. I,
Stop Intersections, adopted 4-3-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968; Art. II, Parking, adopted
4-3-1968 by Ord. No. 4-1968; Art. III, Through Truck Traffic, adopted 4-2-1969 by Ord. No.
1-1969; Art. IV, One-Way Streets, adopted 6-4-1969 by Ord. No. 3-1969; and Art. V, Speed
Limits, adopted 7-8-1970 by Ord. No. 6-1970.
§ 78-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78-27
72:547
Chapter 78A
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND DIRT BIKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 57. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 78.
§ 78A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) — Any motorized off-road recreational
vehicle capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland or other natural terrain, including, but not limited to, a
multitrack, multiwheel or low-pressure-tire vehicle or related two-wheel,
three-wheel, four-wheel or belt-driven vehicle, or an amphibious machine.
The definition of ATV excludes golf carts, construction machines, utility
vehicles used for business operations, agriculture, yard work, landscaping,
snow removal or otherwise being used in the reasonable maintenance
of a person's private property, or motorized vehicles being used for law
enforcement, fire, emergency, military or other authorized governmental
purposes.
DIRT BIKE — A motorcycle with tires and suspension designed and built for
riding on unpaved roads and over rough terrain.
OPERATE — To use in any manner within the boundaries of West Goshen
Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person who has legal or equitable title to the property on
which an ATV or dirt bike is being operated.
§ 78A-2. Operation and use.
A. Access limitation. No person shall go on or cross the land of another
with an ATV or dirt bike without the permission of the owner. No person
shall operate an ATV or dirt bike on state or Township roads unless
properly registered and licensed for such purpose.
B. Acreage requirements. A person operating an ATV or dirt bike on
private property shall only be permitted to do so upon a lot that is one
acre or more in size in order to provide for adequate buffering from
adjacent properties and off-site residential dwellings.
C. Noise limitation. No person shall operate an ATV or dirt bike without an
effective and suitable muffling device on its engine which efficiently
deadens or muffles the noise of the exhaust. Operation of an ATV or dirt
bike shall be subject to and compliant with the noise limitations,
restrictions and requirements set forth in Chapter 52A, Noise.
§ 78-27 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78A-3
72:548
§ 78A-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 78B
VIBRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 52A. Nuisances — See Ch. 53.
§ 78B-1. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to any person, firm, corporation, association or
entity who engages in activity which initiates an intensity of ground motion
or vibration, whether or not such initiating source is located within the
A. A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall
subject the owner of the property and any person operating an ATV or
dirt bike in violation of this chapter to summary enforcement
proceedings.
B. The West Goshen Township Police Department and/or an authorized
West Goshen Township Code Official, and such persons as may from
time to time be designated by the Township, are authorized to make an
initial determination of a violation of, and to enforce, the provisions of
this chapter. An initial determination of a violation of this chapter - a
first offense - shall result in a verbal warning to the owner, and the
operator, of the ATV or dirt bike.
C. A second or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be subject to
summary enforcement proceedings and upon being found guilty thereof
shall subject the violator to a fine of $300 for a second offense
(following a verbal warning) and $600 for a third offense. Upon default
in payment of a fine and upon a guilty finding of a third or subsequent
offense, the violator may be subject to a term of imprisonment up to the
maximum allowed by law for a summary offense. Each day that a
violation continues or each section of this chapter that is found to be
violated shall be considered a separate violation.
D. All offenders convicted of violating this ordinance shall also pay the
costs of prosecution and in default of said payment of fines and costs.
E. Any person guilty of a violation of the within chapter may also be
subject to civil proceedings for damages and/or injunctive relief by the
property owner and any entity injured or damaged by such violation.
F. Both criminal and civil proceedings may be commenced against a
person violating the within chapter and commencement of any such
proceedings shall not constitute an election of remedies preventing the
commencement of the other proceedings against such violator.
§ 78A-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78B-1
72:549
Township, to any real estate, receiving structure, or person thereupon,
which exceeds the levels set forth in § 78B-4.
§ 78B-2. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
indicated herein:
PEAK PARTICLE VELOCITY (PPV) — A measurement of the maximum
instantaneous peak amplitude of a vibration signal; used to evaluate
potential for building damage.
VIBRATION — A periodic motion of the particles of an elastic body or
medium in alternatively opposite directions from the position of equilibrium
when that equilibrium has been disturbed; the action of vibrating; the state
of being vibrated. As applied in this chapter, shall mean "ground-borne
vibration."
VIBRATION MEASURING DEVICE (VMD) — A three-component device
capable of sensing, measuring, and recording displacement, velocity, and
acceleration of ground motion from vibration with a sensor that produces an
electrical signal that is proportional to the amplitude of the ground motion.
VIBRATION VELOCITY LEVEL IN DECIBELS (VdB) — A decibel notation for
root mean squared velocity of vibration amplitude; used to evaluate human
perception and response.
§ 78B-3. Administration and enforcement.
The West Goshen Township Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designee, shall have the power to administer the terms of this chapter,
investigate complaints, make observations, maintain surveillance, and
prosecute violations of this chapter in accordance with §§ 78B-6 and 78B-7
of this chapter. When enforcing the terms of this chapter, the Code
Enforcement Officer may be trained by a qualified person specializing in the
use of vibration measuring devices, or may retain consultants and engineers
with experience in measuring vibration levels with the use of vibration
measuring devices.
§ 78B-4. Vibration standards.
The following actions are specifically prohibited, unless otherwise exempted
in this chapter:
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or public
property any source of continuous vibration (any vibration which is
static, fluctuating, or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one
time in any fifteen-second interval) in such a manner as to create a
vibration level which exceeds the limits set forth beyond any property
boundary or 30 yards from any moving vibration source for the
receiving land use category in the following tables:
§ 78B-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 78B-4
72:550
§ 78B-5. Exceptions.
The following sources for vibration are exempted from the provisions set
forth in § 78B-4 of this chapter:
§ 78B-6. Excess vibration declared a public nuisance.
Any emission of earth-shaking vibration from any source in excess of the
limitations established in or pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
(1) Continuous vibration levels by receiving land use for effect on
structures (in PPV), measured at or within the receiving structure.
Category
PPV
(inches per second)
Residential, public space, open space,
agricultural or institutional
0.12
Residential uses permitted by ordinance
in an industrial-commercial district
0.12
Commercial or business 0.12
Industrial 0.2
(2) Continuous vibration levels by receiving land use for effect on
human response (in VdB), measured at or within the property
boundary of the receiving land use.
Category VdB
Residential, public space, open space,
agricultural or institutional
72
Residential uses permitted by ordinance
in an industrial-commercial district
72
Commercial or business 75
Industrial 94
A. Blasting, only if performed in accordance with a permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such blasting
may occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, unless specifically authorized at different times by the
Department of Environmental Protection permit.
B. Construction activities directly related to the abatement of an
emergency.
C. A snowplow, snowblower or other similar device in operation used to
remove snow or ice.
D. Work or activities performed or sponsored by schools and governmental
agencies or their contractors in the performance of public service.
§ 78B-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 78B-6
72:551
and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to
summary abatement procedures. Such abatement may be in addition to
the administrative proceedings, fines, and penalties herein provided. The
West Goshen Township Solicitor or designated legal counsel is empowered
to institute legal proceedings in the Court of Common Pleas seeking an
injunction for the abatement or prosecution of emissions of earth-shaking
vibration which exceed the levels established in § 78B-4A(1) or (2) and
which cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to the public or
endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare of the public, or cause or
have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to public property. Such
legal proceedings may be in addition to the administrative proceedings,
fines, and penalties herein provided.
§ 78B-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to
the payment of a fine of not less than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution,
plus attorneys' fees expended by the Township to prosecute any violation of
this chapter. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced
to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days.
Each section of this chapter violated shall constitute a separate offense,
and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is
found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations
shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the Magisterial District
Judge of not less than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, plus attorneys'
fees expended by the Township to prosecute any violation of this chapter,
or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 81
WEEDS, BAMBOO AND DANGEROUS TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 53. Property maintenance — See Ch. 63.
§ 81-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "West Goshen Weed Ordinance of 1968."
§ 81-2. Controlled, prohibited and exempted growths. [Amended
9-26-2001 by Ord. No. 12-2001]
§ 78B-6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 81-2
72:552
§ 81-3. Removal of diseased or dangerous trees from public streets
and public rights-of-way.161 [Added 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 7-2017]
A. The following plants are declared to be noxious weeds and shall be
removed by the owner from each lot, parcel or tract of ground ("the
lot") located within West Goshen Township ("the Township") as often as
necessary to prohibit their growth: ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak,
Canadian thistle, bull or spear thistle, jimsonweed, mile-a-minute,
kudzu vine, Johnson grass, purple loosestrife, chickory and blue daisy.
Such growth is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a danger to
the public health, safety and general welfare and is, therefore,
prohibited.
B. Between May 1 and September 30 of each calendar year, the owner of
each lot shall control excessive vegetation by mowing or cutting such
lot as often as is necessary to keep grass, brush, weeds and similar
vegetation, not otherwise controlled by Subsection A or exempted by
Subsection C of this § 81-2, growing on a lot to a height not to exceed 12
inches or less.
C. The provisions of Subsection B of this § 81-2 shall not apply to,
wildflowers and cultivated flowers, inclusive of annuals, biennials, and
perennials, farm-grown grains, vegetables and similar plants intended
for animal and human consumption, vegetable gardens, trees, and
cultivars, all of which are exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
D. Bamboo species, including, but not limited to Bambusa, Phyllostachys,
and Pseudosasa, including common bamboo, golden bamboo, arrow
bamboo, shall not be planted, maintained or otherwise be permitted to
exist within 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or traveled portion of
any public roadway in West Goshen Township. Property owner(s) whose
property contains bamboo shall remove and abate the growth of the
bamboo within 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or traveled portion
of a public road in West Goshen Township. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 05-2013]
A. The property owner or person in possession and control of property
within the Township shall be responsible for maintaining any and all
trees, branches, vines, shrubs and other landscaping on their property
so that they do not unreasonably affect or interfere with the health,
safety or welfare of the public or the right of the public to the
unobstructed use of the public roads or public property. If the condition
of any tree, branch, vine, shrub or other landscaping on private
property in the Township, because of disease or otherwise,
unreasonably affects or interferes with the health, safety or welfare of
the public or the right of the public to the unobstructed use of the
public roads or property, the Township shall send written notice via
certified mail to the property owner or person in possession and control
161. Editor's Note: Former § 81-3, Public notice, as amended, was repealed 6-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 05-2013.
§ 81-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 81-3
72:553
§ 81-4. (Reserved)162
§ 81-5. (Reserved)163
§ 81-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-24-1996 by Ord. No.
7-1996; 3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought
before a District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be subject to the
payment of a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more
than 30 days. Each section or provision of this chapter that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a
of the property ordering that such obstruction be cut and/or removed
from the public road or public property within 30 days from receipt
of the notice. If the property owner fails to remove such obstruction
within 30 days, the Township may enter the property and remove the
obstruction. Thereafter, the Township's cost of cutting and/or removing
the obstruction shall be billed to the property owner or the person in
possession and control of the property and shall be due and payable
within 10 days of the date the Township bills the property owner for the
cost of the cutting and/or removal of the obstruction. If the amount of
the bill is not paid within 10 days, all amounts due and owing shall be
deemed to be delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of 10% of the
amount billed.
B. If the billing is not paid within 15 days, the Township may file an action
in assumpsit or any proceeding otherwise provided by law to recover
the amount of the delinquent bill together with any costs, attorney's
fees or expenses, or may file a municipal lien against the property
pursuant to the procedure established in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Lien Law for any amounts due and owing the Township. Such lien shall
be collected in the manner provided for by law for the filing and
collection of such municipal liens. All of the Township's remedies shall
be cumulative.
C. In the event that a tree, branch, vine, shrub or other landscaping has
fallen into the Township right-of-way and obstructs the use of the public
roads or is creating a hazardous condition which requires immediate
attention, the Township will immediately remove the obstruction from
the right-of-way and bill the property owner for the cost of removing the
obstruction.
162. Editor's Note: Former § 81-4, Specific notice to violators, as amended, was repealed
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 05-2013.
163. Editor's Note: Former § 81-5, Failure to remove; work by Township; costs, as amended, was
repealed 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 05-2013.
§ 81-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 81-6
72:554
violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense,
each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by
the District Justice of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, or upon default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not
more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this
chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
Chapter 84
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 28.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 51.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 54.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 72.
§ 81-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 81-6
72:555

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Establishment of Districts; Map
§ 84-1. Title. [Amended 5-3-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Revised Zoning Ordinance of 1990."
§ 84-2. Community development objectives. [Amended 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-1990]
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and promote the safety, health and general welfare of West
Goshen residents by:
(1) Providing for a compatible balance of residential, commercial and
industrial areas to assure coordinated and practical community
development.
(2) Providing space and arrangements for supplying needed services
such as fresh water, light, clean air, sanitary sewerage service,
solid waste disposal facilities, stormwater drainage, as well as
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities.
(3) Providing for transportation and communication arteries, including
streets, roads, highways, walkways and paths.
(4) Minimizing danger from fire, panic, disaster or other dangers.
(5) Preserving prime agricultural and farm land, considering
topography, soil type and classification and present use. [Added
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
B. To provide for development which will coordinate with other
municipalities and which will enhance the living, working and shopping
amenity by:
(1) Accommodating reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for
development of a variety of residential dwelling types and
nonresidential uses and preventing excessive concentration of
population. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
(2) Directing the use of land and structures so as to minimize
objectionable interference, noise and other unwanted interaction.
(3) Providing for the use of land within the Township for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family dwellings in various
arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks. [Amended
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
§ 84-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-2
72:557
§ 84-2.1. Zoning purposes. [Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
This Zoning Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and with consideration for the character
of the Township, its various parts and the suitability of the various parts for
particular uses and structures, and is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 84-3. Scope. [Amended 6-4-1985 by Ord. No. 9-1985]
(4) Determining the best location and arrangement for both facilities
and arteries (streets, walkways, etc.), to provide the optimum
combination of accessibility with personal privacy and freedom.
(5) Providing space and arrangements for parks, recreational areas,
open space, landscaping and other aspects of visual amenity.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations; airports and
national defense facilities; the provisions of adequate light and air;
access to incident solar energy; police protection; vehicle parking and
loading space; transportation; water; sewerage; schools; recreational
facilities and public grounds; the provision of safe, reliable and
adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or
industrial use and other public requirements; as well as preservation of
the natural scenic and historic values in the environment and
preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land; blight;
danger and congestion in travel and transportation; and loss of health,
life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land,
including streets, and the use, height, area and yard requirements of
every building or a portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height and area, added to or relocated, and every use within a building
or use accessory thereto in West Goshen Township shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any lawful existing
building or structure and any lawful existing use of a building or land
not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be
regarded as nonconforming but may be continued, extended or
changed subject to the special regulations herein provided with respect
to nonconforming buildings or uses under Article XV.
B. Every street located in the Township shall bear and be governed by the
zoning classification of the zoning district, established in § 84-4 of this
article, in which it is located, and the use restrictions applicable to the
various zoning districts shall apply to the use of the streets located
within such zoning district.
§ 84-2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-4
72:558
§ 84-4. Establishment of districts.
A. Types of districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of West
Goshen is hereby divided into types of districts, designated as follows:
[Amended 6-13-1978 by Ord. No. 5-1978; 8-8-1978 by Ord. No.
6-1978; 12-26-1978 by Ord. No. 8-1978]
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-3A Single-Family Attached Dwelling Overlay District [Added
7-27-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
R-3B Flexible Design Conservation District, which shall include,
within such District, Zone A, Zone B and Zone C [Added 12-10-2008
by Ord. No. 9-2008]
R-3C Residential Infill [Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
R-4 Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-1-R Neighborhood Commercial District -- Restricted
C-2 Commercial Shopping Center District
C-3 Limited Highway Commercial District
C-4 Special Limited Business and Apartment District
C-5 General Highway Commercial District
I-1 Campus Light Industrial District
I-2 Light Industrial District
I-3 General Industrial District
I-2-R Light Industrial District--Restricted [Added 2-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 1-1980]
Planned Office Park District
Multipurpose District
M-S Medical-Service District [Added 9-23-1980 by Ord. No.
6-1980]
RGC Residential Golf Course District [Added 10-11-1988 by Ord.
No. 9-1988]
I-C Industrial-Commercial District [Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No.
5-2003]
MCX Municipal Complex District [Added 8-11-2004 by Ord. No.
19-2004]
B. Districts of annexed area. Any territory hereafter added to the
Township shall be considered to be zoned R-3 Residential District until
otherwise classified by action of the Township of West Goshen.
§ 84-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-4
72:559
§ 84-5. Zoning Map.
§ 84-6. Conflict with previous regulations.
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul
any rules or regulations or permits previously issued thereunder and not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, provided that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises
or upon the height of a building, or requires larger open spaces than are
imposed or required by such rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
C. Lot sizes. No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the
dimensions of the required open spaces shall be less than herein
prescribed.
A. Adoption of Zoning Map. The boundaries of said districts shall be as
shown upon the map attached to and made a part of this chapter, which
shall be designated the Zoning Map. Said map and all notations,
references and other things shown thereon shall be made a part of this
chapter as if the matters and things shown by said map were all fully
described herein.164
B. Boundaries of districts. District boundary lines are intended to coincide
with lot lines, center lines of street rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way
and the beds of streams existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, the corporate boundaries of the Township or as dimensioned
on the Township's official Zoning Map. In the event of a dispute over the
location of the boundary of any district, the Zoning Officer shall
investigate and render a decision on the location of the district
boundary line. [Amended 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
C. Lots held in single and separate ownership. Where a zoning district
boundary line divides a lot which was held in single and separate
ownership at the time of the adoption of this chapter, the regulations for
the least restrictive district may extend into the more restrictive district
a distance of not more than 50 feet measured from the district
boundary line; provided, however, that in the case of a lot other than a
corner lot, the regulations for the least restrictive district may extend
into the more restrictive district a distance more than 50 feet beyond
the district boundary line when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards established in
§ 84-72O. [Amended 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
164. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 84-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-6
72:560
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 84-7. Word usage.
Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include the
singular.
§ 84-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building and is used for an
accessory use and is located on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE —
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration, or
electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as defined in this chapter.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No.
5-2003]
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO
STORE[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003] —
A use conducted on the same lot as a principal use to which it is
related, and located either within the same structure or in an accessory
structure or as an accessory use of land, except that off-street parking
may be located on a contiguous lot. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
3-2004]
A.
A use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with a particular principal use.165
B.
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this chapter;
or
(1)
A.
165. Editor's Note: The former definition of "advertising sign," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-20-1985 by Ord. No. 15-1985.
§ 84-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:561
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which features:[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which provides supervision and/or
instruction for adults who are not all related to the caregiver or operator,
on a daily basis where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation are
charged, whether governmentally subsidized and/or licensed or not and
whether operated for profit or not for profit.[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord.
No. 3-1989]
ADULT EDUCATION CENTER — A facility in which adults meet in classes
for the purpose of receiving instruction related to particular
subjects.[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
AGRICULTURE OPERATIONS — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities as defined in this
chapter.
(2)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will
not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store so long as one of its business purposes is the offering for sale or
rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as defined in this chapter.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:562
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or
are consistent with technological development within the agricultural
industry.[Amended 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
AIRPORT — See "commercial airport."[Added 5-26-1981 by Ord. No.
7-1981]
AISLE — That portion of a parking area designed and used for motor vehicle
circulation, which provides access to parking spaces.[Added 6-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-1988]
ALTERATIONS — Include, but are not limited to, the following:
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — A source of energy generated from solar, water,
wind, geothermal or similar sources, which is capable of providing energy
and utility provisions to a permitted use.[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No.
04-2012]
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM — A private system capable of converting
solar, water and/or wind into a viable energy source and utility provisions
for a permitted use. Such facilities are limited to solar panels, wind turbines
and geothermal systems.[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
AMBULATORY CARE CENTER — A medical facility, including lands and
buildings, not part of a hospital, in which a variety of outpatient medical
services, not including emergency medical services and medical emergency
support services, are provided to persons, including occupational therapy,
physical therapy and rehabilitation, physical fitness and cardiac
rehabilitation, speech therapy, hearing testing, behavior modification,
diagnostic imaging, x-ray and nuclear medicine, outpatient surgery and
procedures not requiring hospitalization (short procedures), renal dialysis,
All incidental changes or replacement in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structure.
A.
Minor changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or
other structure, including but not limited to the following examples:
Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in
nonconforming residential buildings, provided that no additional
dwelling units are created thereby.
(1)
Alteration of interior partitions in all other types of buildings or
other structures.
(2)
(3) Making windows or doors in exterior walls.
Strengthening the load-bearing capacity in not more than 10% of
the total floor area to permit the accommodation of a specialized
unit of machinery or equipment.
(4)
B.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:563
dental care, laboratory, including blood draw, collection of other bodily
fluids and analysis thereof, eye care, sports medicine clinic and similar
medical provider services. Transport of patients by helicopter to or from
the ambulatory care facility or by other emergency medical support vehicles
with sirens or other audible warning systems engaged is prohibited.
Temporary lodging for those individuals recovering from the medical
services performed at an ambulatory care center with a maximum duration
per stay not exceeding 72 hours shall be considered an accessory use to an
ambulatory care center.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98; amended
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017]
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities, as defined below.166[Added 7-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 5-1987; amended 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998; 4-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 3-1999; 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
APPLICANT — A landowner, subdivider or developer who has filed an
application for a subdivision or land development, including his heirs,
successors and assigns.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility licensed or not as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which is designated and constructed to
serve the housing and personal care needs of persons age 55 years or
older (provided nothing herein shall preclude residency by any person
under age 55 who is handicapped), operated by a full-time staff in which
supervised round-the-clock services and nursing care are provided for a
period exceeding 24 hours for four or more individuals who require only
intermittent care to maintain the basic needs of daily living in the areas of
hygiene, cooking, cleaning, eating, nutrition, ambulatory care, recreation,
community activities and mobility, general safety and similar activities of
everyday living. An assisted living facility shall include special care units
offering specialized care and services for residents with Alzheimer's disease
or dementia. An assisted living facility does not include a nursing home,
retirement community, halfway house, drug and alcohol abuse treatment
or similar facility.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98; amended
12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
ATHLETIC CLUB — An enterprise operating as a business or club which
charges an admission, entry or membership fee or combination thereof,
whether owned by a public or private entity, which is open to the public
and provides various athletic or health facilities for its members, including a
combination of more than one of the following: gymnasium, swimming pool,
nautilus, weights and similar conditioning equipment, tennis, handball,
racquetball and similar ball courts and similar athletic facilities which
are used to promote fitness and good health. An athletic club may also
166. Editor's Note: The former definition of "apartment," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:564
include as an accessory use a physical therapy facility, provided that the
patients are members of the athletic club, all therapy is provided by licensed
physical therapists and the area dedicated to the physical therapy does
not exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the athletic club. No other
professional medical services may be provided in an athletic club, including
but not limited to care by a physician, chiropractor, dentist, psychologist
or psychiatrist. The term "athletic club" shall be synonymous with "health
club."167[Amended 1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; 7-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 6-2008]
AUTOMOBILE — A four-wheel motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle,
intended for operation on a street or highway for the conveyance of
passengers, but which may also have off-road capability; a passenger
car.[Added 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP — The repair, reconditioning and lubrication
of motor vehicles and the replacement or installation of motor vehicle parts
and accessories when conducted in a repair shop offering a full range of
the foregoing services, but not including body and fender repair, collision
repair service, spray painting or the sale of new or preowned (used) motor
vehicles.[Added 4-5-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988; amended 1-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 1-2003]
AUTOMOBILE BODY REPAIR AND PAINT SHOP — The repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service,
body and fender repair, spray painting and steam cleaning of vehicles, but
excluding the sale of new or used vehicles.[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 7-1995]
BASEMENT — An enclosed area partly or completely below grade. It shall
be considered a building story if more than 33 1/3% of the perimeter walls
are five feet or more above grade and if the net area of the door or window
openings in the exterior walls is at least equal to 10% of the enclosed
floor area. For purposes of Article XIX, the basement shall include any
area of the building having its floors subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.168[Amended 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — An owner-occupied building designed, used
and occupied as a single-family residence having, as an accessory use
therein, public lodging rooms and facilities for, and serving food and drink
prepared within the building to, preregistered transient guests, which
meets the requirements of § 84-57.3 of this chapter.[Added 11-24-1987 by
Ord. No. 17-1987]
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets.
BREWERY PUB — An establishment used specifically for on-premises
consumption of malt and brewed beverages produced on the premises or
167. Editor's Note: The former definition of "attached single-family dwelling," added 4-10-1978
by Ord. No. 3-1978, as amended, and which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994.
168. Editor's Note: The former definition of "billboard," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-20-1985 by Ord. No. 15-1985.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:565
on real property immediately adjacent to the premises. The brewery pub
must be licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board or any successor
agency of the commonwealth.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
BUFFER ZONE — A protected strip of required yard space adjacent to
a property line or district boundary line not less in width than the area
designated in the applicable section of this chapter and which is left
undisturbed, planted or otherwise improved with screening and
landscaping as required by the applicable district regulations, but which is
otherwise left unused and in the most natural possible condition.[Added
11-9-1982 by Ord. No. 8-1982]
BUILDING — Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land and
has enclosing walls and a roof.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area on a lot defined by the applicable
building setback lines and minimum rear and side yards within which
the principal building must be located.[Added 4-15-2009 by Ord. No.
03-2009]
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The area of any building measured along the
perimeter of the exterior foundation walls.[Added 10-25-1994 by Ord.
No. 3-1994]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — An established line within a property, defining
the minimum required distance between any structure to be erected and an
adjacent right-of-way or street line. For a corner lot, the building setback
line shall apply to, and define the setback from, each adjacent right-of-way
or street line.[Amended 9-22-1987 by Ord. No. 11-1987]
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other structures
and their relationship to each other, to open areas such as yards and to lot
lines, and therefore includes:
BUMPER BLOCK — A low, usually concrete barrier permanently installed
in parking spaces, which blocks the front wheels of a vehicle.169[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
CANOPY — A structure or portion thereof with a roof, but no outer walls,
providing cover for motor vehicle fueling positions for the dispensing of
motor vehicle fuel or drive-through lanes for restaurants, pharmacies or
banks and financial institutions.[Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005;
amended 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
The size, including height and floor area, of the building or other
structure.
A.
The relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential building to
the area of the lot.
B.
C. All open areas in yard space relating to buildings and other structures.
169. Editor's Note: The former definition of "business service," added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1-2017.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:566
CELLAR — An enclosed building space more than 33 1/3% below grade
which shall be considered as unhabitable for living purposes.
CENTER LINE OF STREET — See "street, center line of."
CHILD — An individual considered in the law to be a minor, that is, a person
under the age of 18 years.[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which, on a daily basis, exclusively
provides supplemental parental care and supervision and/or instruction
to seven or more children simultaneously, who are not all related to the
caregiver or operator, where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation
are charged, whether governmentally subsidized or not, and which is
licensed or approved to dispense child care by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and whether operated for profit or not for profit.[Added
4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision bounded by
lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of
the center lines of intersecting streets or of an intersecting street and
driveway.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
COLLECTOR STREET or FEEDER STREET — A street which, in addition to
providing access to abutting properties, intercepts minor streets to provide
a route serving 50 or more dwelling units to give access to community
facilities and/or other collector and major streets (streets in industrial and
commercial subdivisions shall generally be considered collector streets)
or which connects a local street system with a major street or highway
system.[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already supports
at least one nontower WCF.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
COMMERCIAL AIRPORT — A landing area which may be used for
commercial flight operations, including charter, leasing of aircraft, aircraft
sales, aircraft rental, flight instruction, air freight, aircraft maintenance
and repair or any other flight activities for compensation, but excluding
scheduled airlines (FAA Part 121 operations).170[Added 5-26-1981 by Ord.
No. 7-1981]
COMMERCIAL SERVICE — A type of retail operation wherein a service,
rather than a product, is made available to the general public. Commercial
services are distinguished from personal and professional services in that
clients need not be present for the service to be provided. An example is
dry-cleaning service.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used in or for or designed for or
adapted to or adaptable to use in a business or trade activity of any kind or
170. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "commercial communications antenna," added
4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998; "commercial communications antenna support structure
(tower)," added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998, as amended; and "commercial
communications antenna support structure height, added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998,
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:567
any construction, excavating, earthmoving or similar equipment, regardless
of the use to which such vehicle or equipment is put at any particular time,
or any of the following specifically designated vehicles or motor vehicles
as defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code:171 truck, truck tractor, trailer,
special mobile equipment, bus and school bus.[Added 6-4-1985 by Ord.
No. 10-1985]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land or a combination of land and water
intended for the use and enjoyment of the public, Township residents or the
residents of a development as a whole and which consists of landscaped or
natural terrain and which may be used as passive open space or for certain
recreation specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors in the approval
of the development plan. Common open space shall be either greenway
lands as defined in this chapter or a common element which is owned
by all members of the homeowners' or condominium association. Common
open space shall be free of buildings, except for recreational and utility
buildings specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
development plan. Common open space shall not include street rights-ofway,
private streets, or yard areas.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990;
amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building used for recreational, social,
educational and cultural activities, usually owned and operated by a public
or nonprofit group or agency.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
COMMUNITY UTILITY — A utility which is owned, operated or maintained
by a homeowners' association or community association for the purpose
of providing sanitary sewage disposal, stormwater control, water supply,
energy, telephone or other utility services within a defined service area
solely within the Township or adjacent municipality.[Added 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 3-1990]
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition or
any substance or combination of substances intended to produce visible
and/or audible effects by combustion and which is suitable for use by
the public that complies with the construction, performance, composition
and labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to consumer practices) or any successor
regulation and which complies with the provisions for "consumer fireworks"
as defined in the American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1,
including but not limited to Sections *3.1 and *3.5, or any successor
standard. The term does not include devices such as "ground and handheld
sparkling devices" as defined in APA Standard 87-1, Section *3.1.1,
"novelties" as defined in APA Standard 87-1, Section *3.2, or "toy caps" as
defined in APA Standard 87-1, Section *3.3.[Added 11-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 8-2018]
171. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:568
CONTRACTOR'S ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial use which involves
offices and/or the storage of supplies, equipment, machinery and materials
for contractors and tradesmen such as builders, masons, carpenters and
landscapers. Such use does not include retail sales of products or
materials.[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store of not less than 3,000 square feet
and not more than 5,500 square feet of gross floor area for the sale of food
and beverages for off-premises consumption, personal care items and other
similar items. This use may include ATM machines and the retail sale of
automotive fuel under canopy. A convenience store must meet all criteria in
§ 84-57.12 of this chapter.[Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."172
COUNTRY HOUSE ESTATE — A residence mansion existing on the effective
date of this section having a minimum floor area of not less than 10,000
square feet located on a lot of not less than 25 gross acres held in single and
separate ownership.[Added 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992; amended
6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
DETACHED HOUSE — One which has yards on all four sides.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development, as defined in Chapter 72.[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.[Added 10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
DEVELOPMENT TRACT — The total area of a parcel of land intended for
development of a multiple number of buildings and structures in accordance
with an overall development plan.[Added 10-11-1988 by Ord. No.
9-1988]
DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof,
that holds a permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health to
dispense medical marijuana.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Defined as more fully set forth in 27 CFR 555.11
(Meaning of terms), which is incorporated herein by reference, which meet
the types of display fireworks devices set forth in the APA Standard 87-1,
Section *4.1 which comply with requirements for display fireworks set forth
in APA Standard 87-1.[Added 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
172. Editor's Note: The definition of "day-care center," added 4-5-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988,
which immediately followed this definition, was superseded 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989.
See now the definitions of "adult day-care center" and "child day-care center."
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:569
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 2-11-2015
by Ord. No. 1-2015]
DOG DAY-CARE FACILITY — The indoor use of a building where six or
more dogs are kept for the purpose of providing shelter, housing, boarding,
grooming and feeding during the day.[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
11-2007]
DORMITORY, COLLEGE — A building owned or managed by a college or
university which contains dwelling rooms that provide sleeping and living
accommodations or apartments containing not more than four bedrooms
and living quarters solely for students enrolled at the college or university
which owns the dormitory.[Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
DORMITORY, PRIVATE — A building owned or managed by a
noneducational entity engaged in the business of providing student housing
in the form of apartments containing not more than four bedrooms and
living quarters solely for college or university students enrolled at a college
or university immediately contiguous to or on the grounds of the college or
university at which such students are matriculated.[Added 9-25-2002 by
Ord. No. 11-2002]
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned and maintained access strip, graded and
paved, intended for use as a means of vehicular access to an individual
dwelling; also, a private access strip, graded and hard-surfaced, intended
for use as a means of vehicular access to a parking area. The driveway(s)
serving a parking area shall not provide direct access to individual parking
spaces.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
DWELLING — A building designed for or occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, containing one or more dwelling units.[Amended
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
DWELLING UNIT[Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994] — A single
residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one
family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation. Dwelling unit types are as follows:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building having only one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and
open on all sides. The term "single-family detached dwelling" shall be
deemed to include a modular home which is designed for transportation
after fabrication in one or more segments or units and constructed
so that it must be assembled on a permanent foundation and be
permanently connected to utilities.
A.
SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling
units, including but not limited to twin or duplex:
B.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:570
EDUCATIONAL USE — Land or buildings used for the establishment and
maintenance of a public or private college, secondary or elementary school
or other educational institution which is used for the primary purpose
TWIN — A building containing two dwelling units separated by a
party wall, each having independent outside access and open space
on three sides.
(1)
DUPLEX — A building containing two dwelling units from ground
to roof, each of which has independent outside access, and is open
on all sides.
(2)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building containing not
more than six dwelling units separated by parallel party walls, each of
which has only one dwelling from ground to roof, independent outside
access, not more than two walls in common with adjacent units and
open space to the front and rear (internal units) or front, rear and one
side (end units); a townhouse; a rowhouse.
C.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units, including three-family dwelling (triplex), four-family
dwellings (fourplex or quadraplex), townhouses and rowhouses (singlefamily
attached), multiplex, and apartment buildings. [Amended
2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
FOURPLEX; QUADRAPLEX — A building containing four dwelling
units, each of which has independent outside access, two
nonparallel walls in common with adjacent dwelling units and open
space on two nonparallel sides.
(1)
TRIPLEX — A building containing three dwelling units, each of
which has independent outside access, at least one party wall in
common with an adjacent dwelling unit and open space on at least
two sides.
(2)
(3) TOWNHOUSE; ROWHOUSE — A single-family attached dwelling.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit intended for rental located either
within an apartment building or within a structure otherwise
permitted by this chapter.
(4)
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building containing three or more
apartment dwelling units separated by party walls, one or more
of which dwelling units may be located from ground to roof, and
common outside access and hallways, intended to be owned by
a single entity and used specifically for residential purposes and
originally constructed as such.
(5)
MULTIPLEX — A building containing more than four dwelling
units, each having a common interior corridor or hallway access,
at least one party wall in common with an adjacent dwelling unit
and each unit intended to be an individually owned and occupied
dwelling unit. [Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
(6)
D.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:571
of instruction and learning. The term shall include the uses identified in
§ 84-57.10B and C of this chapter but shall exclude driver training schools,
heavy equipment training, riding schools, child day-care centers, adult daycare
centers, family day-care homes and group day-care homes.[Amended
4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989; 10-10-2012 by Ord. No. 07-2012]
EFFECTIVE VISUAL SCREEN — A dense but not necessarily opaque barrier
obstructing casual observation of an area from nearby areas. When trees or
shrubbery are employed for this purpose, they shall be sufficiently dense to
obstruct casual observation within the height range specified in this chapter
and shall be effective at all times of the year.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord.
No. 7-1988]
EMERGENCY — A condition that 1) constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or 2) has caused or is
likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss
of the services provided.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — The provision for the immediate care
and treatment of acutely ill or injured people within a hospital initially in an
emergency room, including the provision for ancillary emergency dispatch
services, such as EMS units and transport to the hospital by ambulance,
helicopter or similar emergency response vehicle of ill or injured
people.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98]
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SUPPORT SERVICES — Buildings and facilities for
parking or storage of emergency vehicles and support personnel, such as
EMS personnel and vehicles, including ambulances, helicopters and similar
emergency response vehicles designed or intended for and/or engaged in
the transport of acutely ill or injured people.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 14-98]
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of a tract
of land occupied by an existing use.
ESCORT — A person who for consideration agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 5-2003]
ESSENTIAL UTILITIES — Includes sewerage, water, gas and electric lines
and related appurtenances used to serve development within the Township,
but not including cross-county or cross-country transmission lines or other
utilities not required to serve the Township.[Added 8-10-2011 by Ord. No.
13-2011]
FAMILY — One or more persons living in a single-dwelling unit and
functioning as a common household. A family shall not include more than
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:572
four persons who are not related to each other by blood, official foster
relationship, marriage or adoption. The term "family" may specifically
include a greater number of unrelated persons living within a permitted
group home subject to the regulations established in § 84-57.7 of this
chapter. This definition excludes occupants of a club, dormitory, fraternity,
sorority house, boardinghouse or rooming house and student
home.[Amended 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999; 9-25-2002 by Ord. No.
11-2002; 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No.
02-2013]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A building used principally as a residence
by one adult caregiver in which child day-care is provided simultaneously
for six or fewer children who are not all related to the resident caregiver.
Such residential property shall have outdoor play area of sufficient size to
accommodate six children at once which shall be enclosed with at least a
four-foot-high continuous barrier.[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord.
No. 1-2015]
FINANCIAL SERVICE — A type of commercial activity wherein the service
rendered is available to the general public and is related to the management
of money. Examples are banks, savings and loan associations, brokerages,
accountants, tax consultants, investment counselors and similar
activities.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device for the purpose of producing
a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion,
deflagration or detonation that meets the definition of 1.4 G fireworks or
1.3 G fireworks as set forth in the 2003 International Fire Code, including,
but not limited to, those compositions or devices as defined in APA Standard
87-1.[Added 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
FLAGPOLE — A flagstaff designed and solely intended for the patriotic
display of the flag of the United States of America, or its armed forces,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof, or
the flag of a group or organization, or combination thereof, and for no
other purpose. A flagpole shall not include a standard antenna, a standard
antenna support structure, a commercial communications antenna support
structure, tower, antenna or any other structure designed, intended or
capable of supporting any other use or purpose.[Added 9-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 10-2002]
FLEXIBLE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT OPTION — A residential development
option which is permitted by conditional use of the Board of Supervisors
in the R-3B Zoning District which is intended to allow flexibility in building
and dwelling unit design and to facilitate the preservation of open space
for the public use and enjoyment of Township residents. A flexible design
development may include semidetached dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings and single-family detached dwellings subject to the design
standards in Article IVB of this chapter.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
9-2008]
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:573
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of the several floors of a building or
buildings measured from the face of the exterior walls or from center lines
of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area includes, but is
not limited to, the following;
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total allowable floor area for a given lot divided
by the area of that lot. (For example, a building containing 15,000 square
feet of floor area on a given lot of 10,000 square feet of lot area has a floor
area ratio of 1.5.)
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.[Added 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001]
FORT WORTH INSERT TOWER — A nonfreestanding structure which is
attached to an electrical transmission tower and houses commercial
communications antennas and their support members and achieves lateral
bracing by direct attachment to the transmission tower.[Added 6-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2-2014]
FREESTANDING WALL — A vertical element with a horizontal length-tothickness
ratio greater than three, used to enclose, divide or protect space.
Such term shall not include a retaining wall.[Added 6-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 6-2006]
FRONT YARD — See "yard."
GARAGE, PRIVATE [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000] —
A. Basement space, if it meets the requirements of a building story.
Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space (whether or not a floor has
been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
B.
Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided
that over 50% of the perimeter of these is enclosed.
C.
Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where
located within the building.
D.
Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory off-street
parking or used for loading berths.
E.
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, excluding space used
for air-conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar
mechanical equipment serving the building and cellar space.
F.
Any area used for outdoor dining. [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No.
7-2005]
G.
An accessory structure to store and/or park four or fewer passenger
motor vehicles, either attached to or separate from a principal building,
A.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:574
GAS AND LIQUID PIPELINE FACILITY — Includes a pipeline and all
associated equipment and buildings used or intended to be used for the
transportation or distribution of gases and liquids, including but not limited
to, anhydrous ammonia, petroleum, or petroleum products such as propane,
butane, ethane, natural gas, natural gas liquids, benzene, gasoline, jet
fuel, diesel fuel, fuel oil and kerosene, and any hazardous liquids under
pressure in a gaseous state or any and all liquids or gases that are defined
as hazardous liquids or gases by federal or state environmental or safety
statutes and implementing regulations, including but not limited to the
Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act, 49 U.S.C. § 60101 et seq., as the same
may be amended from time to time.[Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014;
amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, together with any
structure thereon, used for:
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy-generating system that
uses the earth's thermal properties in conjunction with electricity to provide
greater efficiency in the heating and cooling of buildings.[Added
4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
GEOTHERMAL PUMP HOUSE — A structure or building used to house
pumps and piping associated with a geothermal heating and cooling system.
All equipment associated with such pump house must be located inside of
the building or subsurface.[Added 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 13-2011]
GOLF COURSE — A tract of ground laid out and designed in compliance
with minimum USGA regulations as an outdoor course to accommodate a
series of either nine or 18 holes of golf; also, a country club providing a
golf course, whether publicly owned or open to the public or a privately
owned club available only to those who are members. Neither a commercial
driving range, miniature golf course nor chip-and-putt golf facility shall be
considered a golf course for purposes of this definition.[Added 10-11-1988
by Ord. No. 9-1988; amended 1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993]
GOVERNMENTAL UTILITY — A utility which is owned, operated or
maintained by the Township, Municipal Authority or other agency or
authority of the Township or Municipal Authority for the purpose of
providing sanitary sewage disposal, stormwater control, water supply,
energy, telephone or other utility services within a defined service area
solely within the Township or adjacent municipality.[Added 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
in conformance with all area and bulk regulations of the zoning district
involved.
B. Used only for storage purposes.
The retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such
as lubrication and handwashing of motor vehicles.
A.
The sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or other
automobile accessories.
B.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:575
GRASSCRETE — A type of surfacing, usually concrete, wherein the paving
elements are preformed and feature a pattern of perforations creating a
permeable surface and allowing grass to grow within the space of the
perforations.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
GREEN AREA — That portion of tract or lot maintained in its natural state
or landscaped with shrubs, trees, lawn and is not occupied by any buildings,
paved surfaces or man-made structures.
GREENWAY LANDS — The open space land which is required to be held
in single and separate ownership in a flexible design development option
subject to the standards in § 84-14.6B(5) of this chapter.[Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008]
GROSS DEVELOPMENT TRACT AREA — The total area of the development
tract lying within the lot lines, except for areas of existing street right-ofways.[
Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008]
GROSS FLOOR AREA — "Floor area" as defined in this section.[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988173]
GROUND ARRAY — An arrangement of solar panels or solar energy system
including frames directly supported by the ground and not mounted on a
building.[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A building in which child day-care is provided
for more than six but fewer than 12 children at any one time; a child days
center.[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
GROUP HOME — The use of any lawful dwelling unit which meets all of the
following criteria: involves the care or housing of the maximum number of
persons permitted by the group home standards of § 84-57.7 of this chapter;
meets all other standards of § 84-57.7; involves persons functioning as a
common household; involves providing nonroutine support services and
oversight to persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within
an institution or other care facility because of physical disability, old age,
mental retardation or illness or other handicap as defined by applicable
federal law, including § 3602(h) of the Fair Housing Act, as from time to time
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h); does not constitute a treatment center; and
does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who could reasonably
be considered a threat to the physical safety of others.[Added 3-10-1999
by Ord. No. 2-1999]
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, that holds a permit from the Pennsylvania Department
of Health to grow and process medical marijuana.[Added 4-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 1-2017]
HAZARDOUS LIQUID AND/OR GASES — Any liquid or gas of any kind,
including but not limited to anhydrous ammonia, petroleum, or petroleum
173. Editor's Note: This ordinance also added the former definition of "health club," which
immediately followed this definition and which was repealed 1-23-1993 by Ord. No.
1-1993.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:576
products such as propane, ethane, butane, natural gas, natural gas liquids,
benzene, gasoline, jet fuel, diesel fuel, fuel oil and kerosene, any hazardous
liquid under pressure in a gaseous state and any and all hazardous liquids
that are defined as hazardous by federal or state environmental or safety
statutes and implementing regulations, including but not limited to the
Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act, 49 U.S.C. § 60101 et seq., as the same
may be amended from time to time.[Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014;
amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
HAZARDOUS LIQUID AND/OR GAS PIPELINE — Any transmission pipeline
for liquids and/or gases including within a storage field and any pipeline
used for the transmission of materials such as, but not limited to, anhydrous
ammonia, petroleum or petroleum products such as propane, ethane,
butane, natural gas, natural gas liquids, benzene, gasoline, jet fuel, diesel
fuel, fuel oil and kerosene, and any hazardous liquids under pressure in a
gaseous state or any and all liquids or gases that are defined as hazardous
liquids or gases by federal or state environmental or safety statutes and
implementing regulations, including but not limited to the Hazardous Liquid
Pipeline Safety Act, 49 U.S.C. § 60101 et seq., as the same may be amended
from time to time.[Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014; amended
10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of a building to:
HEIGHT OF TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured from
the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a towerbased
WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 10-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 10-1996]
A. The highest point of the roof, in the case of a flat roof.
B. The mean height between eaves and ridge, in the case of a pitched roof.
The highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly above
the roofline, and whose area equals or exceeds 20% of the ground floor
area of the building which supports it.174
C.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
174. Editor's Note: The former definition of "height of sign," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-20-1985 by Ord. No. 15-1985.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:577
HOME OCCUPATION [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994] — An
accessory use which is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use
of the dwelling unit and occupies not more than 25% of total floor area
of such dwelling unit or 500 square feet, whichever is less. Such use is
customarily carried on within a dwelling unit by one or more occupants of
such dwelling unit, except that one person not residing in such dwelling unit
may be employed.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A home occupation does not permit the following operations:
(1) Selling articles produced elsewhere than on the premises.
(2) Having exterior displays of goods visible from the outside.
(3) Storing materials or products outside the dwelling unit.
A.
Such occupation shall not require other internal or external alteration
or involve construction features not customarily found in a dwelling
or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment which would change
the fire rating of the structure. [Amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No.
11-1998]
B.
No mechanical or commercial equipment is used except such as may be
used for domestic or household purposes or as deemed similar in power
and type.
C.
The conducting of an animal hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor, clinic
or other operation which provides any type of medical, homeopathic
or massage services, hospital, kennel or any similar use shall not be
deemed to be a home occupation. [Amended 2-12-2003 by Ord. No.
3-2003]
D.
No home-related business shall be conducted as a home occupation
which involves any outdoor use or activity in conjunction therewith,
including but not limited to the outdoor storage of material, equipment
or products, parking accommodations or the parking or keeping of
employee vehicles, whether on the lot or an adjacent public street,
except one employee parking space for an employee performing service
solely within the home, and the accommodation of one business motor
vehicle owned by the home owner not exceeding in weight and/or in
E.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:578
HOME-RELATED BUSINESS — A routine and customary accessory use
which:[Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
HOSPITAL — An institution having an organized medical staff providing
emergency and in-patient diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitation, medical
and surgical care, treatment and services for the care of persons who are
sick, injured, diseased, disabled or pregnant regardless of the length of time
the patient remains hospitalized, including the provision for emergency
medical support services; a general hospital. Nothing in this definition
shall be construed to preclude either the designation of a hospital as a
trauma center or the provision of mental health care and treatment within
a hospital, but the term shall not include facilities caring exclusively for the
mentally ill.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98]
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or a group of two or more detached or
semidetached buildings located an a lot held in single and separate
ownership, designed, intended and used principally for providing sleeping
accommodations to the transient public in rooms or suites, which may
include a kitchen facility and which are provided with daily maid service.
The following ancillary facilities may be provided as an integral part of the
facility within the building or buildings on the lot, provided, however, that
no gambling or electronic gambling devices shall be permitted: restaurant,
coffee shop, lounge, meeting rooms, banquet facilities and shops for the
retail sale of books, papers, magazines, clothing and sundries to guests;
recreation facilities for use only by registered guests, such as a swimming
pool, exercise room or area, and similar ancillary facilities commonly
accessory to a hotel/motel facility may be provided either in the building or
immediately outside the building on the lot in an area specifically designed
and designated for such ancillary use. Hotels are generally, but not
exclusively, designed so that rooms are entered primarily from an interior
lobby, corridor or hallway. Motels are generally, but not exclusively,
designed so that access to rooms is provided directly or in close proximity
to automobile parking spaces serving such units. Only for the purpose of
length the size specified in § 84-57.2 of this Code. [Added 8-26-1998
by Ord. No. 11-1998]
Prior to undertaking the conduct of a home occupation the owner shall
secure a permit authorizing the home occupation from the Township
Zoning Officer. [Added 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 11-1998]
F.
No educational use shall be conducted as a home occupation which
involves instruction or tutoring in one group to more than three
individuals at any one time, or that in any manner appears as or
constitutes a school. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
G.
A. Is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit; and
Is not performed within a dwelling unit or accessory structure, such
as is the case with a home occupation, but may be administered or
managed from the dwelling unit and/or an accessory structure and
complies with the standards in § 84-57.19.
B.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:579
calculating required parking spaces shall the hotel or motel rooms or suites
be considered discrete from other ancillary facilities.[Added 6-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-1988; amended 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 7-97]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with material to the extent that it is resistant to infiltration by water,
including, but not limited to, conventional impervious surfaces such as
paved streets and driveways, compacted stone, sidewalks and walkways,
concrete pavers, patios, roofs, buildings, and structures. Paving includes
any hard surface, such as concrete, cobblestones, bricks, flagstones, gravel
(either compacted or used by motor vehicles), or any similar
material.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988; amended 3-10-2004
by Ord. No. 3-2004]
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY — A building containing multiple
residential dwelling units for persons who are age 55 years of age and older
which qualifies for the exemption to the prohibition against discrimination
based on familial status found in Section 3607(b)(1) of the United States
Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607(b)(1), and the Housing for Older Persons
Act of 1995 and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The facility may
include accessory uses such as common kitchen facilities and dining rooms,
activity and meeting rooms, storage areas, recreation and exercise
facilities, sundries store, administrative offices and a beauty/barber
shop.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
IN-LAW SUITE — A dwelling unit especially created for and limited to
occupancy by a relative of the residents of the principal dwelling unit. Such
unit may also house a spouse of such relative.[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 5-2016]
IN-PATIENT MEDICAL SERVICES — The care, diagnosis and treatment
within a hospital of human patients by duly licensed physicians, physicians'
assistants, registered nurses, dentists, dental hygienists, medical
technicians, therapists, opticians, pharmacists and similar
caregivers.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98]
INTERIOR LANDSCAPING — Landscaping provided in addition to those on
the parking lot perimeter and occupying land which might otherwise be
paved for use as a driveway, aisle or parking space.[Added 6-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-1988]
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more
unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles or the major part thereof shall be
deemed to make a junkyard.
KENNEL — A use of land or buildings where two or more cats or dogs are
kept on a temporary basis for the purpose of breeding, boarding, raising,
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:580
training, sale or show purposes.[Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994;
amended 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 11-1998]
LANDSCAPING — The planting of grass or other appropriate ground cover
in unbuilt or unsurfaced areas but not land used for agricultural purposes;
includes the planting of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, as well
as the maintenance and replacement thereof, for the purpose of controlling
erosion, retaining precipitation and protecting the public health, safety and
welfare.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
LAUNDROMAT — A facility which provides washing and drying machines
for clothing, operated by the customer and not by employees of the
facility.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
LEARNING CENTER — A facility which provides supplemental educational
support and tutoring services for students. Such use shall not be defined
as an "educational use" and shall not include day-care facilities.[Added
11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012
LIFESTYLE APARTMENT — An apartment building/community offering
amenities such as, but not limited to, an outdoor pool, a BYOB bar and
recreation area, a gym, a yoga studio, a business center, a dog washing
station, and a dog run area. The lifestyle apartment shall offer more studio
and one-bedroom units than two-bedroom units and shall include underbuilding
parking. Lifestyle apartments shall not provide balconies. Lifestyle
apartments shall be located within 1/4 mile of a major arterial road in the
Township.[Added 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
LOADING AREA — That portion of an industrial or commercial lot which
provides access to the facility for cargo vehicles for the purpose of
delivering supplies or raw materials or for carrying away finished products
or refuse.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
LOADING BERTH — That portion of a loading area which is designed to
accommodate a single vehicle.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
LOT AREA — The area lying within the lot lines excluding areas of existing
or proposed street rights-of-way.[Added 9-12-1973 by Ord. No. 6-1973;
amended 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 13-2011]
LOT, CORNER — A lot bounded on at least two sides by streets whenever
the lines of such streets, when extended, form an interior angle of 135° or
less. On a corner lot, each such adjacent street line shall be considered to be
a front lot line and each yard contiguous to the street shall be a front yard.
All of the other yards on the lot shall be considered side yards.[Amended
9-22-1987 by Ord. No. 11-1987; 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of the total ground floor area of all buildings
on a lot to the total area of the lot on which they are located.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street line.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:581
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, except a front lot line, which is parallel
to or within 45° of being parallel to and does not intersect any street line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. (See definition of "corner lot" for requirements.)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
In the case of the corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. (See definition of "corner lot" for requirements.).
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lines measured at right
angles to the lot depth.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area is not considered
a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as
to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.[Added 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
LUMBERYARD — A commercial activity characterized by the sale or storage
of unfinished lumber products.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
MAIN ASSEMBLY ROOM — An auditorium or similar large room, with or
without permanent seating, intended or used for gatherings. If a facility
contains more than one such room, this term shall apply to the
largest.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
MAJOR STREET or THROUGH HIGHWAY (ARTERIAL) — A street serving
a large volume of comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic,
including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or a highway on which
preference is given to the through movement of traffic at the expense of
cross traffic.[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
MANSION — The principal residential building existing on the effective
date of this section located on a country house estate.[Added 4-28-1992
by Ord. No. 3-1992]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure intended for permanent occupancy,
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities.[Amended 10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.[Amended 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
MEDICAL CLINIC — A medical establishment offering outpatient medical
or dental services only, operated by two or more physicians or two or
more dentists, working cooperatively, who are licensed to practice medicine
or dentistry in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 3-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 2-1999]
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:582
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16 of
2016.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING — An office building occupied exclusively by
duly licensed physicians, physicians' assistants, registered nurses, dentists,
dental hygienists, therapists, opticians, pharmacists and similar caregivers
providing out-patient medical services.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No.
14-98]
MICROBREWERY — A facility where more than 250 barrels and less than
15,000 barrels of malt or brewed beverages are produced on-premises on
an annual basis and then sold or distributed for off-premises consumption,
which is not a restaurant use. A microbrewery must be licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board or any successor agency of the
commonwealth.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
MICROWAVE ANTENNA FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION — A
parabolic ground-based reflector, together with its pedestal and any other
attachments and parts thereof, commonly referred to as a "dish-shaped
antenna," used or intended to receive radio or electromagnetic waves from
an overhead satellite: a microwave dish.[Added 6-14-1983 by Ord. No.
3-1983; amended 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
MINERAL — An inorganic substance occurring naturally in the earth and
having a consistent and distinctive set of physical properties and a
composition that can be expressed by a chemical formula.[Added 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001]
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The act or process of extracting
minerals.[Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.175[Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
MINIWAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of
buildings that are divided into individual units, each of which unit is
available for rent or lease to the public for the self-storage of tangible
personal property. Outdoor storage is only permitted in designated locations
on the property if approved in the land development plan for such
use.[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
MINOR/LOCAL STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
175. Editor's Note: The definition of "miniwarehouse," added 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1990,
which immediately followed, was repealed 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007. See now the
definition of "miniwarehouse/storage facility."
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:583
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 3-1990]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.176[Added 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-1990]
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single-pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
MOTORCYCLE OR MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE — A vehicle generally with
two wheels in tandem, propelled by an internal-combustion engine, and
sometimes having a sidecar with one wheel.[Added 3-28-2001 by Ord.
No. 4-2001]
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled by an internal
combustion engine or other self-contained power source and is intended for
operation on a street or highway.[Added 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
MULTIPURPOSE VEHICLE — A motor vehicle constructed on a truck
chassis, equipped with four-wheel or all-wheel drive, and meeting federally
regulated design criteria which incorporate approach, departure and
ground clearance requirements allowing occasional off-road operation. 177
[Added 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 5-1996]
NFPA 1124 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124,
Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.[Added
11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
NIGHTCLUB ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility within a building combining
a restaurant and public amusement facility as principal uses. The term
includes cabarets, off-track betting-type establishments, and dinnertheaters,
as well as nightclubs.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
176. Editor's Note: The former definition of "motel," which immediately followed this
definition, was superseded 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 7-97. See now "hotel/motel." The former
definition of "multifamily," added 12-4-1979 by Ord. No. 8-79, which immediately followed
"motel," was repealed 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994.
177. Editor’s Note: The definition of “new construction,” as amended, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:584
patient traffic (whether vehicular or pedestrian) pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:[Added 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter
or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to
its location by reason of annexation. Nonconforming structures include but
are not limited to nonconforming signs.[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses;
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling;
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature;
C.
There should be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights;
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood;
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood;
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area; and
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:585
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All nontower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Nontower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No.
1-2015]
NOVELTIES — Articles of trade having amusement value and whose appeal
is often transitory, and which is limited to those items for sale described
in American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1, Section
*3.2.[Added 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 5-2003]
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully
opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No.
5-2003]
NURSING HOME — An extended- or intermediate-care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals
who, due to advanced age, illness or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
OFFICE BUILDING — A building used primarily for business services,
professional and personal services, financial services, government functions
or for administrative, managerial or clerical functions.[Added 6-14-1988
by Ord. No. 7-1988]
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing;
A.
Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
C.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:586
OFFICE PARK — A group of office buildings which have been developed
according to a development plan in a parklike or campuslike setting.[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of cesspools,
septic tanks or other approved means within the confines of the lot on which
the use is located.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — The supply of water to a single user from a
private well.178
OUTPATIENT MEDICAL SERVICES — The care, diagnosis and treatment of
human patients by duly licensed physicians, physician assistants, registered
nurses, dentists, dental hygienists, medical technicians, therapists,
opticians, pharmacists and similar caregivers in an outpatient setting,
limited to the office of a physician, dentist or other licensed caregiver or
in an ambulatory care center. Outpatient medical services shall not include
any overnight stay except as otherwise permitted in connection with an
ambulatory care center.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98; amended
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017]
PARKING AREA — A public or private lot or structure designed and used for
the storage of motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages and private
driveways.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PARKING AREA/SPACE SETBACK LINE — An established line within a
property defining the minimum required distance between any parking area
or space to be installed and an adjacent right-of-way or street line.[Added
9-23-1986 by Ord. No. 12-1986]
PARKING GARAGE — A structure designed and used to shelter or store
motor vehicles.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PARKING LOT — An area of land which is used for the temporary storage
of motor vehicles, wherein the vehicles are not enclosed or sheltered by a
structure of any kind.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PARKING SPACE — An open space with a dustless, all-weather surface
in a parking area intended to provide a temporary storage area for one
motor vehicle and designed to conform to the specifications in
§ 84-55E.[Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PARKING STALL — Interchangeable with parking space.[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE — Open space that does not include active
recreation facilities (such as athletic fields) but which may include trails,
picnic areas and pathways and which is primarily maintained in a relatively
natural landscaped or open grass manner.[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
9-2008]
PAVED AREA — The percentage of the lot area covered by paved surfaces,
including but not necessarily limited to parking areas, parking spaces,
178. Editor's Note: The former definition of “open space” was repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
9-2008. See now “common open space.”
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:587
parking lots, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, patios, terraces and similar
surfaces.[Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act 247 of 1968,
as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as the same is from time to time amended,
cited in this chapter as "MPC."179[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
PERIMETER LANDSCAPING — Landscaping between the paved parking
area, including aisles and driveways, and property lines and street right-ofway
lines.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or any other similar entity.
PERSONAL SERVICE — A type of service oriented to personal needs of
members of the general public, but not one involving either a professional
service or the retail or wholesale sales of products. Personal services
include barber, hairdresser, beautician, photographer, tailor, cleaning and
pressing establishment, laundromat, shoe repair, household appliance
repair, locksmith and similar services.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988; 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
PHARMACY/DRUG STORE — An area of land, together with any structures
erected thereon, including drive-through lanes under canopy, where
medical prescriptions are filled and prescription and over-the-counter
drugs, medical supplies, food, beverages, personal care items, greeting
cards and similar retail items are sold in one store under one operator as
further limited by the criteria in § 84-57.13.[Added 11-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 14-98; amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
PHYSICAL THERAPY FACILITY — A facility where licensed physical
therapists provide treatment to patients suffering from disease or injury
by physical means, such as exercise, massage, infrared or ultraviolet light,
heat, electrotherapy, hydrotherapy or physiotherapy.[Added 7-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 6-2008]
PIPELINE IMPACT RADIUS — The distance within which the potential
failure of a hazardous liquid pipeline and/or gas pipeline could have
significant impact to people or property, including but not limited to noise,
environmental, visual and other impacts which may be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the community. The pipeline impact radius
for a hazardous liquid and/or gas pipeline shall be calculated in the same
manner as the potential impact radius defined by federal or state laws,
including, but not limited to Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as
the same may from time to time be amended.[Added 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
PRIMARY PARKING — That portion of a parking area which is surfaced and
marked in accordance with the standards of this chapter and is suitable for
daily use.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:588
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource and Conservation
Services County Soil Survey.[Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
PRIVATE CLUB — Any land or building which serves as a meeting place for
a selected membership, paying a membership fee, together with recreation
and dining facilities which are not open to the general public, and exclusive
of those facilities defined herein as a "public amusement facility" or a
"public recreation facility"; a lodge.[Added 1-23-1993 by Ord. No.
1-1993]
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE — A type of service provided by a licensed
professional holding a degree from an accredited institution of higher
learning in the discipline required for the professional service provided.
Examples are physician, dentist, veterinarian, psychologist, lawyer,
engineer, architect and similar professional.180[Added 3-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2-1999]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986, P.L. 388, No. 84, known as the "Sunshine Act."181[Added 5-8-1990
by Ord. No. 3-1990]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in this Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not
be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of the hearing. Where the hearing to be held will
include consideration of a proposed zoning amendment to the Zoning Map,
then such proposed amendment must be additionally noticed by the posting
along the perimeter of the affected lot at least one week prior to the date of
hearing.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
PUBLIC PARK — A tract of land established and owned by a governmental
entity primarily for passive recreational use and enjoyment of the general
public without the payment of any fee or other charge and providing such
ancillary public facilities as are authorized by the governmental entity, such
as walking, jogging and biking trails, ballfields and other athletic facilities,
picnic areas and facilities of the same general character. A public park is
permitted in all zoning districts established in § 84-4A.[Added 1-23-1993
by Ord. No. 1-1993]
180. Editor's Note: The definition of "public amusement facility," added 1-23-1993 by Ord. No.
1-1993, which immediately followed, was repealed 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007. See
now definition of "public place of amusement or recreation."
181. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:589
PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY — A maintained parking area available and
intended for use by the general public, usually but not necessarily in
exchange for a fee.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
PUBLIC PLACE OF AMUSEMENT or RECREATION — Any facility providing
recreation and/or amusement to the general public and which may or
may not charge an admission or use fee. A public place of amusement
or recreation includes, but is not limited to, movie theaters, live theaters,
dinner theaters, concert halls, arcades, statutorily authorized betting
parlors, bowling alleys, amusement parks, fairgrounds, hockey rinks, rolleror
ice-skating rinks, moonbounce facilities, batting cages, public golf
courses, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, chip-and-putt golf courses,
tennis courts, paddle tennis courts, squash courts, handball courts, facilities
providing table games, such as billiards, pool and table tennis or any facility
of the same general character.[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
PUBLIC RECREATION — Leisure-time activities, including but not limited
to sports and entertainment that are open to anyone without restriction,
except for rules and standards of conduct and use.182
PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary
sewer system served by a central sewage treatment plant approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health and operated by a municipality or
designated authority or private company under the jurisdiction of the Public
Utility Commission.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A public utility as that term is defined in the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Code, 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.[Added
8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 13-2011]
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILTY — A facility owned and operated by a public
utility as defined in this chapter.[Added 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 13-2011;
amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014; 10-8-2014 by Ord. No.
4-2014]
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — The supply of water to a user from a public
water supply approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and
operated by a municipality or designated authority or private company
under the jurisdiction of the Public Utility Commission.
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."
RECEPTION HALL — An area within a mansion on a country house estate
capable of being used for rental facilities for banquets, weddings, parties,
meetings, receptions and similar affairs without extensive alteration and
not involving expansion or extension of the mansion and meeting the
requirements of § 84-57.6 of this chapter.[Added 4-28-1992 by Ord. No.
3-1992]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Added 10-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 10-1996]
182. Editor's Note: The definition of "public recreation facility," added 1-23-1993 by Ord. No.
1-1993, which immediately followed, was repealed 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007. See
now the definition of "public place of amusement or recreation."
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:590
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or nontower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and base stations.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are closely related by blood,
marriage, adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the
following relationships: brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law or parent-in-law.[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 5-2016]
RENTAL BUSINESS — A commercial use in which machinery, equipment
and goods are rented to customers for temporary use pursuant to a shortterm
rental contract, including the sale of machinery, equipment and goods
as an accessory use. For the purposes of this definition, "machinery" means
equipment which requires a motor to operate; "equipment" means any
nonmotorized device permanently attached to and movable on wheels;
and "goods" means any other rental items. This use shall not include an
automobile rental facility.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
RESERVE PARKING — That portion of a parking area which has been
designed according to the standards in this chapter and is intended for
occasional use or when the primary parking area is fully occupied.[Added
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
RESTAURANT — An establishment furnishing food and beverages to the
public for consumption on the premises or for consumption off the premises,
or both, and which provides within the building an individual seating
capacity for more than 35 patrons or has more than eight separate
tables.[Amended 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 9-1989]
RESTRICTED ACCESS — A driveway or private street restricted by gate,
automatic card access, barrier, or some manner of limited access for entry
only by the owners of dwellings or their invitees.[Added 2-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 3-2005]
RETAIL SALES — The sale of goods to the general public for personal or
household consumption and the rendering of services incidental to the sale
of such goods.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
RETAINING WALL — A wall which provides lateral support to vertical
slopes of soil.[Added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006]
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A development of individually owned
dwelling units with restricted access limited to entry by the residents of
A. Built on a single chassis.
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection.
B.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
C.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:591
the development which may include a community center and is designed
as housing for older person as defined in Title 42, Section 3607, of the
Code of Federal Regulations. The residents thereof need not be actually
retired from their occupation or employment, provided that the age and
other requirements of the statute are met.[Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No.
3-2005]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved as a street or crosswalk or for other public
purposes.
ROOFTOP ARRAY — An arrangement of solar panels or solar energy system
including frames mounted on a roof, whether pitched or flat, or a
building.[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
SCHOOL PARKING GARAGE — A structure containing two or more parking
levels, which is owned and operated by a college, university, school district
or entity operating a private school, designed and intended for the
temporary parking of motor vehicles of students and faculty of an
educational use.[Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — See "miniwarehouse."[Added 10-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 11-2007]
SEMINUDE — The state of dress in which clothing partially or opaquely
covers specified anatomical areas.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
SERVICE STATION — Facility for the sale of gasoline and other petroleum
products to the general public, including repair and maintenance of motor
vehicles; a gasoline service station.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988]
SETBACK — See "building setback line."
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter
center.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
SHED — A detached building or structure having no permanent foundation
with dimensions which are not greater than 250 square feet in area and 12
feet in height measured at the peak of the roof and which is used solely
for storage and not for the housing of animals or as living or sleeping
quarters.[Added 7-7-1987 by Ord. No. 9-1987; amended 6-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 03-2013]
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or person of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:592
SHOPPING CENTER — A discrete use allowed only in the C-2 Commercial
Shopping Center District, designed and developed as an integrated unit,
consisting of multiple retail sales and personal service uses permitted in
the C-2 District by the use regulations of § 84-21, arranged as contiguous
but separate stores, shops and establishments in one or more buildings
and sharing common vehicular and pedestrian access and parking.[Added
10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 10-1978; amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."
SIGN — For definitions related to signs, see § 84-52B of Article
XIV.[Amended 8-20-1985 by Ord. No. 15-1985183]
SILO — A tall cylindrical structure that is located on a farm and is used to
store crops for animal feed.[Added 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SINGLE CONTINUOUS COMMON TRACT/RESIDENTIAL BOUNDARY —
All of the title line courses and distances and portions thereof which are
shared by the tract and one or more parcels, which form an uninterrupted
residential use. The deviation between two adjacent courses of more than
15° shall make the meeting point of the two courses the ends of two single
continuous common tract/residential boundaries.[Added 10-11-1988 by
Ord. No. 9-1988184]
SITE — A parcel of land that contains a wireless communications facility
and associated parking.[Added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998]
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES (SWF) — A type of wireless communication
facility (WCF) as specifically defined by the Federal Communications
Commission in Part 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.[Added
11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — A structure used to collect energy from
the sun that is used to produce heat or electricity.[Added 9-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 10-2002]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — The components and subsystems that in
combination convert solar energy into electric energy suitable for use. The
term is limited to photovoltaic solar power systems.[Added 4-25-2012 by
Ord. No. 04-2012]
SOLAR PANEL — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by
way of a solar energy system.[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "sign, advertising,"
"sign, business," and "sign, temporary," which immediately followed this definition.
184. Editor's Note: This ordinance also added the former definition of "social club," which
immediately followed this definition and which was repealed 5-25-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:593
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely covered.[Added 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:[Added 4-9-2003
by Ord. No. 5-2003]
STACKING SPACE — Off-street space for a motor vehicle waiting to enter a
parking area or car wash. Stacking spaces may occupy the driveway(s), and
each space shall occupy a block 10 by 20 feet. Stacking spaces shall not be
delineated by painted lines.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No.
1-2015]
STEEPLE — A tall tapering structure narrowing to a point at the top that is
located on the roof of or is a part of the superstructure of a church or other
place of worship.[Added 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any floor
and the next floor above it. If there is not more than one floor, the space
between any floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.[Amended
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
STREET, CENTER LINE OF — A line which is an equal distance from both
street lines.
STREET LINE — A right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having ascertainable stationary
location on land or water or on land and water, whether or not affixed
to the land. The term "structure" shall include, but not be limited to,
buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages,
flagpoles, windmills, watertowers, silos, solar energy collectors, and similar
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsection A and B above.
C.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:594
constructions. "Structures" shall be interpreted as including the words "or
part thereof".[Amended 12-1-1987 by Ord. No. 16-1987; 9-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 10-2002]
STUDENT — Any individual who is enrolled or has made application and
been accepted at a university, college or trade school and is taking at
least six credit hours and whose primary occupation is as a student or
who is on semester or summer break from studies at a college, university
or trade school. The term “student” shall apply to both undergraduate
and graduate students alike.[Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002;
amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013]
STUDENT HOME — Living arrangement for at least two students up to
a maximum of four students (as defined in this chapter) unrelated by
blood, marriage or legal adoption. A student home shall not include
dormitories.[Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013]
STUDENT HOUSING — A building owned and managed by a private school,
college or university or by a private entity which owns and operates student
housing for college or university students recognized and approved for such
purpose by the college or university at which such students are enrolled,
which contains dwelling rooms, apartments or other living units that
provide sleeping and living accommodations solely for students enrolled at
the private school, college or university. Student housing shall not include
the conversion or the use of single-family dwellings for the purpose of
renting rooms or space to individuals attending a school, college or
university.[Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.[Added 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of the structure, cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. Substantial improvement is considered to occur when
the first alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of
the structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or State Inventory of Historic Places.[Added 6-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-1988; amended 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — [Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
A.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:595
SWIMMING POOL — A temporary or permanent structure containing a pool
of water with a minimum depth of two feet.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure other than a permanent facility
with fixed utility connections which is in use or in place for a period of
20 consecutive calendar days or less and is dedicated to the storage and
sale of consumer fireworks and related items; the term includes temporary
retail sales stands, tents, canopies, and membrane structures meeting the
specifications of NFPA 1124. The term shall not include a facility that is not
licensed to sell consumer fireworks under this chapter.[Added 11-26-2018
by Ord. No. 8-2018]
THROUGH LOT — A lot (with the exception of a corner lot) that has frontage
on two public streets.[Added 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 2-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 1-2015]
TRACT COVERAGE — The total gross area of a tract of land that is covered
by impervious coverage, such as principal and accessory buildings,
structures, streets, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, pathways,
recreational facilities and other similar surfaces that prohibit or slow the
percolation of water into the soil.[Added 10-11-1988 by Ord. No.
9-1988]
TRACT PERIMETER — The outer boundaries, usually title lines, that
circumscribe, delimit and define the gross area of a tract of land.[Added
10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 9-1988]
TRANSMITTER — Any instrument, equipment or device that generates
or amplifies or is capable of generating or amplifying a carrier wave or
impulse, modulates it with a signal, as derived from speech, music, images
or other sources, and radiates the resulting signal from an antenna for
conveyance to a remote receiver, whether land-based or satellite.[Added
7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 5-1987]
TRAVEL CENTER — A facility which provides roadside assistance, travel
planning and reservations, insurance sales, and other services incident to
travel and transportation. Such use may also include as an accessory use an
automobile repair shop.[Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 04-2013]
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a prison or a permitted
accessory use in a hospital) providing housing facilities for persons who
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:596
need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling for stays of less than
one year and who need such facilities because of addiction to alcohol and/
or a controlled substance; a type of mental illness or other behavior that
could cause a person to be a threat to the physical safety of others; or a
halfway house for adult criminal offenders or juvenile delinquents.[Added
3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used and maintained primarily for
the transportation of goods and materials, whether natural or man-made.
Trucks are classified according to size by the number of axles, as follows:
two-axle, three-axle, four-axle and combination vehicles (tractor and trailer
or semitrailer) as specified in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.[Added
1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
TRUCK, BOX TYPE AND VAN TYPE — A van-type and/or box-type truck
is one that is constructed with a fully enclosed cargo area designed and
intended for the carriage of goods and materials and which has no
capability to compress the load. The van-type truck is generally smaller than
the box-type truck.[Added 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
TRUCK TERMINAL — An area and building for the maintenance and
storage of trucks and where cargo is stored and where trucks load and
unload cargo on a regular basis.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract or lot
of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, or for
which land or buildings are used, occupied or maintained; also any activity,
occupation, business or operation carried on in a building or other structure
on a tract of land.185[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
UTILITY INSTALLATION — A facility owned and operated by an electric
company, water company, sewage disposal company, telephone company,
cable television service, pipeline company or such similar entity which is
an integral component of the infrastructure of that entity. For the purposes
of this chapter, such facility shall be considered to be separate from
administrative and office space.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
WATER ENERGY SYSTEM — A type of geothermal energy system in which
water is pumped from a water well or other groundwater source into a
heat exchanger. A water energy system can be either closed loop (where
the pipes are connected to the heat exchanger and heat transfer fluid is
circulated through the pipes) or open loop system (where the water drawn
from the earth is pumped back into the ground through a different well as
"re-injection").[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
WATER PRESSURE — The hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, buoyant, impact,
uplift and other forces associated with flooding.[Amended 10-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 10-1996]
185. Editor's Note: The former definition of “utility,” added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:597
WATERTOWER(S) — A structure owned and operated by a company which
is regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission that is used to
store water; a watertank.[Added 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
WHOLESALE SALES — A commercial activity involving the sale of
commodities in large quantities or in bulk to retailers or jobbers, rather
than directly to consumers.[Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A device that is used to produce electricity from
wind and all associated equipment, including any base, blade, foundation,
nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other
component necessary to fully utilize the wind generator, also referred to as
a "wind turbine."[Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
WINDMILL — A machine that is worked by the wind by means of vanes that
radiate from a central shaft, which is used to produce energy or perform
work.[Added 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
186WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998; amended 2-11-2015
by Ord. No. 1-2015]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.[Added 2-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 1-2015]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.[Added 2-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 1-2015]
WOMEN'S TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL CARE CENTER — A facility owned
and operated by a charitable not-for-profit organization qualified as such
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or comparable
provision, which provides temporary (no more than five years) housing and
support services to women, including their children, temporarily unable to
provide shelter and care for themselves. A women's temporary care center
may provide accessory child day-care services for not more than six children
186. Editor's Note: The former definition of "wireless communications equipment building,"
added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998, which immediately preceded this definition, was
repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
§ 84-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-8
72:598
unrelated to such women occupying a dwelling unit, but is not and shall
not be construed or interpreted to be a group home, group day-care home,
family day-care home, child day-care center, nursing home, assisted-care
facility, treatment center, penal facility, transitional-living facility or halfway
house.[Added 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
YARD — That portion of the lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and
extends from the lot line to the structure.
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending along the full length of the front lot
line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the required
front yard to the required rear yard.
ZERO LOT LINE UNIT — An individual unit or building which may be
conveyed, sold or transferred absent any required minimum yard, lot width,
green area or lot area or maximum building or impervious coverage.[Added
7-31-2013 by Ord. No. 09-2013]
ZONING OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Board of Supervisors
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The term includes
such Deputy Zoning Officers as are appointed by the Board of
Supervisors.[Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
§ 84-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-8
72:599

ARTICLE III
R-2 Residential District
§ 84-9. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises and may
be used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Agriculture. (See § 84-50.)
C. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001187]
D. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard or side
yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory and is a minimum of 25
feet from any lot line. On a lot which fronts on two or more streets
and on corner lots, a swimming pool may be erected within the
building envelope to the rear of the dwelling. A swimming pool
shall be enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high continuous barrier.
[Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
(3) Home occupation, no-impact home-based business and homerelated
business. [Amended 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(4) Family day-care homes. [Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
(5) A noncommercial athletic court, such as, but not limited to, a tennis
court, paddle tennis court or basketball court, shall be permitted as
an accessory use to a single-family dwelling on a lot containing a
minimum of one acre, provided that the following conditions are
met: [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
(a) The court is not located in the front or side yard;
(b) The court is set back at least 50 feet from any side or rear
property line;
(c) There shall be no lighting facilities installed to illuminate the
court; and
(d) Any side of the court which is visible from a public street or
adjacent residential lot shall be screened with a completely
planted visual barrier consisting of evergreen plantings having
a minimum height of six feet (after planting) and placed no
187. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C and D as D and E,
respectively.
§ 84-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-9
72:601
§ 84-10. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
more than 10 feet apart on center. A stockade fence having a
minimum height of six feet constructed without gaps or breaks
may be substituted for the evergreen screen.
(6) In-law suites in accordance with the regulations in § 84-57.25.
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
E. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations for uses permitted by special
exception, § 84-10B of this article, and design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, § 84-11B of this article, shall apply to all
uses permitted by special exception in the R-2 Residential District.
(1) Religious and philanthropic uses, excluding correctional or penal
institution. [Amended 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(2) (Reserved)188
(3) Noncommercial recreational use, such as nonprofit swimming pool,
provided that the principal activity shall not be one which is
customarily carried on as a business and provided that all services
shall be for members and their guests.
F. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter. [Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(1) The educational uses specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter, subject
to the regulations specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 150 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(5) Green area: 75% minimum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
188. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(2), Public utility facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014 and 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 84-9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-10
72:602
§ 84-11. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
(7) Side yards: 25 feet minimum for each.
(8) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 50 feet minimum, for each.
(7) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(8) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
(9) Green area: 75% minimum.
(10) Public water and public sewer facilities required. [Amended
9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Parking: as required by § 84-55J of this chapter.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter or as directed by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(4) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
§ 84-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-11
72:603

ARTICLE IV
R-3 Residential District
§ 84-12. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Agriculture. (See § 84-50.)
C. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001189]
D. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard or side
yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory and is a minimum of 10
feet from any lot line. On a lot which fronts on two or more streets
and on corner lots, a swimming pool may be erected within the
building envelope to the rear of the dwelling. A swimming pool
shall be enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high continuous barrier.
[Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
(3) Home occupation, no-impact home-based business and homerelated
business. [Amended 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(4) Family day-care homes. [Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
(5) A noncommercial athletic court, such as, but not limited to, a tennis
court, paddle tennis court or basketball court, shall be permitted as
an accessory use to a single-family dwelling on a lot containing a
minimum of one acre, provided that the following conditions are
met: [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
(a) The court is not located in the front or side yard;
(b) The court is set back at least 50 feet from any side or rear
property line;
(c) There shall be no lighting facilities installed to illuminate the
court; and
(d) Any side of the court which is visible from a public street or
adjacent residential lot shall be screened with a completely
planted visual barrier consisting of evergreen plantings having
a minimum height of six feet (after planting) and placed no
189. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C, D and E as D, E and
F, respectively.
§ 84-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-12
72:605
more than 10 feet apart on center. A stockade fence having a
minimum height of six feet constructed without gaps or breaks
may be substituted for the evergreen screen.
(6) In-law suites in accordance with the regulations in § 84-57.25.
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
E. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations for uses permitted by special
exception, § 84-13B of this article, and design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, § 84-14B of this article, shall apply to all
uses permitted by special exception in the R-3 Residential District
except the conversion of private residence to college dormitory use.
(1) Religious or philanthropic uses, excluding correctional or penal
institution. [Amended 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(2) (Reserved)190
(3) (Reserved)191
(4) Noncommercial recreational use, such as nonprofit swimming
pools, provided that the principal activity shall not be one which is
customarily carried on as a business and provided that all services
shall be for members and their guests.
F. (Reserved)192
G. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter. [Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(1) The educational uses specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter, subject
to the regulations specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter.
(2) (Reserved)193 [Added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
(3) Independent living facility subject to the following: [Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
(a) Area and bulk requirements of § 84-13C;
190. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Golf course and golf house, was repealed
1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993.
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(3), Public utility facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014 and 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
192. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the conversion of private dwelling for
lodging for college students, was repealed 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013.
193. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2), added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006, which
permitted as a conditional use development pursuant to the flexible design option, was
repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008.
§ 84-12 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-12
72:606
§ 84-13. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
(b) Design standards of § 84-14C; and
(c) Requirements of § 84-57.15.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot size with both on-site sewer and water services: 30,000 square
feet minimum.
(2) Lot size with either public off-site sewer or water service only:
22,000 square feet minimum.
(3) Lot size with both public off-site sewer and water services: 18,000
square feet minimum.
(4) Lot width at building line: 100 feet minimum.
(5) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(7) Green area: 50% minimum.
(8) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
(9) Side yards: 10 feet minimum for each with 25 feet total for both
yards.
(10) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(11) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(5) Green area: 50% minimum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 50 feet minimum, for each.
(8) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
§ 84-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-13
72:607
§ 84-14. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
(10) Public water and public sewer facilities shall be required.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
C. Independent living facility. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
(1) Lot size: five acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building setback line: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 40% maximum.
(5) Green area (landscaped): 55% minimum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Front yard parking setback: 30 feet minimum.
(8) Side yard: 30 feet minimum.
(9) Rear yard: 70 feet minimum.
(10) Building height of principal building: 45 feet.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Parking: as required by § 84-55J of this chapter.
B. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed
by Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(4) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
C. Independent living facility by conditional use. [Added 12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 10-2008]
(1) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(2) Landscaping requirements. All portions of the property which are
not utilized for buildings, structures or paved areas shall be
landscaped in accordance with an approved landscape plan which
utilizes combinations of landscaping, fencing, shrubbery, lawn
areas, ground cover, rock formations, existing foliage and planting
of conifers and deciduous trees native to the area in order to lessen
the visual impact of the buildings, structures and paved areas.
§ 84-13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14
72:608
Landscaping berms a minimum of three feet in height shall be
constructed between the street line and any parking areas and
between the rear lot line and any parking areas so as to minimize
the visibility of parking areas from the street line and adjacent
properties in the rear. As part of the conditional use approval, the
Board of Supervisors may waive the requirement for a landscaping
berm in cases where existing vegetation and trees provide a
suitable screen or if an alternative buffer or screen is proposed.
[Amended 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 02-2010]
(3) Side and rear yard buffers. The screening requirements in § 84-55A
shall apply to the side yard areas. The rear yard shall be screened
with a vegetative buffer which has a minimum width of 40 feet
measured from the rear property line. The vegetative buffer shall
be primarily composed of evergreen shrubs and evergreen trees
which are placed in alternating rows to produce a more effective
barrier and to provide space for future growth. The landowner shall
maintain the screen planting and replace any plant material which
does not live and which is necessary to form a complete visual
screen.
(4) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.194
194. Editor's Note: Former § 84-14.01, Flexible design option, added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No.
9-2006, was repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008. See now Article IVB, R-3B Flexible
Design Conservation District.
§ 84-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14
72:609

ARTICLE IVA
R-3A Single-Family Attached Dwelling Overlay District
[Added 7-27-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
§ 84-14.1. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Agriculture. (See § 84-50.)
C. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
D. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard or side
yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory and is a minimum of 10
feet from any lot line. On a lot which fronts on two or more streets
and on corner lots, a swimming pool may be erected within the
building envelope to the rear of the dwelling. A swimming pool
shall be enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high continuous barrier.
[Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
(3) Home occupation, no-impact home-based business and homerelated
business. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(4) Family day-care homes.
E. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations for uses permitted by special
exception, § 84-13B of this chapter, and design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, § 84-14B of this chapter, shall apply to
all uses permitted by special exception in the R-3A Single-Family
Attached Dwelling Overlay District except the conversion of private
residence to college dormitory use.
(1) Religious or philanthropic uses, excluding correctional or penal
institution.
(2) (Reserved)195
(3) Noncommercial recreational use, such as nonprofit swimming
pools, provided that the principal activity shall not be one which is
customarily carried on as a business and provided that all services
shall be for members and their guests.
195. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(2), Public utility facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014 and 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 84-14.1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.1
72:611
§ 84-14.2. Area and bulk regulations.
The area and bulk regulations in § 84-13 shall apply to single-family
detached dwellings and uses permitted by special exception. The following
area and bulk regulations shall apply to a development tract which is
proposed for development with single-family attached dwellings:
F. (Reserved)196
G. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by The Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter.
(1) The educational uses specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter, subject
to the regulations specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter.
(2) Single-family attached dwelling subject to the area and bulk
requirements in § 84-14.2 and the design standards in § 84-14.3.
A. Minimum development tract area: 1.25 acres.
B. Minimum lot width at building setback line: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
D. Maximum number of dwelling units per acre: 8.5 units per acre
averaged over the development tract.
E. Maximum height: three stories, not exceeding 40 feet.
F. Minimum building setback from the street right-of-way: 30 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
H. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
I. Minimum distance from building to any property line of the
development tract: 30 feet.
J. Minimum green area; 50%.
K. Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
L. Maximum paved area: 20%.
M. Public water service and public sewer service required.
N. Minimum off-street parking: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
196. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the conversion of private dwelling for
lodging for college students, was repealed 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013.
§ 84-14.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14.2
72:612
§ 84-14.3. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply to single-family attached
dwellings:
O. Individual single-family attached units may be conveyed in fee simple
with a front yard, rear yard and one side yard for end units, provided
that the following area and bulk requirements are met for each
individual lot:
(1) Minimum building setback from street right-of-way: 30 feet.
(2) minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) minimum side yard: zero for units with two party walls and six feet
for end units on side with no party wall.
A. Parking: as required by § 84-55E and 84-55J of this chapter.
B. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
C. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
D. All utilities shall be designed, placed and installed underground.
§ 84-14.2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.3
72:613

ARTICLE IVB
R-3B Flexible Design Conservation District
[Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008]
§ 84-14.4. Purpose.
The Flexible Design Conservation District is intended to facilitate flexible
development options which promote different housing and unit types and
create opportunities for recreational use of land by residents of the
Township consistent with the Township's community development
objectives as adopted in the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 84-14.5. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used, for any of the following purposes and no other.
A. R-3B Flexible Design Conservation District Zone A:
(1) Agriculture subject to the standards in § 84-50.
(2) Forestry subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
(3) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors:
(a) Common open space as part of a flexible design development
option.
B. R-3B Flexible Design Conservation District Zone B:
(1) Agriculture subject to the standards in § 84-50.
(2) Forestry subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
(3) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(a) Religious uses.
(b) Noncommercial recreational uses, such as nonprofit swimming
pools, provided that the principal activity shall not be one
which is customarily carried on as a business and provided that
all services shall be for members and their guests.
(4) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors:
(a) Flexible design development option with common open space;
provided, however, that the only type of dwelling unit that is
permitted within Zone B shall be single-family detached
dwelling units.
C. R-3B Flexible Design Conservation District Zone C:
§ 84-14.4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.5
72:615
§ 84-14.6. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Agriculture subject to the standards in § 84-50.
(2) Forestry subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
(3) A mansion located on a country house estate lot may be used as a
reception hall, museum, exhibition hall or any use of the same
general character as any use permitted in this Subsection C(3)
subject to the standards in § 84-57.6.
(4) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(a) Religious uses.
(b) Noncommercial recreational uses, such as nonprofit swimming
pools, provided that the principal activity shall not be one
which is customarily carried on as a business and provided that
all services shall be for members and their guests.
(5) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors:
(a) Flexible design development option with common open space
and single-family detached dwelling units, semidetached
dwelling units and single-family attached dwellings.
A. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Lot size: five acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 500 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 500 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(5) Green area: 50% minimum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 50 feet minimum, for each.
(8) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
(10) Public water and public sewer facilities shall be required.
B. Area and bulk regulations and design standards for the flexible design
development option which is permitted by conditional use in the R-3B
District.
(1) Minimum gross development tract area: 350 acres.
§ 84-14.5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14.6
72:616
(2) Maximum number of dwelling units: gross development tract area
multiplied by 1.4.
(3) Minimum lot area: To insure that the proposed flexible design
development achieves the purposes of such development option,
the Board of Supervisors may establish a minimum lot size for
single-family detached dwellings as part of the approval of the
conditional use for a development using the flexible design
development option.
(4) Forty percent of the gross development tract area shall be
maintained as common open space, either as greenway lands or as
commonly owned land surrounding dwelling units which is owned
by either a homeowners' or condominium association.
(5) Eighty percent of the lands which must be maintained as common
open space shall be designated as greenway lands which must be
held in single and separate ownership and comply with the
following criteria:
(a) Areas designated as greenway lands may be used for
woodland, meadow, wetland, wildlife habitat, game preserve or
similar conservation-oriented areas; public or private park or
recreation areas which are designed to accommodate active or
passive uses such as physical, leisure, sporting or relaxation
activities, including but not limited to trails and community
gardens; and parking areas and any other uses or structures
that would facilitate the enjoyment and appreciation of said
greenway lands as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Greenway lands shall be owned by one of the following: West
Goshen Township, a private nonprofit organization among
whose purposes is the conservation of land or natural
resources, or any other similar eleemosynary institution. If
neither West Goshen Township or a private nonprofit
organization or any other eleemosynary institution is willing to
accept dedication or ownership of greenway lands, said
greenway lands shall be owned and maintained by a
homeowners' or condominium association.
(c) The ownership of the greenway lands shall be approved by the
Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use approval for
the flexible design development, unless the Board determines
it would be in the best interest of the Township to defer said
determination until the time of final land development
approval.
(d) If a body of water such as a lake or pond which is greater than
one acre in area is located on greenway lands, there shall be a
minimum setback of 100 feet and a maximum setback of 250
feet from the edge of the lake or pond to any lot used for
dwelling units in the development to allow the owner of the
§ 84-14.6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.6
72:617
greenway lands adequate access to maintain the lake or pond.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish the appropriate
setback that is needed to access the body of water as part
of the conditional use approval for the flexible design
development.
(6) Dwelling unit setback line from curbline. Dwelling units shall be set
back from any curbline a minimum distance of 25 feet.
(7) Restricted use areas. The type and location of dwelling units and
accessory structures associated with dwelling units that are
permitted within a flexible design development shall be restricted
based on the particular Zone A, B or C, as depicted on Figure 1
which is attached hereto and shall become part of the Zoning
Map.197
(a) No dwelling units or accessory structures to dwelling units
shall be permitted within that portion of the R-3B District
which is designated as Zone A on Figure 1,198 which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
(b) Only single-family detached dwelling units shall be permitted
within that portion of the R-3B District which is designated as
Zone B on Figure 1,199 which is attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.
(c) Single-family detached dwellings, semidetached dwellings and
single-family attached dwellings shall be permitted within that
portion of the R-3B District which is designated as Zone C on
Figure 1,200 which is attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference.
(8) Spacing between single-family detached dwelling units. The
following minimum distances between any two single-family
detached dwelling units shall be maintained:
(a) Side wall to side wall: 15 feet.
(b) Rear wall to rear wall: 60 feet.
(c) Side wall to rear wall: 40 feet.
(9) Building separation between buildings with semidetached
dwellings and single-family attached dwellings. The following
minimum distances between any two buildings with semidetached
and/or single-family attached dwelling units shall be maintained:
(a) Side wall to side wall: 20 feet.
197. Editor's Note: Figure 1 and the Zoning Map are on file in the Township offices.
198. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
199. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
200. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 84-14.6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14.6
72:618
(b) Rear wall to rear wall: 60 feet.
(c) Side wall to rear wall: 45 feet.
(10) Maximum building length for single-family attached dwellings. No
more than four dwelling units may be attached in one building, and
the maximum length of the building shall not exceed 135 feet.
(11) Decks, patios, terraces and unroofed porches. The following
criteria shall apply to any deck, patio, terrace or unroofed porch
associated with a dwelling unit:
(a) Any deck, patio, terrace or unroofed porch shall be located to
the rear of the dwelling unit to which it is attached.
(b) A deck, patio, terrace or unroofed porch shall be located a
minimum distance of 25 feet from the side wall of any dwelling
unit other than the dwelling unit to which it is attached.
(c) A deck, patio, terrace or unroofed porch shall be located a
minimum distance of 45 feet from the rear wall of any dwelling
unit other than the dwelling unit to which it is attached.
(12)Off-street parking spaces. Each off-street parking space shall be at
least nine feet by 18 feet in size, except that any off-street parking
spaces located in a garage or in a driveway associated with a
dwelling unit shall be at least 10 feet by 20 feet.
(13) Swimming pools and sheds are prohibited on lots with
semidetached dwellings or single-family attached dwellings.
Swimming pools and sheds shall be permitted as accessory uses to
a single-family detached dwelling provided that they are located in
the rear yard or side yard of the dwelling to which they are
accessory and are a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line. On a lot
which fronts on two or more streets and on corner lots, a swimming
pool may be erected within the building envelope to the rear of the
dwelling. A swimming pool shall be enclosed by a minimum fourfoot-
high continuous barrier. [Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No.
3-2009]
(14) In lieu of seeking special exception approval for those uses which
are permitted in the identified floodplain area as set forth in Article
XIX of this chapter, an applicant proposing a flexible design
development option shall be required to demonstrate to the Board
of Supervisors during land development that the proposed
development meets the standards of Article XIX. [Amended
7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
(15) Driveways connecting to or intersecting with any street shall be
located at least 80 feet from the intersection of any street line. Said
distance may be reduced to a minimum of 45 feet where said
reduction is necessary to facilitate traffic-calming devices and
§ 84-14.6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.6
72:619
§ 84-14.7. Design standards.
Uses permitted by special exception:
where in the opinion of the Township Engineer said reduction will
not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
(16) Portions of trails, whether located in greenway lands or lands
owned or controlled by a homeowners' association or condominium
association, grading and construction associated with parking
areas located in greenway lands, retaining walls and utilities may
be permitted in areas of precautionary steep slopes and prohibitive
steep slopes provided that the Township Engineer has determined
that said construction is necessary to minimize land disturbance
and grading of steep slopes and other environmentally constrained
areas and will not adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(17) Portions of trails, whether located in greenway lands or lands
controlled by a homeowners' association or condominium
association and whether consisting of natural vegetation or other
materials, may be located in any area considered a riparian buffer
as defined in Chapter 71 of the West Goshen Township Code
entitled "Stormwater Management," provided that trail placement
will not adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion
of said buffer and sound engineering practices are utilized to limit
the area of disturbance to trail placement only.
(18) Retaining walls, or portions thereof, shall be permitted within the
required yards and building setback line on a lot where the
applicant demonstrates to the Board of Supervisors during land
development that said placement of retaining walls, or portions
thereof, is necessary to minimize grading and to prevent
unnecessary disturbance of steep slopes and other environmentally
constrained areas.
(19) An applicant or property owner who files an additional application
for a conditional use or an application to modify a prior conditional
use decision for a flexible design development may request that the
Township Engineer not require all supplemental information and
documents that would otherwise be required by § 84-74B(1)(b),
provided that the applicant or property owner is the same under
both applications, the application covers the same property, and
the conditional use approval was not rendered more than five years
before the new application is filed. The Township Engineer shall
determine the supplemental information required to be filed when
an applicant seeks a modification of a prior conditional use for the
flexible design development.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 84-14.6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14.7
72:620
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
§ 84-14.7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.7
72:621

ARTICLE IVC
R-3C Residential Infill District
[Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
§ 84-14.8. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
§ 84-14.9. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to a development tract
which is proposed for development with single-family detached dwellings:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Agriculture.
C. Forestry.
D. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Home occupation, no-impact home-based business and homerelated
business.
(3) Family day-care home.
A. Minimum development tract area: 3.5 gross acres.
B. Minimum lot width at building setback line: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
D. Maximum number of dwelling units per acre: 4.0 units per acre
averaged over the development tract.
E. Maximum height: two stories, not exceeding 30 feet.
F. Minimum building setback from the street right-of-way: 30 feet.
G. Minimum side yard: 10 feet; 25 aggregate.
H. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
I. Minimum green area: 50%.
J. Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
K. Public water service and public sewer service required.
L. Minimum off-street parking: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
§ 84-14.8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-14.10
72:623
§ 84-14.10. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply to single-family detached
dwellings:
A. Parking: as required by § 84-55J of this chapter.
B. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
C. All utilities shall be designed, placed and installed underground.
§ 84-14.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-14.10
72:624
ARTICLE V
R-4 Residential District
§ 84-15. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Agriculture. (See § 84-50.)
C. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001201]
D. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard or side
yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory and is a minimum of 10
feet from any lot line. On a lot which fronts on two or more streets
and on corner lots, a swimming pool may be erected within the
building envelope to the rear of the dwelling. A swimming pool
shall be enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high continuous barrier.
[Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
(3) Home occupation, no-impact home-based business and homerelated
business in a single-family detached dwelling. [Amended
2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No.
03-2013]
(4) Family day-care homes. [Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
(5) A noncommercial athletic court, such as, but not limited to, a tennis
court, paddle tennis court or basketball court, shall be permitted as
an accessory use to a single-family dwelling on a lot containing a
minimum of one acre, provided that the following conditions are
met: [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
(a) The court is not located in the front or side yard;
(b) The court is set back at least 50 feet from any side or rear
property line;
(c) There shall be no lighting facilities installed to illuminate the
court; and
(d) Any side of the court which is visible from a public street or
adjacent residential lot shall be screened with a completely
planted visual barrier consisting of evergreen plantings having
201. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C and D as
Subsections D and E, respectively.
§ 84-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-15
72:625
a minimum height of six feet (after planting) and placed no
more than 10 feet apart on center. A stockade fence having a
minimum height of six feet constructed without gaps or breaks
may be substituted for the evergreen screen.
(6) In-law suites in accordance with the regulations in § 84-57.25.
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
E. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations for apartments, § 84-16B of this
article, shall apply to apartment use in the R-4 Residential District. The
area and bulk regulations for other uses permitted by special exception,
§ 84-16C of this article, shall apply to all other uses permitted by special
exception in the R-4 Residential District. The design standards for uses
permitted by special exception, § 84-17B of this article, shall apply to all
uses permitted by special exception in the R-4 Residential District.
(1) Multifamily dwellings. [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
(2) Religious or philanthropic uses, excluding correctional or penal
institution. [Amended 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(3) (Reserved).202
(4) (Reserved)203
(5) Noncommercial recreational use, such as nonprofit swimming
pools, provided that the principal activity shall not be one which is
customarily carried on as a business and provided that all services
shall be for members and their guests.
(6) Semidetached dwellings. [Added 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978;
amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(7) 204Student homes. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013]
F. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter. [Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(1) The educational uses specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter, subject
to the regulations specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Golf course and golf house, was repealed
1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(4), Public utility facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 3-2014 and 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
204. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(7), Patio homes, added 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978,
was repealed 12-4-1979 by Ord. No. 8-1979.
§ 84-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-16
72:626
§ 84-16. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot size with both on-site sewer and water services: 30,000 square
feet minimum.
(2) Lot size with either public sewer or public water service only:
22,000 square feet minimum.
(3) Lot size with both public sewer and public water services: 18,000
square feet minimum.
(4) Lot width at building line: 100 feet minimum.
(5) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(7) Green area: 20% minimum.
(8) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
(9) Side yards: 10 feet minimum for each with 25 feet total for both
yards.
(10) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(11) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
B. Apartments.
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 25% maximum for principal buildings; 35% total
maximum, including all accessory buildings and tenant garages.
(5) Green area: 20% minimum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 50 feet minimum for each.
(8) Rear yards: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
(10) Minimum distance between building faces: 75 feet. [Amended
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
§ 84-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-16
72:627
(11) Length of building: not to exceed 175 feet in any direction.
[Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(12) Dwelling unit density. [Amended 6-13-1973 by Ord. No.
3-1973]
(a) One acre to less than three acres: six dwelling units per acre.
(b) Three acres to less than 10 acres: eight dwelling units per acre.
(c) Ten acres or more: 10 dwelling units per acre.
(13) Public water service and public sewer service shall be required.
[Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994205]
C. Multifamily dwellings (excluding apartments) and semidetached
dwellings. [Added 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 3-78; amended
12-4-1979 by Ord. No. 8-79; 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80;
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(1) Minimum development tract area: three acres.
(2) Maximum number of dwelling units per acre: six averaged over the
development tract.
(3) Minimum building setback from the street right-of-way: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum height: three stories, not exceeding 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard for end unit or corner lot: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum distance between buildings: 75 feet.
(7) Minimum distance from building to any property line of the
development tract: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum green area: 45%.
(9) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(10) Maximum paved area: 20%.
(11) The length of any building and other structure not to exceed 175
feet in any single direction.
(12) Public water service and public sewer service required.
(13) Minimum off-street parking: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
D. Other uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Green area: 20% minimum.
205. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B(14), requiring fire
hydrants for apartment construction, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 84-16 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-16
72:628
§ 84-17. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
(2) Lot size: one acre minium.
(3) Lot width at building line: 200 feet minimum.
(4) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(5) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(6) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 50 feet minimum for each.
(8) Rear yards: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 40 feet.
(10) Public water and public sewer facilities required.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) Parking: as required by § 84-55J of this chapter.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception.
(a) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as
directed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(c) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(d) Parking for nonresidential uses as required by § 84-55I of this
chapter; parking for residential uses as required by § 84-55E
and I(3) of this chapter. [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
(e) Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this
chapter. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
B. The following additional regulations shall apply to multifamily
dwellings: [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(1) Variations in buildings and other structural locations shall be
provided to create architectural interest and to preserve critical
environmental areas and amenities. Variations shall include but not
necessarily be limited to width of individual dwelling units, a
variation of exterior facade materials and rooflines. Setbacks shall
vary from one or a pair of dwelling units so that each is offset from
the next by a minimum of two feet. The rooflines of buildings shall
be designed so that roof elevations vary by no less than 13 inches in
height every two attached dwelling units. The front wall of each
§ 84-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-17
72:629
pair of dwelling units shall be designed to provide a minimum twofoot
offset from each pair of adjacent dwelling unit front walls on
either side. A garage attached to and made an integral part of the
dwelling unit shall not be considered in the design of the minimum
two-foot offset. In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing
Board may modify the requirements of this subsection if it finds
that an alternate proposal for building variation proposed by the
applicant provides for at least equal or superior design variation
criteria which is consistent with the requirements of this
subsection.
(2) Every building and other structure (except for streets and utilities
within the street right-of-way) shall be sited to promote pedestrian
and visual access to the required minimum green area and the open
space mandated by Chapter 72, Subdivision of Land.
(3) All utilities shall be designed, placed and installed underground.
§ 84-17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-17
72:630
ARTICLE VI
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
§ 84-18. Use regulations. [Amended 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993;
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995; 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001;
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007;
11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013;
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
§ 84-19. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
A. Retail sales.
B. Personal service establishment.
C. Office building, medical clinics, municipal, county, state and federal
use.
D. Banks.
E. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
F. Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility.
G. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, including a
home-related business as an accessory use to an existing
nonconforming single-family detached dwelling.
H. Learning center.
I. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors subject to Article XVIII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations, § 84-19 of this article, and
design standards, § 84-20 of this article, shall apply to all uses
permitted by conditional use in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District.
(1) Church.
(2) Funeral parlor.
(3) Single-family detached dwelling which conforms to R-3 regulations.
(4) Convenience store.
(5) Pharmacy/drug store and medical marijuana dispensary.
A. Lot size with both on-site sewer and water services: 30,000 square feet
minimum.
§ 84-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-19
72:631
§ 84-20. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
B. Lot size with either public sewer or public water services: 22,000
square feet minimum.
C. Lot size with both public sewer and public water services: 18,000
square feet minimum.
D. Lot width at building line: 100 feet minimum.
E. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
F. Lot coverage: 30% maximum.
G. Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
H. Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each. [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord.
No. 3-1994]
I. Rear yards: 50 feet minimum.
J. Maximum building height: two stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
K. Paved surface area: may not exceed 55% of total lot.
L. Maximum floor area, individual stores: 5,000 square feet maximum.
[Amended 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 10-2001]
M. Green area, landscaped: 40% minimum. [Amended 9-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 10-2001]
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
E. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
§ 84-19 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-20
72:632
ARTICLE VII
C-2 Commercial Shopping Center District
§ 84-21. Use regulations. [Added 10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 10-1978;
4-5-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988; 1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993;
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995; 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 7-97; 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001; 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002; 4-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 5-2003; 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007; 12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
10-2008; 11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No.
03-2013; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No.
6-2019]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Retail sales.
B. Personal service establishment.
C. Office building, bank, radio studio, municipal, county, state and federal
use.
D. Restaurant and uses similar to a restaurant where food is prepared and
served, including a catering business, a microbrewery and a brewery
pub, provided that there shall be no drive-up or walk-up windows
permitted for the sale or dispensing of food or food products.
E. Greenhouse, nursery.
F. Public place of amusement or recreation.
G. Athletic club; private club, provided that it does not offer entertainment
that would constitute a sexually oriented business.
H. Shopping center.
I. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, including
outdoor dining as an accessory use to a restaurant subject to the
conditions in § 84-57.11 and a home-related business as an accessory
use to an existing lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling.
J. Hotel/motel.
K. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
L. Women's temporary residential care center.
M. Learning center.
N. The following use shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors subject to Article XVIII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations, § 84-22.1 of this article, and
§ 84-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-21
72:633
§ 84-22. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
§ 84-22.1. Area and bulk regulations for women's temporary
residential care center.
design standards, § 84-23 of this article, shall apply to all uses
permitted by conditional use in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District.
(1) Pharmacy/drug store and medical marijuana dispensary.
A. Lot size: three acres minimum. [Amended 4-9-1997 by Ord. No.
7-97]
B. Lot width: 400 feet minimum at building line.
C. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
E. Floor area ratio: 0.40 maximum.
F. Building setback line: 100 feet minimum, except in the case of a canopy
erected over a drive-through lane at a bank or financial institution
which may be setback a minimum distance of 50 feet from an adjacent
right-of-way or street line, provided that the area of the fifty-foot
setback between the right-of-way or street line and the canopy is
landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the Board
of Supervisors. For properties with a lot area of five acres or less, the
building setback line may be reduced in accordance with the
requirements in § 84-22.2 of this chapter. [Amended 6-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 8-2006; 9-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006]
G. Side yards: 50 feet minimum each side, provided that this requirement
may be waived if the conditions as set forth in § 84-23J are met. [Added
10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 10-1978]
H. Paved surface area: may not exceed 60% of total lot.
I. Green area (landscaped): 20% minimum.
J. Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
K. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 40 feet.
L. Public water and public sewer facilities required.
A. Minimum tract size: two acres minimum.
B. Permitted dwelling types: triplex, fourplex, townhouse, and onebedroom
apartments. [Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
§ 84-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-22.1
72:634
§ 84-22.2. Building setback for lots with five acres or less. [Added
9-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006]
§ 84-23. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
C. Maximum number of dwelling units per acre: six averaged over the
development.
D. Minimum building setback from street right-of-way: 50 feet.
E. Maximum height: three stories, not exceeding 35 feet.
F. Minimum distance between buildings: 75 feet.
G. Minimum boundary setback: 50 feet from any property line.
H. Minimum green area: 45%
I. Maximum lot coverage: 35%
J. Maximum paved area: 20%.
K. Maximum building length: 260 feet in any single direction.
L. Minimum off-street parking: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit in a triplex,
fourplex and townhouse; 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit for each onebedroom
apartment unit. [Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
M. Public water service and public sanitary facilities.
A. For properties with a minimum lot area of five acres or less, the building
setback line may be reduced to a minimum of 50 feet along Route 3 and
Paoli Pike, provided that the building footprint of any such building
does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
B. If the building setback line is reduced to a minimum of 50 feet pursuant
to § 84-22.2A above, a maximum of four drive-through aisles may be
built within the area extending from the fifty-foot building setback line
to the one-hundred-foot setback line.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
§ 84-22.1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-23
72:635
G. Shopping cart storage: as required by § 84-55G of this chapter.
H. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
I. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
J. Shopping centers. In addition to the foregoing design standards and
subject to the area and bulk regulations of § 84-22, the following
provisions shall apply to lots developed or to be developed as a
shopping center: [Added 10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 10-78]
(1) For the purpose of development of a shopping center wholly within
the C-2 District, two or more contiguous lots, totaling in the
aggregate four acres or more, whether or not held in single and
separate ownership, may be considered as one lot and the side yard
requirements of the interior side yards may be waived for the
purpose of development of lots as a shopping center if all of the
following conditions are met:
(a) The owners of all lots involved join in a written application,
supported by the information and data required by § 84-87A,
agree in writing by execution of a developer's agreement, in a
form approved by the Board of Supervisors, to be fully bound to
develop the combined lots as a single lot in accordance with
the zoning, subdivision and land development regulations and,
as a part of the application, submit a traffic circulation and
parking plan in accordance with the requirements of § 84-55E.
(2) Two or more contiguous lots totaling in the average of four acres or
more and lying wholly within the C-2 District which have been
developed in accordance with the use regulations set forth in
§ 84-21 and which, if combined, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, constitute a shopping center, except that they do not
have to be operated as a single entity and they do not have to have
common off-street parking and loading, may be considered as one
lot and the side yard requirements with respect to the interior side
yards may be waived if the Board of Supervisors approves the
application and the following conditions are met:
(a) The owners of such contiguous lots make written application as
required in Subsection J(1)(a) and agree in writing to the
proposed combination of lots.
(b) Such owners agree to be bound by the provisions of § 84-55E.
(3) An application and plan approved in accordance with § 84-23J shall
not thereafter be amended without the written consent of the
adjoining property owners of record and the approval of the Board
of Supervisors. Once developed, use of the combined lots as an
integrated shopping center shall not be discontinued or abandoned
without the consent of all owners and approval of the Board of
Supervisors. The Board shall not grant approval unless each such
§ 84-23 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-23
72:636
combined lot, upon abandonment of the shopping center use, is
brought into compliance with all area, bulk and other zoning and
design regulations otherwise applicable.
§ 84-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-23
72:637

ARTICLE VIII
C-3 Limited Highway Commercial District
§ 84-24. Use regulations. [Amended 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995;
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
§ 84-25. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
A. Retail sales.
B. Personal service establishment.
C. Office building.
D. Laboratory facilities, medical clinics.
E. Wholesale sales, storage or distribution.
F. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
G. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, including a
home-related business as an accessory use to an existing lawful
nonconforming single-family detached dwelling.
H. Learning center.
A. Lot size: two acres minimum.
B. Lot width at building line: 300 feet minimum.
C. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 30% maximum.
E. Floor area ratio: 0.40 maximum.
F. Building setback line: 40 feet minimum for any building or parking
area.
G. Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each, except that the building on any
corner lot must be set back 20 feet from the lot line on side street.
H. Green area (landscaped): 20% minimum.
I. Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
J. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[Amended 7-24-1979 by Ord. No. 3-1979]
K. Paved surface area: may not exceed 55% of total lot.
§ 84-24 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-25
72:639
§ 84-26. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 84-27. General standards.
The following limitations shall be applied to any use permitted in this
district.
L. Public water and public sewer facilities shall be required.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
G. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
H. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
A. No use shall be conducted in any open area.
B. No goods shall be displayed in any open area.
C. No odors shall be emitted which are perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
D. No glare shall be allowed which is perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
E. No loading shall be permitted in the area between the building and any
street line.
F. No noise emanating from a use in this section shall exceed the level of
ordinary conversation at the rear lot line. Short, intermittent noise
peaks may be permitted if they do not exceed normal traffic noise
peaks.
§ 84-25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-27
72:640
ARTICLE IX
C-4 Special Limited Business and Apartment District
§ 84-28. Use regulations. [Amended 6-13-1973 by Ord. No. 3-1973;
4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978; 5-14-1985 by Ord. No. 6-1985;
10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 13-1986; 1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993;
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994; 8-22-1995 by Ord. No. 5-1995;
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002;
4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003; 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005;
6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006; 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 4-2007;
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008; 11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013; 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015;
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Office building, banks.
B. Laboratory or research facilities.
C. Wholesale sales, storage or distribution.
D. Church.
E. Learning center.
F. Nursing homes.
G. Hospitals, medical clinics.
H. Athletic club; private club, provided that it does not offer entertainment
that would constitute a sexually oriented business.
I. Apartment buildings.
J. Restaurant and uses similar to a restaurant where food is prepared and
served, including a catering business, a microbrewery and a brewery
pub, provided that there shall be no drive-up or walk-up windows
permitted for the sale or dispensing of food or food products.
K. Motel.
L. Multifamily dwellings, exclusive of apartments, in accordance with the
area and bulk regulations and design standards of § 84-16C and the
design standards of § 84-17B.
M. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
N. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, including
outdoor dining as an accessory use to a restaurant subject to the
conditions in § 84-57.11 and a home-related business as an accessory
use to an existing lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling.
§ 84-28 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-28
72:641
§ 84-29. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
O. Photographic studio.
P. (Reserved)
Q. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter.
(1) Child day-care center, subject to the regulations of §§ 84-29, 84-30,
84-31 and 84-31.1.
(2) The educational uses specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter, subject
to the regulations specified in § 84-57.10 of this chapter.
A. Lot size: four acres minimum.
B. Lot width at building line: 400 feet minimum.
C. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
E. Setback lines. [Amended 9-23-1986 by Ord. No. 12-1986]
(1) Building setback line: 100 feet minimum.
(2) Parking area/space setback line: 40 feet minimum for all uses
except convalescent or nursing homes (§ 84-28F), apartments
(§ 84-28I), motels (§ 84-28K) and multifamily dwellings (§ 84-28L),
which uses shall require a parking area/space setback of 100 feet
minimum. [Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 03-2012]
F. Green area (landscaped): 25% minimum.
G. Side yards: 50 feet minimum for each.
H. Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
I. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
[Amended 7-24-1979 by Ord. No. 3-1979]
J. Paved surface area: may not exceed 55% of total lot.
K. Building length: residential buildings not to exceed 175 feet maximum.
L. Distance between buildings: 50 feet minimum. [Amended 9-12-1973
by Ord. No. 6-1973]
§ 84-28 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-29
72:642
§ 84-30. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 84-31. General standards.
The following limitations shall be applied to any use permitted in this
district:
M. Dwelling unit density for apartments: [Amended 6-13-1973 by Ord.
No. 3-1973; 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 03-2012]
(1) Four acres to less than 10 acres: eight dwelling units per acre.
(2) Ten acres or more: 10 dwelling units per acre.
N. Public water and public sewer facilities required for apartments.
[Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 03-2012]
O. Apartment construction permitted only in areas served by fire hydrants.
All buildings must be within 750 feet of a hydrant.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
However, if the development is located adjoining an arterial highway, a
frontage road must be provided adjacent and parallel to the arterial
route at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
G. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
H. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
A. No use shall be conducted in any open area.
B. No goods shall be displayed in any open area.
C. No odors shall be emitted which are perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
D. No glare shall be allowed which is perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
E. No loading shall be permitted in the area between the building and any
street line.
§ 84-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-31
72:643
§ 84-31.1. Day-care centers. [Added 8-22-1995 by Ord. No. 5-1995]
The following conditions shall be applied to child day-care centers
permitted in this district:
F. No noise emanating from a use in this section shall exceed the level of
ordinary conversion at the rear lot line. Short, intermittent noise peaks
may be permitted if they do not exceed normal traffic noise peaks.
A. The use shall be located and conducted within a detached building,
except for authorized outdoor play areas.
B. No other use shall be located or conducted in the same building as the
child day-care center unless the center is conducted by or located in a
church, school or hospital and is approved by the Supervisors.
C. The use, including buildings, outdoor play areas, parking and other
facilities shall be physically separated on all sides by a minimum
setback of 25 feet from any residential building or use.
D. All outdoor play areas accessible to children attending the center shall
be enclosed with a fence having a minimum height of six feet, with all
openings being secured with a gate having a self-latching device.
E. Parking shall be provided as required by § 84-55I for day-care center.
F. A pickup and drop-off area measuring at least 60 feet in length and 10
feet in width, marked by signs and physically removed from any
required parking area, loading area and all points of vehicular access
for ingress to and egress from the site shall be provided and maintained
for the discharge and collection of children attending the center.
G. All areas of the center, whether interior or exterior, shall be physically
separated by a distance of 100 feet from any natural or man-made
hazard, including but not necessarily limited to swimming pools, water
retention or detention ponds, machinery, electric generating and
transmitting equipment and streets, unless secured to the satisfaction
of the Township Supervisors.
H. The center shall comply with all minimum space allocation
requirements and standards required for licensure and promulgated by
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and other regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction.
I. The Supervisors in granting a conditional use shall have authority to
impose such additional conditions as they shall determine are
reasonably required with respect to any application for a child day-care
center.
§ 84-31 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-31.1
72:644
ARTICLE X
C-5 General Highway Commercial District
§ 84-32. Use regulations. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1992;
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995; 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001;
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003;
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006;
6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006; 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008;
11-14-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012; 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 04-2013; 7-31-2013 by Ord. No. 09-2013;
9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 10-2013; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017;
6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. Retail sales.
B. Personal service establishment.
C. Office building.
D. Restaurant and uses similar to a restaurant where food is prepared and
served (including a catering business), provided that there shall be no
drive-up or walk-up windows permitted for the sale or dispensing of
food or food products.
E. Funeral home.
F. Automobile and/or a truck leasing agency involving no sales activity on
site, provided truck leasing shall not exceed trucks larger than two-axle
van-type trucks or two-axle box-type trucks.
G. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
H. Learning center.
I. Athletic club.
J. Public place of amusement or recreation.
K. Medical clinic.
L. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, including
outdoor dining as an accessory use to a restaurant subject to the
conditions in § 84-57.11 and a home-related business as an accessory
use to an existing lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling.
M. The following use shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of this
chapter:
(1) Dog day-care facility subject to the standards in § 84-57.14.
§ 84-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-32
72:645
§ 84-33. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 6-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-2006]
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
N. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors subject to Article XVIII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations, § 84-33 of this article, and
design standards, § 84-34 of this article, shall apply to all uses
permitted by conditional use in the C-5 General Highway Commercial
District.
(1) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution.
(2) Gasoline service station.
(3) Car wash.
(4) Monument sales.
(5) Banks and financial institutions.
(6) Vehicular sales and service agency limited to the sale and/or
leasing of new and/or used automobiles, two-axle van-type or twoaxle
box-type trucks and the operation of an automobile repair shop
for such vehicles as an accessory use thereto.
(7) Motorcycle sales and the operation of a repair shop for the
motorcycles as an accessory use thereto.
(8) Travel center with the accessory use of an automobile repair shop.
(9) Convenience store, subject to the standards of § 84-57.12.
(10) Pharmacy/drug store, subject to the standards of § 84-57.13, and
medical marijuana dispensary.
A. Lot size: two acres minimum for vehicular sales and service agency for
the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles; 40,000 square feet minimum for
gasoline service stations, vehicular sales and service agency for the sale
and/or leasing of used vehicles and motorcycle sales, supermarkets and
car washes; 20,000 square feet minimum for all other uses.
B. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 200 feet minimum for gasoline
service stations, vehicular sales and service agency for the sale and/or
leasing of new and used vehicles, supermarkets and car washes; 100
feet minimum on noncorner lots for all other uses; 125 feet minimum on
corner lots for all other uses.
C. Lot width at building line: 300 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 50% maximum for vehicular sales and service agency for
the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles; 20% maximum for gasoline
§ 84-32 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-33
72:646
§ 84-34. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
service stations; 40% maximum on noncorner lots for all other uses;
30% maximum on corner lots for all other uses.
E. Floor area ratio: 0.80 maximum.
F. Building setback line: 50 feet minimum for vehicular sales and service
agency for the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles; 40 feet minimum for
all other uses.
G. Setback for outdoor displays or parking facilities: 20 feet minimum.
[Amended 7-31-2013 by Ord. No. 09-2013]
H. Side yards: 30 feet minimum for vehicular sales and service agency for
the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles; 15 feet minimum each side for
all other uses.
I. Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
J. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 40 feet.
K. Paved surface area: may not exceed 60% of total lot area for vehicular
sales and service agency for the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles;
may not exceed 55% of total lot area for all other uses.
L. Green area (landscaped): 30% minimum for vehicular sales and service
agency for the sale and/or leasing of new vehicles; 20% minimum for all
other uses.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter or as directed by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
E. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
§ 84-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-34
72:647

ARTICLE XI
C-1-R Neighborhood Commercial District -- Restricted
§ 84-35. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 84-36. Area and bulk regulations; design standards.
The area and bulk regulations set forth in § 84-19 and the design standards
set forth in § 84-20 of Article VI shall apply to all uses permitted under this
section.
A. Office building or offices for administrative, executive, professional or
similar organizations having limited contact with the general public,
provided that no merchandise is kept or stored on the premises for
purpose of sale thereof.
B. One single-family residence in rear of or on second floor over a
commercial establishment.
C. Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001206]
D. Customary accessory uses associated with the foregoing.
206. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection D.
§ 84-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-36
72:649

ARTICLE XII
Industrial Zoning Districts
[Added 8-8-1978 by Ord. No. 6-1978207]
§ 84-37. I-1 Campus Light Industrial District.
A. District purpose and use regulations. The purpose of this district is to
provide areas for industrial development seeking spacious and
attractive settings. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot
or premises may be used for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Research engineering or test laboratory.
(2) Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
including a retail activity on the lot and not including a junkyard or
the slaughtering of animals.
(2.1) Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility. [Added 7-24-1990 by
Ord. No. 5-1990; amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
(3) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution.208 [Added 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
(3.1) Microbrewery and brewery pub. [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1-2017]
(4) Offices.
(5) Commercial airport. [Amended 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 7-1981]
(6) Public place of amusement or recreation; athletic club. [Amended
1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
11-2007]
(7) Financial establishment.
(8) Agricultural use, as prescribed by the farm regulations in § 84-50 of
this chapter.
(9) Radio and television studio, including the erection of microwave
antennas for satellite communication and related equipment used
for purposes of transmitting and receiving radio or electromagnetic
waves from overhead satellites. The design standards of
§ 84-57.01D of this chapter shall apply. [Added 7-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 3-1995209]
207. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Article XII, I-1
Limited Industrial District, and former Article XIII, I-2 General Industrial District, as
amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 4-1977.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding a public utility installation required for
the Campus Light Industrial District, was repealed 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014 and
10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 84-37 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-37
72:651
(10)Kennels. [Added 8-26-1998 by Ord. No. 11-1998210]
(11) Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001]
(12) Mineral extraction. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001211]
(13) Ambulatory care center. [Added 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017
212]
(14) Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the principal
building structure or use, including but not limited to restaurant,
cafeteria or recreational uses and a home-related business as an
accessory use to a lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(15) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of
this chapter. The area and bulk regulations of this article, the
design standards of this article and the general performance
design standards of this article shall apply to all uses permitted by
special exception in the Campus Light Industrial District.
(a) Radio and television transmitter, including such as an
accessory use, if it is of any type requiring licensing by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(b) Child day-care center, adult day-care center and group daycare
center. [Amended 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989;
9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(c) Retail sales as an accessory use, subject to the limitations
imposed by § 84-53. [Added 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
(16) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional
use, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC
and this Zoning Chapter. [Added 12-28-1993 by Ord. No.
8-1993; amended 3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997; 4-22-1998
by Ord. No. 5-1998; 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(a) Private club, provided that any building used for such use shall
not be located within 500 feet of any residential use, subject to
209. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that former Subsection A(9) and (10) be
renumbered as Subsection A(10) and (11).
210. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that former Subsection A(10) through (13) be
renumbered as Subsection A(11) through (14), respectively.
211. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(11) through (14) as
C(13) through (16), respectively.
212. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(13) through (15) as Subsection A(14) through (16), respectively.
§ 84-37 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-37
72:652
the area and bulk regulations, design standards and general
performance standards of § 84-37B, C and D, and further
provided that such club does not offer entertainment that
would constitute a sexually oriented business. [Amended
4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
(b) (Reserved)213
(c) 214Public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility
subject to the standards in § 84-56. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
B. Area and bulk regulations. The following area and bulk regulations shall
apply:
(1) Lot size: four acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building setback line: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 100 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 60 feet minimum for each side yard.
(7) Green area:
(a) Under seven acres: 40% minimum.
(b) Seven acres and over: 35% minimum.
(8) Rear yard: 60 feet minimum.
(9) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(10) Tower and chimney location: 60 feet minimum from any lot line.
(11) Paved surface area: a maximum of 40% of the lot area.
(12) Yard contiguous to a residential zoning district or a residential use,
except for residential uses permitted by this chapter in any
industrial district or industrial-commercial district established in
Article XII of this chapter. [Amended 6-14-1983 by Ord. No.
4-1983; 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005]
(a) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(b) Side yard: 100 feet.
213. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(15)(b), regarding wireless communications facilities,
was repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
214. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(15)(c), which permitted certain educational uses as
conditional uses, was repealed 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011.
§ 84-37 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-37
72:653
§ 84-38. I-2 Light Industrial District.
(c) The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards provided for in
Subsection B(12)(a) and (b) shall be maintained as a buffer
zone as follows:
[1] The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards shall be treated as a
buffer zone and shall be left and retained in their natural
states, with all natural vegetation left undisturbed.
[2] In the event that the screening requirements of § 84-55A
are not met after application of § 84-37B(12)(c)[1], there
shall be added to the undisturbed buffer zone the
screening required by § 84-55A.
[3] The buffer zone shall not be used for any industrial or
accessory use, nor shall any structure, building, parking,
roads or driveways be permitted within such zone, and the
zone shall be left and maintained in its natural state.
[4] For purposes of this subsection, the words "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including but not
limited to grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any other flora
located on a lot.
(13) Parking area setback from property lines:
(a) Side or rear yard: 10 feet minimum.
(b) Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(14) Height of structure: 60 feet minimum.
C. Design standards. The following design standards shall apply:
(1) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(4) Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
(5) Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
(6) Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
(7) Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
(8) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
D. General performance standards. Uses located in the Campus Light
Industrial Zoning District shall comply with § 84-57.1, General
performance standards, located in Article XIV of this chapter.
§ 84-37 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-38
72:654
A. District purpose and use regulations. The purpose of this district is to
provide areas for a wide variety of industrial and selected business uses
seeking attractive settings where lot sizes and industrial and business
uses would tend to be smaller than those in the I-1 District. A building
may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be used for
any of the following purposes and for no other:
(1) Research, engineering or test laboratory.
(2) Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
involving a retail activity on the lot and not including a junkyard or
the slaughtering of animals.
(2.1) Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility. [Added 7-24-1990 by
Ord. No. 5-1990; amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
(2.2) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution. [Added 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
(3) 215Municipal, county, state and federal uses including fire, police
and ambulance facilities. [Added 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(4) Contractor's establishment not engaging in any retail activities on
the site.
(5) Offices.
(6) Mass transit station.
(7) Public place of amusement or recreation; athletic club. [Amended
1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
11-2007]
(8) Financial establishment.
(9) Commercial greenhouse.
(10) Agricultural use: as prescribed by the farm regulations in § 84-50.
(11) Automobile body repair and paint shop or automobile repair shop.
[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995 216; amended
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
(12) Hotel/motel, provided that the minimum lot size for the use shall be
three acres. [Added 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 7-97 217]
215. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Public utility installation, municipal, county, state
and federal use, including fire, police or ambulance facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014.
216. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(11) and Subsection A(12) as Subsection A(12) and (13), respectively.
217. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(12) and (13) as
Subsection A(13) and (14) and former Subsection A(13)(e) as Subsection A(14)(d).
§ 84-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-38
72:655
(13) Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001]
(14) Mineral extraction. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001 218]
(14.1) Microbrewery and brewery pub. [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1-2017]
(14.2) Rental business. [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
(15) Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the principal
building, structure or use, including but not limited to restaurant,
cafeteria or recreational uses and a home-related business as an
accessory use to a lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(16) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of
this chapter. The area and bulk regulations of this article, the
design standards of this article and the general performance
standards of this article shall apply to all uses permitted by special
exception in the Light Industrial District.
(a) Radio and television transmitter, including such as an
accessory use, if it is of any type requiring licensing by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(b) Child day-care center, adult day-care center and group daycare
center. [Amended 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989;
9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(c) Retail sales as an accessory use, subject to the limitations
imposed by § 84-53. [Amended 3-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2-1999]
(d) Churches.219 [Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 8-1990]
(17) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional
use, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC
and this Zoning Chapter. [Added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998;
amended 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(a) (Reserved)220
218. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(13) through (15) as
Subsection A(15) through (17), respectively.
219. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(12)(d), which permitted motels, was repealed
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994.
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(17)(a), regarding wireless communications facilities,
was repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
§ 84-38 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-38
72:656
(b) 221Public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility
subject to the standards in § 84-56. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
B. Area and bulk regulations. The following area and bulk regulations shall
apply to all uses in the I-2 District except for a sales and service agency
for used vehicles and for motorcycle sales. The area and bulk
regulations in § 84-33 shall apply to a sales and service agency for used
vehicles and for motorcycle sales. [Amended 6-28-2006 by Ord. No.
6-2006]
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building setback line: 200 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 50% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 30 feet minimum for each side yard.
(7) Green area (landscaped): 30% minimum.
(8) Rear yard: 35 feet minimum.
(9) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(10) Tower and chimney location: 50 feet minimum from any lot line.
(11) Paved surface area: a maximum of 60% of the lot area.
(12) Yard contiguous to a residential zoning district or a residential use:
[Amended 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 4-1983]
(a) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(b) Side yard: 100 feet.
(c) The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards provided for in
Subsection B(12)(a) and (b) shall be maintained as a buffer
zone as follows:
[1] The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards shall be treated as a
buffer zone and shall be left and retained in their natural
states, with all natural vegetation left undisturbed.
[2] In the event that the screening requirements of § 84-55A
are not met after application of § 84-38B(12)(c)[1], there
shall be added to the undisturbed buffer zone the
screening required by § 84-55A.
221. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(17)(b), which permitted certain educational uses as
conditional uses, was repealed 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011.
§ 84-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-38
72:657
§ 84-39. I-3 General Industrial District.
[3] The buffer zone shall not be used for any industrial or
accessory use, nor shall any structure, building, parking,
roads or driveways be permitted within such zone, and the
zone shall be left and maintained in its natural state.
[4] For purposes of this subsection, the words "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including, but not
limited to, grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any other flora
located on a lot.
(13) Parking area setback from property lines:
(a) Side or rear yard: 10 feet minimum.
(b) Front yard: 20 feet minimum.
(14) Height of structure: 60 feet maximum.
C. Design standards. The design standards in the Campus Light Industrial
District shall also apply to the Light Industrial District.
D. General performance standards. Uses located in the Light Industrial
Zoning District shall comply with § 84-57.1, General performance
standards, located in Article XIV of this chapter.
A. District purpose and use regulations. The purpose of this district is to
provide areas for a wide variety of industries that require smaller lots
and prefer a more built-up environment than the uses located in the
other industrial zoning districts. A building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used for any of the following
purposes and for no other:
(1) Research, engineering or test laboratory.
(2) Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
involving a retail activity on the lot and not including a junkyard or
the slaughtering of animals; except that an automobile repair shop
is permitted and may involve a retail activity. [Amended
11-9-1982 by Ord. No. 7-1982]
(2.1) Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility. [Added 7-24-1990 by
Ord. No. 5-1990; amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
(2.2) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution. [Added 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
§ 84-38 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-39
72:658
(3) 222Municipal, county, state and federal uses including fire, police
and ambulance facilities. [Added 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(4) Truck freight terminal.
(5) Contractor's establishment not engaged in any retail activities on
the site.
(6) Offices.
(7) Agricultural uses.
(8) Public place of amusement or recreation; athletic club. [Amended
1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
11-2007]
(9) Community center, adult education center.
(10) Financial establishment.
(11) Lumberyard.
(12) The sale, leasing and repair of trucks and tractor-trailers.
[Amended 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 5-1996; 1-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 1-2003]
(13) Commercial greenhouse.
(14) Automobile body repair and paint shop. [Added 10-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 7-1995 223]
(15) Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 6-2001 224]
(15.1) Microbrewery and brewery pub. [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1-2017]
(15.2) Medical marijuana grower/processor. [Added 4-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 1-2017]
(16) Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the principal
building, structure or use, including but not limited to restaurant,
cafeteria or recreational uses and a home-related business as an
accessory use to a lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
222. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Public utility installation, municipal, county, state
and federal use, including fire, police or ambulance facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014.
223. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering former Subsection A(14)
and (15) as A(15) and (16), respectively.
224. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(15) through (17) as
A(16) through (18), respectively.
§ 84-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-39
72:659
(17) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of
this chapter. The area and bulk regulations of this article, the
design standards of this article and the general performance
standards of this article shall apply to all uses permitted by special
exception in this General Industrial District.
(a) Radio and television transmitter, including such as an
accessory use, if it is of any type requiring licensing by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(b) Retail sales as an accessory use, subject to the limitations
imposed by § 84-53. [Amended 3-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2-1999]
(18) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional
use, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC
and this Zoning Chapter. [Added 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998;
amended 11-20-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]
(a) (Reserved)225
(b) 226Public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility
subject to the standards in § 84-56. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
B. Area and bulk regulations. The following area and bulk regulations shall
apply:
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Width at building setback line: 150 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 60% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 20 feet minimum for each side yard.
(7) Green area: 20% minimum.
(8) Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
(9) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
225. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18)(a), regarding wireless communications facilities,
was repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
226. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18)(b), which permitted certain educational uses as
conditional uses, was repealed 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011.
§ 84-39 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-39
72:660
§ 84-40. I-2-R Light Industrial District--Restricted. [Added
2-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1-1980; amended 11-9-1982 by Ord. No.
8-1982; 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
(10) Tower and chimney location: 50 feet minimum from any lot line.
(11) Paved surface area: a maximum of 65% of the total lot area.
(12) Yard contiguous to a residential zoning district or a residential use:
[Amended 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 4-1983]
(a) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(b) Side yard: 100 feet.
(c) The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards provided for in
Subsection B(12)(a) and (b) shall be maintained as a buffer
zone as follows:
[1] The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards shall be treated as a
buffer zone and shall be left and retained in their natural
states, with all natural vegetation left undisturbed.
[2] In the event that the screening requirements of § 84-55A
are not met after application of § 84-39B(12)(c)[1], there
shall be added to the undisturbed buffer zone the
screening required by § 84-55A.
[3] The buffer zone shall not be used for any industrial or
accessory use, nor shall any structure, building, parking,
roads or driveways be permitted within such zone, and the
zone shall be left and maintained in its natural state.
[4] For purposes of this subsection, the words "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including but not
limited to grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any other flora
located on a lot.
(13) Parking area setback from property lines:
(a) Side or rear yard: 10 feet minimum.
(b) Front yard: 10 feet minimum.
(14) Height of structures: 60 feet maximum.
C. Design standards. The design standards in the Campus Light Industrial
District shall also apply to the General Industrial District.
D. General performance standards. Uses located in the General Industrial
District shall comply with the § 84-57.1, General performance
standards, located in Article XIV of this chapter.
§ 84-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-40
72:661
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or
premises may be used for any of the following purposes and for no
other:
(1) Research, engineering or test laboratory.
(2) Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
involving a retail activity on the lot and not including a junkyard or
the slaughtering of animals.
(2.1) Miniwarehouse.
(2.2) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution. [Added 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
(3) 227Municipal, county, state and federal uses including fire, police
and ambulance facilities. [Added 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(4) Contractor's establishment not engaging in any retail activities on
the site.
(5) Offices.
(6) Mass transit station.
(7) Public recreation facility; athletic club.
(8) Financial establishment.
(9) Commercial greenhouse.
(10) Agricultural use: as prescribed by the farm regulations in § 84-50.
(11) Automobile body repair and paint shop.
(12) Hotel/motel, provided that the minimum lot size for the use shall be
three acres.
(13) Forestry, subject to the standards in § 84-57.8.
(14) Mineral extraction.
(15) Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the principal
building, structure or use, including but not limited to restaurant,
cafeteria or recreational uses and a home-related business as an
accessory use to a lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(16) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of
this chapter. The area and bulk regulations of this article, the
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Public utility installation, municipal, county, state
and federal use, including fire, police or ambulance facility, was repealed 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 3-2014.
§ 84-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-40
72:662
design standards of this article and the general performance
standards of this article shall apply to all uses permitted by special
exception in the Light Industrial District.
(a) Radio and television transmitter, including such as an
accessory use, if it is of any type requiring licensing by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(b) Child day-care center, adult day-care center and group daycare
center.
(c) Retail sales as an accessory use, subject to the limitations
imposed by § 84-53.
(d) Churches.
(17) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional
use, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC
and this Zoning Chapter.
(a) (Reserved)228
(b) Independent living facility pursuant to the following:
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011]
[1] Area and bulk regulations in § 84-40B(3);
[2] Design standards in § 84-40C; and
[3] Regulations in § 84-57.15.
(c) Apartments pursuant to the area and bulk requirements in
§ 84-40B(2).
(d) Public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility subject
to the standards in § 84-56. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(e) Lifestyle apartments as defined by this chapter, subject to the
area and bulk requirements set forth in § 84-40B(4). [Added
5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
B. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all uses in
the I-2-R District, except apartments and independent living
facilities. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011]
(a) Lot size: two acres minimum.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(17)(a), regarding wireless communications facilities,
was repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
§ 84-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-40
72:663
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 200 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 50% maximum.
(e) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(f) Side yards: 30 feet minimum for each side yard.
(g) Green area (landscaped): 30% minimum.
(h) Rear yard: 35 feet minimum.
(i) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(j) Tower and chimney location: 50 feet minimum from any lot
line.
(k) Paved surface area: a maximum of 60% of the lot area.
(l) Yard contiguous to a residential zoning district or a residential
use:
[1] Rear yard: 100 feet.
[2] Side yard: 100 feet.
[3] The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards provided for in
Subsection B(1)(l)[1] and [2] shall be maintained as a
buffer zone as follows:
[a] The one-hundred-foot side/rear yards shall be treated
as a buffer zone and shall be left and retained in their
natural state, with all natural vegetation left
undisturbed.
[b] In the event that the screening requirements of
§ 84-55A are not met after application of
§ 84-40B(1)(l)[3][a], there shall be added to the
undisturbed buffer zone the screening required by
§ 84-55A.
[c] The buffer zone shall not be used for any industrial or
accessory use, nor shall any structure or building be
permitted within such zone, and the zone shall be left
and maintained in its natural state.
[d] For purposes of this section, the words "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including but not
limited to grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any other
flora located on a lot.
§ 84-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-40
72:664
(2) The following area and bulk requirements shall apply to
apartments in the I-2 R District: [Amended 1-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 3-2008]
(a) Lot size: eight acres minimum.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 200 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(e) Paved area (excluding parking structures): 20% maximum.
(f) Green area (landscaped): 55% minimum.
(g) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(h) Side and rear yard: 35 feet minimum except where the side
yard and rear yard abut an existing residential district, in
which case the side yard and rear yard shall be a minimum of
100 feet subject to the following additional conditions.
[1] The one-hundred-foot side or rear yard shall be maintained
as a buffer zone as follows:
[a] Said buffer zone shall be left and retained in its
natural state with all natural vegetation left
undisturbed, except as otherwise permitted in
Subsection B(2)(h)[1][c] below.
[b] The existing buffer may be supplemented as required
by the Board of Supervisors during the conditional use
process with some or all of the screening required by
§ 84-55A of this chapter.
[c] The buffer zone shall not be used for any accessory
use nor shall any structure or building be permitted
within said buffer zone, with the exception that
passive recreation areas inclusive of trails fencing and
benches shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
Perimeter site fencing along the lot boundary shall
also be permitted within the buffer zone.
[d] For purposes of this section, the words "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including, but
not limited to, grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any
other flora located on a lot.
(i) Building height: 45 feet maximum; provided, however, that the
maximum height of an apartment building may be increased to
50 feet if approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
conditional use approval to allow for a pitched roof treatment
and architectural amenities associated with the same.
§ 84-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-40
72:665
(j) Retaining walls: The height and location of retaining walls
otherwise regulated in § 84-7 of this chapter may be modified
by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use
approval upon a finding by the Township Engineer that said
height and location do not obstruct clear sight angles and is
necessary to facilitate road improvement to existing Township
roads.
(k) Parking space setback from property lines:
[1] Side or rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
[2] Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(3) The following area and bulk requirements shall apply to an
independent living facility in the I-2-R District: [Added
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011]
(a) Lot size: five acres minimum.
(b) Lot width at building line: 300 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 40% maximum.
(e) Green area: 55% minimum.
(f) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(g) Side and rear yard: 25 feet minimum except where the side and
rear yard abut an existing residential district in which case the
side and rear yard shall be a minimum of 100 feet subject to
the following additional conditions:
[1] The one-hundred-foot side or rear yard shall be maintained
as a buffer zone as follows:
[a] Said buffer shall be left and retained in its natural
state with all natural vegetation left undisturbed
except as allowed pursuant to Subsection B(3)(g)[1][c]
below.
[b] The existing buffer may be supplemented as required
by the Board of Supervisors during the conditional use
process with some or all of the screening required by
§ 84-55A of this chapter.
[c] The buffer zone shall not be used for any accessory
use nor shall any structure or building be permitted
within said buffer zone, with the exception that
passive recreation areas inclusive of trails, fencing
and benches shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
§ 84-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-40
72:666
Perimeter site fencing along the lot boundary shall
also be permitted within the buffer zone.
[d] For purposes of this subsection, the words, "natural
vegetation" shall mean any plant life, including, but
not limited to, grasses, bushes, trees, vines and any
other flora located on a lot.
(h) Building height: 45 feet maximum, provided, however, that the
maximum height of the independent living facility may be
increased to 50 feet if approved by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the conditional use approval to allow for a pitched roof
treatment and architectural amenities associated with the
same.
(i) Parking space setback from all property lines: 20 feet
minimum.
(4) The following area, bulk and parking requirements shall apply to
lifestyle apartments in the I-2-R District: [Added 5-21-2018 by
Ord. No. 3-2018]
(a) Lot size: three acres minimum.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 300 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 300 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 40% maximum.
(e) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(f) Green area (landscaped): 30% minimum.
(g) Building height: 60 feet maximum.
(h) Paved surface area: 35% maximum.
(i) Parking area setback from property lines: 10 feet minimum.
(j) Front yard setback: 10 feet minimum.
(k) Side and rear yard setback: 25 feet minimum.
(l) Parking ratio: one off-street parking space per studio or onebedroom
apartment; 1.5 off-street parking spaces for each twobedroom
apartment. Parking spaces shall be dimensioned at
nine feet by 18 feet.
C. Design standards. The design standards in the I-1 Campus Light
Industrial District shall also apply to the I-2-R Light Industrial District--
Restricted. In addition, for an independent living facility, the following
design standards shall apply: [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No.
12-2011]
§ 84-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-40
72:667
§ 84-41. I-C Industrial-Commercial District. [Added 4-9-2003 by
Ord. No. 5-2003]
(1) Landscaping requirements. All portions of the property which are
not utilized for buildings, structures or paved areas shall be
landscaped in accordance with an approved landscape plan which
utilizes combinations of landscaping, fencing, shrubbery, lawn
areas, ground cover, rock formations, existing foliage and planting
of conifers and deciduous trees native to the area in order to lessen
the visual impact of the buildings, structures and paved areas.
(2) Side and rear yard buffers. The screening requirements in § 84-55A
shall apply to the side and rear yard areas for all independent living
facilities in the I-2-R District. The landowner shall maintain the
screen planting and replace any plant material which does not live
and which is necessary to form a complete visual screen.
(3) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
D. General performance standards. Uses located in the Light Industrial
Restricted District shall comply with § 84-57.1, titled, "General
performance standards," located in Article XIV of this chapter.
A. District purpose and use regulations. The purpose of this district is to
provide areas for industrial development seeking spacious and
attractive settings and to provide areas for adult entertainment uses
along a public highway that are not in close proximity to residential
areas, schools and churches. In addition, where the Township deems it
appropriate, certain areas will be available for retirement communities
and independent and/or assisted living facilities under the prescribed
area and bulk requirements. A building may be erected, altered and/or
used and a lot or premises may be used for any of the following
purposes and for no other: [Amended 12-10-2014 by Ord. No.
8-2014]
(1) Research engineering or test laboratory.
(2) Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
including a retail activity on the lot and not including a junkyard or
the slaughtering of animals.
(3) Miniwarehouse or self-storage facility. [Amended 10-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 11-2007]
(4) Wholesale sales, storage or distribution.229 [Added 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
(5) Offices.
229. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), Public utility installation, was repealed 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 3-2014 and 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 84-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-41
72:668
(6) Commercial airport.
(7) Public place of amusement or recreation; athletic club. [Amended
10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
(8) Financial establishment.
(9) Agricultural use, as prescribed by the farm regulations in § 84-50 of
this chapter.
(10)Radio and television studio, including the erection of microwave
antennas for satellite communication and related equipment used
for purposes of transmitting and receiving radio or electromagnetic
waves from overhead satellites. The design standards of
§ 84-57.01D of this chapter shall apply.
(11)Kennels.
(12) Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the principal
building, structure or use, including but not limited to restaurant,
cafeteria or recreational uses and a home-related business as an
accessory use to a lawful nonconforming single-family detached
dwelling. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
(13) The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of
this chapter:
(a) Radio and television transmitter, including such as an
accessory use, if it is of any type requiring licensing by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(b) Adult education center, child day-care center, adult day-care
center and group day-care home.
(c) Retail sales as an accessory use, subject to the limitations
imposed by § 84-53.
(14) The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors and subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the Board:
(a) Private club, provided that any building used for such use shall
not be located within 500 feet of any residential use and
provided further that such club does not offer entertainment
that would constitute a sexually oriented business.
(b) (Reserved)230
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(14)(b), wireless communications facility, was repealed
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015. Said subsection was originally adopted as Subsection
A(14)(c); however, original Subsection A(14)(b), education use, was repealed 12-14-2011
by Ord. No. 12-2011, and original Subsection A(14)(c) through (k) were redesignated as
Subsection A(14)(b) through (j), respectively.
§ 84-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-41
72:669
(c) Adult arcades, which use shall not be permitted in any other
zoning district in the Township.
(d) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores and adult video stores,
which uses shall not be permitted in any other zoning district
in the Township.
(e) Adult cabarets, which use shall not be permitted in any other
zoning district in the Township.
(f) Adult motion-picture theaters and adult theaters, which uses
shall not be permitted in any other zoning district in the
Township.
(g) Escort agencies, which use shall not be permitted in any other
zoning district in the Township.
(h) Nude model studios, which use shall not be permitted in any
other zoning district in the Township.
(i) Sexual encounter centers, which use shall not be permitted in
any other zoning district in the Township.
(j) Retirement community. [Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No.
3-2005]
(k) Public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility subject
to the standards in § 84-56. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
3-2014; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(l) Assisted and/or independent living facilities. [Added
12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
B. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
(1) The area and bulk regulations in § 84-37B shall apply to all uses
permitted by right, special exception or conditional use in the
Industrial-Commercial District except for the conditional uses that
constitute either sexually oriented businesses, assisted and/or
independent living facilities or retirement communities.
[Amended 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
(2) The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all sexually
oriented businesses in the Industrial-Commercial District:
(a) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 150 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 30% maximum.
(e) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
§ 84-41 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-41
72:670
(f) Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each side yard.
(g) Green area: 20%.
(h) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(i) Building height: three stories, not to exceed 35 feet maximum.
(j) Paved surface area: may not exceed 55% of total lot.
(k) Parking area setback from property lines:
[1] Side or rear yard: 10 feet minimum.
[2] Front yard: 50 feet minimum.
(3) The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the
development tract of a retirement community:
(a) Minimum development tract area: 35 acres.
(b) Maximum number of dwelling units per acre: 6.5 units per
acre.
(c) Minimum building setback from street right-of-way: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 40 feet, except if at grade under
building parking is designed and constructed, then the height
of building, as defined in § 84-8, may increase to 50 feet, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet.
(f) Minimum distance from buildings to tract boundary: 40 feet.
(g) Minimum green area: 55%.
(h) Maximum impervious coverage: 45%.
(i) Maximum length of any building or structure: 140 feet.
(j) Parking area setback from property line of development tract:
20 feet.
(4) The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the
development of an assisted and/or independent living facility:
[Added 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
(a) Minimum development tract area: five acres.
(b) Lot width at building line setback: 300 feet minimum.
(c) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(d) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(e) Minimum green area: 45%.
§ 84-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-41
72:671
(f) Minimum building setback from street right-of-way: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard: 30 feet.
(h) Minimum rear yard: 70 feet.
(i) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(j) Minimum parking space setback from all property lines: 10
feet.
C. Design standards. The following design standards shall apply to all uses
in the Industrial-Commercial District:
(1) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(4) Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
(5) Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
(6) Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
(7) Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
(8) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
D. General performance standards. Uses located in the Commercial-
Industrial Zoning District shall comply with § 84-57.1, General
performance standards, located in Article XIV of this chapter.
E. Separation requirement for sexually oriented business. A sexually
oriented business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another
sexually oriented business, church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related
religious activities, a public or private school, child day-care center and
public park. The distance between the two uses shall be measured by
the shortest distance between the lot on which the proposed sexually
oriented business will be located and the lot or lots which contain the
uses identified hereinabove.
F. Design standards and general performance standards for a retirement
community. [Added 2-9-20054 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
(1) The purpose of the retirement community is to:
(a) To insure that the provisions of this chapter that are concerned
with provisions of a full range of housing options are met.
(b) To provide greater opportunities for housing and recreation for
Township residents over age 55.
§ 84-41 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-41
72:672
(2) No application for approval of a retirement community
development shall be considered or approved unless the following
conditions are met.
(a) Retirement communities shall provide a combination of
individual dwelling units as defined in § 84-8, except
apartments or apartment buildings, and may include a
community center consisting of one or more buildings with
other amenities as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Not less than 40% of the development tract shall be designated
as and used exclusively for common open space. Ownership,
location, design, layout and maintenance of the common open
space shall be consistent with the following criteria:
[1] Common open space shall be defined as set forth in § 84-8.
[2] Common open space shall be contiguous to the dwelling
units throughout the development tract;
[3] Consideration shall be given to the arrangement and
location of common open space to take advantage of
physical characteristics of the site and to place common
open space within easy access and view of the dwelling
units at the same time preserving and enhancing natural
features. Areas set aside for the common open space shall
contain no structures other than a community house and
structure related to active recreational uses as permitted
by the Board of Supervisors.
[4] Common open space shall be made subject to such
agreement with the Township and such deed restrictions
duly recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in
Chester County as may be required by the Board of
Supervisors for the purpose of preserving the common
open space for such use.
[5] Common open space areas will be suitably landscaped,
either by retaining existing natural cover and wooded
areas and/or by a landscaping plan for enhancing open
space areas through landscaping that is consistent with
the purposes of this subsection and which is designed to
minimize maintenance costs.
[6] The provisions of ownership and maintenance of the
common open space shall be in accord with the
requirements of § 84-128D(4), (5), (6) and (7) respectively.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street and
shall be at least five feet in width and separated from the edge
of the street by a grass strip of at least 18 inches in width.
§ 84-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-41
72:673
(d) Pedestrian paths shall connect to the sidewalk system and
meander through the open space to provide a contiguous
system for walking, if required by the Board of Supervisors at
conditional use.
(e) In addition to the requirements of § 84-55C of this chapter,
shade trees/street trees shall be installed and maintained on
both sides of all streets and shall be spaced at forty-foot
centers.
(f) All streets shall be private and shall not be dedicated to the
Township, however, if any street is offered for dedication to the
Township, it must meet the design and construction standards
of Chapter 72, Subdivision of Land.
(g) All parking shall be provided at a minimum of two spaces per
dwelling unit, plus one additional space per six units for
multiunit structures but not townhouses, plus one space for
each employee at the community center. A portion of the
required parking may be provided under the building as
approved by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be required to
be located under the building if the height of the building is
proposed to be increased per § 84-41B(3)(d).
(h) Landscaping shall be accomplished in accordance with
§ 84-55C of this chapter.
(i) Lighting, as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
(j) Screening as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as
directed by the Board of Supervisors.
(k) It shall be a condition of final subdivision approval or final site
plan approval that the developer markets and maintains the
retirement community so as to qualify for the exemptions to
the prohibition against discrimination based on familial status
found in Section 3607(b)(1) of the United States Fair Housing
Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., and the Housing for Older
Persons Act of 1995, and the regulations promulgated therein
at 24 C.F.R. 100.300 through 100.304.
§ 84-41 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-41
72:674
ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)231
§ 84-42. (Reserved)
§ 84-43. (Reserved)
§ 84-44. (Reserved)
231. Editor's Note: Former Article XIII, I-2 General Industrial District, was repealed 8-8-1978
by Ord. No. 6-1978. For current provisions see Article XII of this chapter.
§ 84-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-44
72:675

ARTICLE XIV
Supplemental Regulations
§ 84-45. Visibility at intersections.
The following shall apply to all zoning districts. On a corner lot or at a
point of entry on a public road, nothing shall be erected, placed or allowed
to grow in a manner which obscures vision above the height of 2 1/2 feet,
measured from the center-line grades of the intersecting streets, and within
the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points on these street lines 25 feet from their intersection.
§ 84-46. Stripping of topsoil; excavation of clay, sand, gravel or
rock.
The following shall apply to all residential districts:
§ 84-47. Projections into required yards. [Amended 7-7-1987 by
Ord. No. 9-1987; 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
The following regulations shall apply to all zoning districts, except as
otherwise limited as specified in this section. Otherwise, all required yards
shall be and remain unobstructed, except as herein specified:
A. Topsoil or sod may be removed from a premises only under the
following conditions:
(1) In connection with the construction or alteration of a street.
(2) Where sod farming is conducted.
(3) Where mushroom soil farming is conducted.
B. The excavation of clay, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral shall be
permitted, and the material thus excavated may be sold only as part of
the construction of a building or alteration of a street. Excavation shall
not be conducted in a way which will leave loose boulders exposed.
A. A patio, terrace, deck or unroofed porch may project into a rear yard,
provided that they are set back a minimum of 15 feet from adjacent
property line in the R-3 Residential District and R-4 Residential District
and a minimum of 25 feet from the adjacent property line in the R-2
Residential District.
B. An open fire escape may project not more than six feet into any side or
rear yard.
C. The overhang or eave of a roof may project a maximum of two feet into
any yard. A roof not to exceed 20 square feet over an entrance or exit
door may project into any yard.
D. In the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts, one shed may be located
within a required rear yard or side yard but not in a front yard or within
§ 84-45 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-47
72:677
the required building setback line, provided that it shall be set back a
minimum of six feet from the side or rear property line. A permit shall
be required per § 84-67A of this chapter.
E. In any district in which either a gasoline service station or other use
which includes, as an integral part thereof, the retail sale and
dispensing of gasoline through full service or self-service metered
gasoline pumps is a permitted use, whether by right, special exception
or conditional use, the overhang of a canopy, as herein defined,
designed and intended to provide a permanent cover over the gasoline
pump islands to protect customers and their vehicles positioned there
for service from inclement weather may encroach into the front yard
within the required building setback area, provided that the leading
edge or facade of the overhang shall be set back not less than 10 feet
from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way. The supporting
structure of the overhang shall be set back as required by the
applicable district regulations for gasoline pumps. For purposes of this
regulation, the leading edge or facade of the canopy is the outside face
or edge of that part of the canopy which is parallel to the right-of-way, a
canopy is a permanent, roof-like structure without walls permanently
attached by posts or columns to the ground and the overhang is that
part of the canopy which extends beyond the district's minimum
building setback. [Added 3-26-1997 by Ord. No. 5-1997]
F. In the I-C Industrial-Commercial District, noise barriers may be
permitted in required yards, except front yards, between any industrial
use permitted by § 84-41A(1) through (4) and a residential use located
within the district, when approved as a conditional use, as determined
necessary and appropriate by the Board for noise abatement, subject to
the following regulations: [Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005]
(1) The structures shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
contiguous lot line or street right-of-way.
(2) The sound barrier structures shall comply with standards for such
structures promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, but shall not exceed 12 feet in height measured
from the undisturbed ground level.
(3) The sound barrier structures shall be screened from the contiguous
lot line and/or street right-of-way by landscaping consisting of
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs meeting the
requirements of § 84-55A.
(4) Such other conditions as shall be imposed by the Board to insure
compliance with § 84-75.
G. Fences. [Added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006; amended
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
(1) Fences may be erected in the required front yard, provided they
meet the following criteria:
§ 84-47 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-47
72:678
(a) The fence does not exceed four feet in height.
(b) The fence is not solid and instead maintains a minimum one-toone
ratio of open-to-structural areas (such as a picket fence).
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection G(1) above, fences may be erected in
the required front yard of a through lot, provided they meet the
following criteria:
(a) The fence does not exceed six feet in height.
(b) The fence shall be constructed of a solid wood or vinyl
material.
(c) The fence shall be erected in the rear of the dwelling on a
through lot that adjoins one of the following streets: Pottstown
Pike, Paoli Pike, West Chester Pike, U.S. Route 322 and U.S.
Route 202.
(d) The fence shall be erected outside of the existing right-of-way.
(3) Fences may be erected in the required side or rear yards, provided
they meet the following criteria:
(a) The fence does not exceed six feet in height on a residential lot
and 10 feet in height on any other lot.
(b) Such fences may be solid.
(4) No permit is required prior to the erection of a fence, provided the
fence is less than six feet in height. Any fence which is six feet in
height or taller requires a building permit pursuant to the
procedures set forth in § 84-67.
H. Walls. [Added 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006]
(1) Freestanding walls shall not be permitted in the required front yard
area. Retaining walls with a height as approved by the Township
Engineer may be permitted in the required front yard, provided the
following criteria are met:
(a) The height of a retaining wall which is built in the required
front yard must be approved by the Township Engineer,
provided that the maximum height of a retaining wall in the
required front yard is four feet.
(b) The retaining wall is erected in a location which does not
obstruct clear site and is located a minimum of 10 feet from the
right-of-way.
(2) Freestanding walls and retaining walls may be built in the required
side and rear yard, provided that they do not exceed four feet in
height unless a height greater than four feet is approved by the
Township Engineer. The Township Engineer may approve a
§ 84-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-47
72:679
§ 84-48. Exceptions on height limitations. [Amended 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-1990; 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
§ 84-49. Outdoor storage.
Junkyards, as defined by this chapter, shall be prohibited in all residential
and commercial districts.
§ 84-50. Farm regulations.
Agriculture, farmhouses and usual farm buildings shall be permitted
without restriction except as follows:
freestanding wall or retaining wall which is greater than four feet
in height in the required side or rear yard area, provided the wall
is necessary for health and safety or must be installed to address
issues with regard to the topography of the site.
(3) All freestanding walls and retaining walls which are four feet in
height or taller require a building permit pursuant to the
procedures set forth in § 84-67.
I. Flagpoles. A flagpole shall be permitted in the required front, side and
rear yard with no exceptions. All flagpoles require a building permit
pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 84-67. [Added 6-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 6-2006]
A. Unless specifically permitted, no building or structure shall exceed the
maximum height of buildings specified in this chapter, except that the
regulations shall not apply to church steeples which are usually placed
above the roof level and are not intended for human occupancy.
B. Structures such as flagpoles, water towers and silos (but specifically
excluding windmills and solar energy collectors) shall be subject to and
shall not exceed the maximum permitted building height unless a
special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board and the
Board affirmatively finds that such structure is proposed, designed,
intended and limited in use only to such purpose. In such case, the
Board may approve such increased height as is proven by the applicant
to be warranted by the functional needs of the structure, subject to
such reasonable limitations and conditions as the Board shall impose;
provided, the height allowed by the Board shall not exceed two times
the permitted building height absent the Board's granting of a variance.
Provided further, no structure shall significantly impair solar access of
adjacent buildings or solar collection locations. [Amended 4-25-2012
by Ord. No. 04-2012]
A. The minimum size of a farm shall be three acres.
B. Farm buildings shall not be constructed closer than 85 feet to a front
property line nor closer than 100 feet to a side or rear property line.
§ 84-47 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-50
72:680
§ 84-51. House trailers.
House trailers may not be used for business or residential purposes except
in trailer camps legally operated; when in transit (and then for not more
than eight hours); or on special permit for temporary use as an office at
construction sites (limited to six months' use).
§ 84-52. Sign regulations. [Amended 2-26-1980 by Ord. No. 2-1980;
8-20-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
C. No farmhouse shall be constructed closer than 75 feet to such lines.
D. No barn or manure storage shall be established closer than 100 feet to
any property line.
E. There shall be no more than one additional dwelling for each 10 acres of
farm.
F. Silos and bulk bins shall be exempted when attached to an existing
building.
G. All other new construction, including structures for temporary storage
of feed, shall conform to setback requirements.
A. Purposes. The purposes of this section are to promote, protect and
preserve the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
West Goshen Township in accordance with the following objectives:
(1) To control the size, location and illumination of signs in the
Township in order to reduce hazards to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
(2) To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in
appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, in
order to enhance the economic value as well as the visual character
of the Township.
(3) To establish criteria designed to encourage signs which are
compatible with their surroundings, appropriate to the type of
activity to which they pertain, expressive of the identity of
individual proprietors and legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen.
(4) To prohibit sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that
may contribute to traffic accidents or hazards caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way.
(5) To prohibit the construction of and provide for the removal of signs
which constitute a hazardous or blighting influence.
(6) To establish criteria for the regulation of billboards along Route
202, to prevent the proliferation of billboards within the Township
and to provide for a maximum area for billboards sufficient to allow
§ 84-50 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:681
motorists in vehicles on Route 202 to safely detect, read and react
to messages set forth thereon. [Amended 1-24-2007 by Ord. No.
3-2007]
A.1. Legislative findings. The Board of Supervisors, having studied
and considered fully various information and data with regard
to the nature and character of the Township including,
without limitation, that certain report by the Township's
Special Traffic Consultant, Traffic Planning and Design, Inc.,
entitled "Billboard Ordinance Review TPD No.
WGOT.A.00004," finds as follows: [Added 1-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 3-2007]
(1) The Township is primarily residential in nature with long
established and centralized commercial and industrial
areas.
(2) The Township is traversed by U.S. Route 202 from the
Township's southwestern border with the Township of
Westtown to a point on the Township's eastern border
with the Township of East Goshen.
(3) U.S. Route 202 is a primary regional roadway with not
less than six grade-separated interchanges and one
signalized four-way intersection along its course through
the Township.
(4) Within the Township, and due in part to the presence of
the aforementioned interchanges and intersection, traffic
traveling on U.S. Route 202 proceeds at a rate of speed
slower than traffic on portions of that roadway outside of
the Township.
(5) Approximately 45,000 vehicles per day utilize U.S. Route
202 at its point of intersection with Matlack Street.
(6) Industrially zoned properties in the Township with
frontage on U.S. Route 202 are logical and proper places
within the Township at which billboards may be located.
(7) Outdoor signs, including billboards, are important and
valuable tools by which individuals, companies and other
organizations communicate commercial and
noncommercial messages to the general public.
(8) Notwithstanding their function and regardless of the
content of the messages displayed thereon, outdoor signs,
including billboards, have adverse secondary effects upon
the communities in which the same are located,
including, without limitation, detracting from the
aesthetic value of such communities and creating the
potential for traffic hazards.
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:682
(9) The proliferation of outdoor signs within the Township,
including billboards, would have the effect of cluttering
viewscapes from public roadways and would have
adverse effects upon the aesthetic values of properties
within the Township.
(10)The Board of Supervisors has a significant government
interest in preserving the aesthetic values of the
Township and properties located in the Township,
including, without limitation, viewscapes from public
roadways.
(11)The Board of Supervisors has a significant government
interest in preventing the cluttering effect that would
result from the proliferation of outdoor signs.
(12)The Board of Supervisors has a significant government
interest in preventing the creation of dangerous trafficrelated
conditions.
(13)The proliferation of outdoor signs within the Township,
including billboards, would have the effect of distracting
motorists, and such signs, if too small or too large in size,
would create the potential for motorists to direct their
attention away from the roadway in order to safely detect,
read and react to messages set forth on such signs.
(14)The regulations set forth at § 84-52 of the Zoning Chapter
are narrowly tailored to serve the Board of Supervisors'
significant government interests.
(15)Though the regulations set forth at § 84-52 of the Zoning
Chapter operate to prohibit certain off-site signs, the
Board of Supervisors does not intend to, and by § 84-52
of the Zoning Chapter does not, regulate the content
of the messages displayed on signs within the Township
including, without limitation, billboards.
(16)Notwithstanding the immediately preceding subsection,
to the extent that the regulations set forth at § 84-52
of the Zoning Chapter operate to regulate the content of
messages displayed on signs within the Township, such
is declared to be an unintended secondary effect of such
regulations and, in any event, the Board of Supervisors
finds that ample alternative channels exist within the
Township for such content, including, without limitation,
local cable and broadcast television, local print media and
radio.
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:683
(17)The Board of Supervisors incorporates herein that certain
report by the Township's Special Traffic Consultant,
Traffic Planning and Design, Inc., dated July 5, 2006,
and entitled "Billboard Ordinance Review TPD#
WGOT.A.00004" as if the same were set forth here in its
entirety.
B. Word usage and definitions.
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and regulations used to
identify and regulate sign types are herein described as follows:
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988; 5-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-1996; 10-22-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004; 12-8-2004
by Ord. No. 24-2004]
ADDRESS — A sign identifying a dwelling, building or lot number
and/or the occupant thereof. (Refer to § 54-6 of the West Goshen
Code.)
BALLOON — An air- or gas-filled device designed to attract
attention. The height of such device shall not exceed 10 feet.
BANNER — A sign consisting of lightweight, flexible material that
is supported by frame, rope, wires or other anchoring devices,
which may or may not include copy, logo or graphic symbols.
Banners across streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way shall
be permitted to promote community events or charitable,
educational, fraternal, civic or service organizations (permitted
banners). Banners to promote business or other commercial
enterprises are prohibited. Permitted banners are subject to the
following provisions:
BILLBOARD — A type of off-site sign, or part thereof, rectangular
in shape and displayed outdoors or visible from a public roadway
and which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, location or political or ideological position
or to express a point of view by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, pictures, images (projected or
otherwise), advertising flags, fixtures, colors or illuminations. Each
substantially different face of a billboard structure shall constitute
a separate billboard. Billboards do not include on-premises
signs.[Amended 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007]
Banners meeting the above definitions will be allowed as a
temporary sign not to exceed 30 days.
(a)
For any lot, banners shall be limited to one banner per public
street frontage.
(b)
Each banner shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and four
feet in height.
(c)
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:684
Where allowed. Billboards shall be allowed only by conditional
use pursuant to § 84-74 of this Zoning Chapter in the I-1
Campus Light Industrial District and the I-2 Light Industrial
District along the limited access Route 202 highway corridor
(West Chester Bypass) from Route 202's inception at its point
of connection with South High Street (SR322) to a terminus
point located at the Route 202 northbound on-ramp at Boot
Road.
(a)
Billboard area. No billboard shall have an area greater than
300 square feet. Only one billboard shall be permitted on
each billboard structure. No billboard shall be entitled to be
increased in area pursuant to the criteria for bonus sign area
otherwise provided for in § 84-52S.
(b)
Multisided billboards prohibited. No billboard structure shall
have more than one billboard mounted thereon. That is, no
more than one side of any billboard structure shall have any
message or advertisement set forth thereon. Furthermore, the
face of any billboard on which any message or advertisement
is set forth shall be oriented and maintained at an angle of not
less than 45° to the legal right-of-way line of U.S. Route 202
and shall face the oncoming flow of traffic on that side of U.S.
Route 202 on which the billboard structure is erected.
(c)
Height. The top of any billboard shall not be greater than 25
feet above the grade of the cartway of U.S. Route 202 at the
closest point of the cartway parallel to the center point of the
face of the billboard.
(d)
(e) Setback from Route 202 right-of-way: 25 feet.
Spacing. Measurements shall be made parallel to Route 202
between perpendiculars extended from the billboard locations
in question.
(f)
Billboards per property.
Between billboards. No billboard shall be erected or
located within 2,000 linear feet of an existing billboard on
either side of the highway.
[1]
From intersections and ramps. No billboard shall be
erected or located within 200 feet of an intersection at
grade with Route 202 or within 200 feet of any on-ramp to
or off-ramp from Route 202.
[2]
From residential districts. No billboard shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district.
[3]
(g)
Lighting.
[1] Billboard signs shall be externally lit only.
(h)
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:685
BILLBOARD AREA — The facing of a billboard, including copy,
insignia, background, structural supports, and border and trim.
The measurement shall be determined by the smallest rectangle
inclusive of all letters and images. The structural supports shall be
excluded if they do not constitute a major part of the billboard or if
the structure is not used to identify or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event
or location, or to express a point of view.
BILLBOARD STRUCTURE — The frame and support assembly upon
which a billboard is mounted or to which a billboard is attached,
including, without limitation, all pylons set into the ground surface.
No portion of any billboard structure shall extend beyond the face
of the billboard that is mounted thereon. Furthermore, no billboard
structure shall be permitted to remain standing for a period of
more than 15 consecutive days without a billboard being mounted
thereon.[Added 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007]
BUSINESS — A sign identifying an establishment which sells a
product or provides a service or entertainment to the general
public as distinguished from a sign identifying places, institutions
or offices.
BUS SHELTER SIGNS — Business signs attached to the sides of
public transportation bus shelters erected and maintained for the
comfort and protection of the traveling public and located within
PennDot rights-of-way. No more than two signs each measuring a
maximum of 24 square feet in area shall be permitted on one bus
shelter.[Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
CANOPY — A permanent structure other than an awning made of
cloth, metal or other material attached or unattached to a building
Lighting shall comply with the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America's (IESNA) recommended
practices and criteria in the IESNA Lighting Handbook,
including but not limited to criteria for full-cutoff fixtures.
Fixtures shall be equipped with or be capable of being
backfitted with light-directing devices such as shields,
visors or hoods when necessary to redirect offending light
distribution. All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed,
fitted and maintained so as not to project or reflect light
onto a neighboring use or property or Route 202 or nearby
intersecting road. If adjacent to a residential zoning
district, the sign shall be lit only from dusk to 10:00 p.m.
All lighting fixtures shall be equipped with devices which
automatically extinguish the lighting at 10:00 p.m.
[2]
Signs or component parts thereof that flash, blink, move,
rotate, oscillate, or turn on or off intermittently, or which
outline the billboard by illuminated tubing, strings of light,
or other means, shall be prohibited.
[3]
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:686
for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles. A
canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.
CHANGEABLE COPY — Copy containing or displaying letters,
numbers, or graphics which is designed to be readily changed,
either manually, electronically, or through mechanical means (e.g.,
animated signs with changeable letters).
CHANGING IMAGE SIGN — Any sign, display, device, or portions
thereof which is designed to have the capability of movement or
give the semblance of movement of the whole or any part of the
sign or that displays any artificial light which is not maintained
stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such
signs are in use or, through some other automated method, results
in movement, the appearance of movement or change of sign image
or text. Such signs include but are not limited to electronic signs
including LED, LCD, video or other automatic changeable display,
rotating and revolving signs, readerboard signs, flashing signs, and
wind driven signs including flags, pennants, and streamers.
CONSTRUCTION — A sign identifying the architect(s), engineer(s)
and/or contractor(s) involved in construction and/or renovation on
the property. Such sign shall be removed immediately upon
completion of work.
DIRECTIONAL — An outdoor sign which guides, instructs or
directs people to a place or event located on the same lot. If
directional signs are part of or related to a special event, such signs
shall be temporary and contain no advertising and shall require a
special permit from the Zoning Officer.
DIRECTORY — A sign identifying two or more persons, agencies or
establishments located in a place or location common to them all.
FLAG — A piece of fabric or other material of distinctive design
that is used as a symbol of an organization or entity, nation, state,
Canopy signs are permitted only in conjunction with gasoline
service stations and similar commercial uses where the canopy
is required to provide cover for outdoor equipment and service
area.
(a)
No more than one canopy sign shall be allowed per canopy
face and no more than two such signs per canopy shall be
permitted.
(b)
No part of the canopy sign shall be less than 12 feet nor more
than 20 feet above ground level.
(c)
A canopy sign may not encroach in the respective zoning
district's minimum required yard area.
(d)
The area of a canopy sign shall not exceed 20% of the area of
the canopy face or 50 square feet, whichever is less.
(e)
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:687
municipality, agency or corporation and which is usually displayed
hanging free from a permanent pole.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign and supporting structure which is
secured to the ground and independent of any building, fence or
other support. For the purpose of this definition, freestanding signs
may consist of the following:
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the undisturbed
grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-way to the highest point
of the sign. In the case of off-site signs, it is the vertical distance
measured from the undisturbed grade at the edge of the adjacent
right-of-way to the highest point of the sign.
HOME OCCUPATION — A sign that identifies only the name and/
or occupation of one conducting a permitted home occupation in a
dwelling.
INDUSTRIAL — A sign identifying an establishment involved in
any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products, not
involving a retail activity on the lot.
INSTITUTIONAL — A sign identifying a club, association, school,
hospital, church, nursing home, firehouse, care facility, boardingor
rooming house, institution, cemetery or similar use.
MEASUREMENT OF AREA AND HEIGHT OF A SIGN — For
purposes of the determination of the permissible area of a sign
under the provisions of this chapter, the area shall be taken as
that of the smallest imaginary rectangle whose sides would touch
the outer boundaries of the sign. Supports which are structural in
nature and which convey no message shall be excluded from the
area of the sign. In the case of a wall sign, where components are
fastened to or painted on a wall within a distinctive panel clearly
different in color and/or texture from the surrounding wall, the size
shall be based on the dimensions of the panel. The height of a sign
is the vertical distance measured from ground level to the highest
point on the sign itself and/or its supporting structure.
MULTISIDED SIGN — A sign constructed as a plane with a
message on two opposing sides spaced less than one foot apart may
have the full permissible design area for each face. Where a sign
consists of two or more faces, not placed back to back and parallel,
no face shall exceed 1/2 the permissible area specified for a sign.
GROUND-MOUNTED — Any sign that is not affixed or attached
to a building, and is securely and permanently mounted on the
ground at grade level which has a support which places the
bottom of the sign less than two feet from grade.
(a)
POLE — A sign which is detached from a building and
supported by more than two poles or other structural supports
which are architecturally dissimilar to the design of the sign.
(b)
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:688
Furthermore, the sum of the areas of all faces shall not exceed
twice the permissible area.
OFFICE — A sign identifying any office building or use.
OFFICIAL — Those signs erected by the United States
Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County 0f
Chester or the Township of West Goshen which are designed to
regulate, direct or inform the public.
OFF-SITE SIGN — Also known as an "off-premises sign," it is a sign,
other than a billboard sign, referring to a business, industry, event
or institution on a lot other than that on which the sign is located.
(See § 84-52T, Special provisions.) One sign, containing only the
name of a business, industry, event or institution and directional
information or directional symbols, may be permitted on a lot other
than the lot on which such entity is located with the approval of the
Planning Commission and Zoning Officer if:
PLACE — A sign identifying a community, residential development,
public facility or historic facility.
POLITICAL SIGN — A type of off-site sign on which there is
displayed the name of a candidate for public office, protected
political speech under the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution, or an office in a political party registered with an
appropriate electoral or governmental entity, such as the County
of Chester Board of Elections and/or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of State; and/or an issue to be voted upon
in plebiscite or referendum at an election scheduled and to be
administered by the County of Chester Board of Elections or its
successor entity. The area of any one political sign may not exceed
three square feet. Political signs may not be posted in the public
view any earlier than the date that is 45 days prior to the date
of the election referenced therein or thereon (whether expressly
or otherwise). Political signs must be removed from public view
(a) The sign is limited to two square feet.
The lot on which the entity is located is on a minor street and
does not abut a major or collector street.
(b)
The entity would not be readily located by the public without
such sign.
(c)
Only one such sign may be permitted for each entity, and only
one such sign may be located on any single lot.
(d)
The lot on which the sign is located is zoned either commercial
or industrial, and written permission from the owner of same
is presented to the Zoning Officer.
(e)
The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to political signs.
[Added 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007]
(f)
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:689
within 15 days of the close of polls with regard to such election.
Illumination of political signs is prohibited in all residential zoning
districts. The above regulations shall only apply to signs placed
within the legal right-of-way. Political signs placed outside of the
legal right-of-way are exempt from these regulations.[Added
1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007; amended 2-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 1-2019]
PROHIBITED SIGNS — Any sign that is not permitted by the
provisions of this section is hereby prohibited, with the following
signs specifically prohibited:
PUBLIC INFORMATION DIRECTIONAL —
REAL ESTATE — A temporary sign indicating exclusively the sale,
rental, lease or development of the property on which it is located.
ROOF — Any sign erected wholly upon or over the roof of any
building or structure, with the principal support on the roof
surface.
SIGN, GENERAL — Any name, nameplate, emblem, painting,
banner, pennant, placard, billboard, poster, panel display,
illustration, structure or other device, illuminated or
nonilluminated, used for visual communication, which is affixed
in any way, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a
Signs that flash, move, rotate, oscillate or which outline the
rooflines, doors, windows or wall edges by illuminated tubing
or strings of light for advertising purposes.
(a)
Signs, other than utility or municipal, attached to a utility pole,
parking meter, traffic sign post, traffic signal or control device,
street sign, or historical marker.
(b)
Pennants, streamers, or similar devices constructed of cloth,
light fabric, plastic, cardboard or other like material, or
whirling or similar lighting devices, or searchlights displayed
for the purposes of attracting the attention of pedestrians
and motorists outside a building, except where such use is
authorized by permit on a temporary basis.
(c)
Inflatable balloons and similar devices intended to attract
attention, except where such use is authorized on a temporary
basis.
(d)
A sign containing a cautionary message, such as "Beware of
Dog," "No Trespassing" or other similar cautions.
(a)
A sign designating rest rooms, telephone or similar public
conveniences.
(b)
A sign designating handicapped parking, loading docks, no
parking, entrance, exit or similar directional information.
(c)
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:690
building or other outdoor surface or on the interior of a building
visible from the exterior, advertising a business, commodity,
product, service, person, firm, company or direction or identifying
a business, structure or the use of land, for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of passersby.
SPECIAL EVENT — A sign identifying a grand opening, parade,
festival, fund drive or similar occasion.
SPORTS FACILITIES BUSINESS SIGNS — Business signs located
within a football stadium, baseball field or similar playing fields
owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization or entity,
advertising a business, service, product, organization or entity,
the proceeds from the rental of which are used and expended
to support the programs and objectives of such not-for-profit
organization or entity. No more than one sign measuring a
maximum of 16 square feet in area shall be permitted for each
500 square feet of playing field or ground floor stadium area. Such
signs may be located on walls, fences, light poles and scoreboards
but shall not be mounted on roofs nor be freestanding.[Added
5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
STREAMER — A long narrow flag, banner, tinsel or roping which is
hung or strung from any structure.
TEMPORARY SIGNS — Air- or gas-filled device(s), banner(s),
pennants, and streamers, including any temporary supporting
structure, which shall be permitted only by issuance of a temporary
sign permit allowing use of this type advertising for a period of
30 consecutive days within a calendar year. Upon expiration of the
temporary sign, permit, the applicant shall remove the air- or gasfilled
device, banner(s), pennants, and streamers, including any
temporary supporting structure.
WALL — One of the sides or surfaces of a building or structure
connecting the foundation and roof, which side or surface is not
more than 15° from the vertical. All materials comprising the
"wall," including window and door areas, shall comprise a part of
the wall surface.[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
WINDOW — Any translucent and/or transparent surface, whether
or not any such surface can be opened.[Amended 12-13-1988 by
Ord. No. 10-1988]
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign affixed to or painted upon the interior
or exterior surface of a window. or otherwise displayed, whether
self-standing, hanging or mounted, in such proximity to the window
as to be predominantly visible from the exterior of the building or
structure.[Added 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
(2) (Reserved)232
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), which contained definitions of "collector street or
feeder street," "major street or through highway (arterial)" and "minor/local street," was
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:691
C. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install,
replace, alter, relocate or maintain within the Township any sign or
other advertising structure without first obtaining a sign permit from
the Zoning Officer.
D. Application for sign permit. Application for a sign permit required by
Subsection C shall be made upon forms available from the Zoning
Officer and shall, at a minimum, require the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Location of the building, structure or lot to which the application
pertains.
(3) Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures and
lot lines.
(4) Two blueprints or ink drawings containing the plans, specifications
and description of the construction materials, methods of
attachment or installation of the sign or the method of anchorage to
the ground.
(5) Copy of stress sheets and calculations demonstrating that the
structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any
direction in the amount required by this chapter and all other laws
and ordinances of the Township.
(6) Name, address and telephone number of the person erecting the
sign.
(7) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to
which or on which the sign is erected.
(8) A copy of the electrical permit required and issued for the proposed
sign, if any.
(9) Such other information as the Zoning Officer shall require to
demonstrate full compliance with this and all other applicable laws
and ordinances of the Township.
E. Illuminated and electrified signs. Any sign illuminated or otherwise
electrical shall be subject to the National Electrical Code and an
electrical inspection by an approved electrical inspection agency
pursuant to Chapter 39. The electrical inspection fee shall be borne by
the applicant.
F. Permit number, date and voltage to be placed on each sign. Each sign
hereafter erected shall have permanently painted or affixed in a
conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than one inch in height,
removed from this section and redesignated as part of § 84-8, Definitions, 12-13-1988 by
Ord. No. 10-1988.
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:692
the date of erection, the permit number and, if electrified, the voltage
of any electrical apparatus used in conjunction therewith.
G. Wind pressure and dead load elements. All signs and their supporting
structures shall be designed and constructed:
(1) To withstand a wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square
foot of area.
(2) To receive dead loads and snow loads as required by the Township
Building Code pursuant to Chapter 28.
(3) To comply with all other ordinances of the Township.
H. Face of sign to be smooth. All signs which are constructed along the
side of a street right-of-way or within five feet thereof shall have a
smooth surface, and no nails, tacks, wires or other similar parts shall be
permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and
devices attached to the signs.
I. Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or supporting structure
shall be erected at or near the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct the free and clear vision of the traveling public or
at any location where, by reason of its position, shape or color, it may
interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused by the traveling
public with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which is a
flashing or moving sign; or which makes use of the words "stop," "look,"
"drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character
which may reasonably be expected to interfere with, mislead or confuse
operators of motor vehicles.
J. Gooseneck reflectors. Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be
permitted on freestanding signs, roof signs and wall signs; provided,
however, that the reflectors shall be equipped with proper lenses
concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign only in such
manner as to prevent glare upon adjacent public or private rights-ofway
or other property.
K. Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape.
L. Maintenance and construction of sign. Every sign permitted, except
temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept in
good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to become
dilapidated, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, shall be removed by
the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on
which it is located if the sign is not removed by the latter within 10 days
after due notice given by the Zoning Officer by registered or certified
mail to the owner or lessee of the property.
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:693
M. Inspection fees. The Building Inspector shall inspect annually, or at
such other times as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this
chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is
structurally stable and whether it is in need of removal or repair. If such
sign is deemed by the Building Inspector to be unstable, in need of
removal or in need of repair, the owner will be ordered to correct the
condition immediately and shall be required to pay an inspection fee in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
N. Obscene matter prohibited. No sign shall be permitted which contains
obscene matter as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
O. Unsafe and unlawful signs.
(1) If the Building Inspector shall find that any sign is unsafe or
structurally unstable or is a menace to the public or has been
constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he shall serve on the permittee, owner,
agent or person in control of the sign, either by certified mail or by
personal service, a written notice specifying the defects and the
required repairs or improvements necessary to be made to render
the sign in compliance or requiring the sign or a portion thereof to
be demolished within a stipulated time. If the person addressed
with such notice cannot be found or such notice delivered, a copy of
the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
on which the sign is located, and such procedure shall be deemed
the equivalent of personal notice.
(2) Upon refusal or neglect of the person served with such notice to
comply with the requirements of the notice within the period of 10
days from the date of the notice, the Township Solicitor shall
institute the appropriate action to compel compliance.
(3) When, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is actual and
immediate danger of failure or collapse of the sign or structure on
which it is placed which would endanger life or be a menace to
members of the traveling public or constitute an attractive
nuisance creating the reasonable probability of danger, the
Building Inspector shall cause the necessary work to be done to
render such sign and/or structure or part thereof temporarily safe,
whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted. For purposes of this section, the Building Inspector is
authorized to employ the necessary labor and materials to perform
the required work as expeditiously as possible, including
disassembly and/or removal of the sign and structure.
(4) Costs incurred in the performance of the work described in this
subsection shall be paid from the treasury of the Township on
certificate of the Building Inspector. Thereupon, the Township
Solicitor shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:694
premises where the unsafe sign and structure is or was located
for the recovery of any and all such costs. including all necessary
labor and material costs. Such legal action may include, by way
of example and not by way of limitation, the filing of a legal court
action or the filing of a lien against the property.
P. Removal of certain signs. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no
longer relates to a current activity conducted or a product sold shall be
taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the building or structure. Upon such person's failing to
comply with a removal notice from the Building Inspector or Zoning
Officer, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of
such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner
of the land, building or structure to which such sign is attached.
Q. Exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall apply
to the following signs; provided, however, that such signs shall not be
subject to the provisions of Subsections C and D:
(1) Professional nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area.
(2) Bulletin boards not over eight square feet in area located on the
property of public, charitable or religious institutions, one per
property allowed.
(3) Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial building, public institutional building or
dwelling house and not exceeding two square feet in area.
(4) Memorial signs or tablets or names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other noncombustible materials.
(5) Official signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs
and such other temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as
may be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) One money access machine located on bank or commercial
premises is permitted in addition to the number of signs permitted
by the applicable formula in this chapter, provided that a permit, as
required by Subsections C and D of this section, shall be required.
(7) Address, construction, home occupation, public information and
real estate signs.
(8) Real estate signs: House-for-sale, open-house, and new-residentialhousing-
development signs, provided such signs shall not be
illuminated. [Added 10-22-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004;
amended 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 24-2004]
R. Permissible number of signs.
(1) Address signs: as required by § 54-6.
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:695
(2) Public information and directional signs: The number shall be the
minimum required to convey the essential information.
(3) Place signs: two per lot.
(a) Place signs in the R-3B District: A maximum of six place signs
shall be permitted per road entrance at an intersection with a
major collector street, provided that three of such place signs
share the same supporting structure; otherwise two place
signs shall be permitted at such intersection. A maximum of
one additional place sign shall be permitted per road entrance
to a distinct interior community, residential development,
public facility or historic facility within a larger development
tract exclusive of any place sign permitted at a major collector
road entrance. All place signs shall be single-faced. Any
illumination shall be concentrated upon the area of the sign(s)
only in such manner as to prevent glare upon adjacent public
or private rights-of-way or other property. [Added 2-19-2019
by Ord. No. 1-2019]
(4) Home occupation signs: one per dwelling.
(5) Institutional signs: two per institution.
(6) Real estate signs, limited as follows: [Amended 10-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 22-2004; amended 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 24-2004]
(a) House-for-sale sign: one per property boundary facing each
separate abutting street. Off-site directional signs may be
posted at the intersection closest to the listed property on
which the house-for-sale sign is located and may be erected no
earlier than 6:00 p.m. on Friday and must be removed by 6:00
p.m. on Sunday.
(b) Open-house sign: one per property boundary facing each
separate abutting street. A maximum of two off-site directional
signs may be located at any one intersection, and on a straightof-
way one sign may be erected per change of direction or per
1.0 mile. Signs may contain any and all of the following
information: development name, name of real estate broker/
agent or individual holding the open house, and telephone
number. Signs may be erected no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the
day of the open house and must be removed by 6:00 p.m. on
the day of the open house.
(c) New development sign: one per street entrance. The sign may
indicate that the tract is in the active process of securing or
has received subdivision and/or land development approval for
residential or nonresidential uses. Such signs may be posted no
earlier than 6:00 p.m. on Friday and must be removed by 6:00
p.m. on Sunday.
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:696
(d) The Township Zoning Officer, his/her designee, the Streets
Superintendent, Public Works Director and Public Works
employee are authorized to physically remove any such real
estate off-site directional sign remaining after the removal
deadlines specified above.
(e) No such sign shall be located so as to obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or obstruct vision of vehicular traffic, nor
shall any such sign be attached to a utility pole, official traffic
signpost or official street sign.
(7) Construction: one per site.
(8) Office signs: For a lot occupied by a single office, one freestanding
and one wall sign are permitted. Multiple occupancy lots may have
one freestanding sign identifying the complex plus one
freestanding or wall-mounted directory sign per building. Where
individual offices open to an exterior wall, each office may be
identified by an individual sign in letters not to exceed four inches
in height.
(9) Business and industrial signs: Where a single business and/or
industry occupies a single lot, three signs are permitted, one of
which may be freestanding. Where multiple businesses and/or
industries are located on the same lot but in attached buildings,
one freestanding sign is permitted. Additionally, one wall or roof
sign per business is permitted. Where multiple businesses and/or
industries are located in separate buildings on the same lot, up to
three signs per building may be permitted; provided, however, that
the total number of freestanding signs on the tract shall not exceed
the lesser of one per building or one per 200 feet of street frontage,
whichever is less. In each instance where the area of the exterior
surface of a wall is comprised of more than 30% of glass or other
translucent or transparent material, the maximum area of window
sign coverage shall be reduced from 20% to 10% of the area of the
window. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988]
(10) Directory signs: one per building.
(11) Special event: two per lot or one for every 10 acres of lot area,
S. Criteria for bonus sign area.
(1) To encourage design excellence, the maximum sign areas for
certain business, industrial and directory signs, as set forth in the
schedule of sign regulations,233 may be increased by the
percentages as provided herein. A separate bonus is granted for
compliance with each of the criteria, and the area is cumulative,
233. Editor's Note: The schedule of sign regulations (Table 1) is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-52
72:697
but the percentage increase is based on the original sign area
limitation.
(2) Freestanding signs may be increased as follows:
(a) Twenty percent when the sign is constructed of wood, in
natural finish with only the lettering in other than natural
finish.
(b) Ten percent when a directory sign utilizes uniform coloring and
lettering for all establishments listed in the directory.
(c) Ten percent when the sign is installed in a landscaped planter
having an area four times the area of the resultant sign.
(d) Ten percent if the sign is designed to contain only the
identification of the establishment without advertisement of
any products sold on the premises.
T. Special provisions.
(1) No freestanding sign, other than official signs, shall be nearer to
the street right-of-way line or side or rear yard than a distance
equal to the height of the sign.
(2) Adjacent signs readable from the same direction shall be spaced at
a distance of at least ten times their largest dimension.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be erected within the limits of the front
yard and side yard of the property to which they pertain.
[Exception: See the definition of "off-site sign" in § 84-52B(1).]
(4) Signs shall refer only to activities or articles on the premises on
which the sign is located. [Exception: See the definitions of the
terms "billboard" and "off-site sign" in § 84-52B(1).] [Amended
10-22-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004; 12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
24-2004]
(5) Where any premises fronts on two streets or roads which do not
intersect and are approximately parallel, the owner or user of such
premises may have two freestanding ground-mounted signs and
one roof-mounted or wall sign.
(6) Menu boards, bills of fare or price lists may be freestanding or wallmounted.
They may not exceed 24 square feet in area; and numbers
and letters shall not exceed three inches in height. Signs shall be
located to the rear or side of an eating establishment. They shall
not be considered signs within the meaning of this article.
(7) Special event signs are permitted for 30 days. A maximum of three
thirty-day periods shall be permitted per lot per year with a thirtyday
interval between periods. These signs shall require a permit.
§ 84-52 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-52
72:698
§ 84-53. Retail sales as accessory use.235 [Added 3-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2-1999; amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012]
In any district in which any provision of this chapter allows retail sales as a
lawful accessory use, the following regulations shall apply:
(8) Real estate signs shall be removed within 90 days for the sale or
lease of the property to which they pertain or, in the case of a
development, within 90 days of the sale of the last property in the
development.
(9) On a corner property where a premises fronts two intersecting
streets and access is provided for at a minimum of two separate
locations accessible and visible from each street, the owner or user
of such premises may have two wall or roof signs or any
combination thereof, one per each street on which the property
fronts, not to exceed a total of two signs. The combined square
footage for both signs shall not exceed the total square footage
allowed for a wall sign. [Added 10-22-2004 by Ord. No.
22-2004; amended 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 24-2004]
U. Specifications for signs. (See Table 1.234)
A. Retail sales shall not exceed more than 1O% of the total wholesale sales
of the principal use.
B. The authorization to conduct retail sales shall be subject to and
conditioned upon the issuance of an initial permit, which shall be
renewed annually by the owner of the principal use upon submission of
proof of compliance with the ten-percent limitation imposed by
Subsection A of this section. The fees for issuance and renewal of the
permit shall be set by resolution of the Board. This limitation shall not
apply to approvals granted by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to the
effective date of this section or to a lawful nonconforming accessory use
retail activity otherwise regulated by this section which existed prior to
the effective date of this chapter.
C. The display and sales area of the building devoted to retail sales shall
not exceed 10% of the total floor area of the business, exclusive of areas
devoted to or used for production, processing, merchandise and raw
materials storage, or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
D. No exterior sign advertising retail sales shall be permitted on the
premises.
E. No exterior display of merchandise or products offered for sale at retail
shall be permitted unless they are also sold at wholesale and such
exterior display is permitted by this chapter.
234. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
235. Editor's Note: Former § 84-53, Floodway controls, was repealed 5-12-1987 by Ord. No.
6-1987.
§ 84-52 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-53
72:699
§ 84-54. Steep slope regulations. [Amended 1-14-1986 by Ord. No.
2-1986]
F. There shall be no change or alteration in the existing outside
appearance of the building or premises resulting from the allowance of
retail sales nor shall there be any other visible exterior evidence of
retail sales activities.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section to establish
supplemental regulations to control the development of areas
containing steeply sloped land for the purpose and with the intent of
preserving and promoting the health, safety and general welfare for the
following purposes:
(1) To minimize soil erosion and sedimentation.
(2) To protect watersheds and limit increases in stormwater runoff.
(3) To protect residents of the Township from property damage and
personal injury caused by runoff, erosion and landslides
attributable to nearby development on steeply sloping land.
(4) To protect the quality of stream water subject to degradation by
indiscriminate grading and development.
(5) To protect the natural vegetative cover in steep slopes and to
maintain adequate foliage and vegetative cover thereon.
(6) To protect streams from increases in sediment and pollution.
(7) To minimize the necessity for expenditure of Township funds for
corrective public works caused by soil erosion and subsidence,
sedimentation and landslides.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Surfaces that do not absorb water,
including but not limited to all buildings, parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks and areas of concrete, nonporous asphalt or other
material.
SLOPE — The ratio of the change in height over the horizontal distance
as measured between consecutive contour lines. Contour intervals shall
not exceed two feet.
STEEP SLOPES —
PRECAUTIONARY STEEP SLOPES — Those sloping 15 to 20 feet
vertical over a distance of 100 feet horizontal or slope of 15%
to 20% on the United States Geological Survey topographic maps
or a topographical survey map prepared by a registered architect
or engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(1)
§ 84-53 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-54
72:700
PROHIBITIVE STEEP SLOPES — Those areas sloping with at least
a six-foot vertical change in grade over a distance of 30 feet
horizontal or greater than twenty-percent slope on the United
States Geological Survey topographic maps or a topographical
survey map prepared by a registered architect or engineer licensed
to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended
10-27-1987 by Ord. No. 12-1987]
(2)
C. Rules for interpretation of steep slopes. Steep slopes, as defined in
Subsection B, and the extent thereof shall be determined by the Zoning
Officer by scaling distances on the United States Geological Survey
topographic maps or a topographical survey map prepared by a
registered architect or engineer, where such interpretation is
necessary. Initially and upon any appeal, the person contesting the
location of the boundary of any such slopes, as determined by the
Zoning Officer, or the slope as stated, shall have the burden of
establishing that the land in question does not lie within the applicable
steep slopes as defined in Subsection B(1) and (2).
D. Plan requirements for precautionary steep slopes. Where any map
identified in Subsection B(1) and (2) shows the existence of
precautionary steep slopes, the applicant shall supply the following
information prior to the issuance of any building permit or subdivision
and land development approval:
(1) Site plan of the property indicating the existing grades with
contour lines at two-foot intervals and proposed grades within the
area of the proposed construction.
(2) Landscaping plan indicating proposed paved areas, storm drainage
facilities, retaining walls and ground cover, together with trees and
ornamental shrub locations.
(3) Architectural plans, elevations and sections for all permitted
buildings, structures or construction, accompanied by a drainage
plan and an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(4) A plan, profile and typical cross sections of the entrance drive and
the proposed public street providing access to such drive.
(5) A plan for on-site sewage dispose facilities if connection to a public
sanitary sewer system is not contemplated.
(6) A statement prepared, signed and sealed by a registered architect
or a licensed civil or structural engineer describing in detail the
building methods to be used in overcoming foundation and other
structural problems created by slope conditions, how the natural
slopes and watershed will be preserved substantially undisturbed,
the method proposed to prevent soil erosion and details of how
overground stormwater runoff and groundwater will be diverted
away from all building areas below finish grade.
§ 84-54 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-54
72:701
E. Limitation of construction on precautionary steep slopes. The
construction, erection and development of buildings or structures on
precautionary steep slopes shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) The maximum impervious surface coverage in the precautionary
steep slopes shall be limited to 20% of the total area of
precautionary steep slopes on the lot. [Amended 4-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 1-2017]
(2) If a driveway is to be located on a precautionary steep slope, a
driveway grading plan shall be submitted for approval to the
Zoning Officer and Township Engineer, subject to acceptedengineering
criteria consistent with the other requirements of
§ 84-54. The grading plan shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and shall show existing and proposed
contour grades at two-foot contour intervals within 25 feet of either
side of the proposed driveway and the center-line profile of the
driveway showing slopes and vertical alignment of the proposed
driveway. [Amended 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1-1992]
(3) To minimize cutting or filling, all streets shall be placed as close to
the natural contour of the lot as possible. Storm sewers, culverts,
stormwater retention or detention structures and related
installations shall comply with the applicable provisions of the West
Goshen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
codified in Chapter 72 of the West Goshen Code. [Amended
1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1-1992; 10-25-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994]
(4) The construction of all buildings, structures and streets in
precautionary steep slopes shall be preceded by the installation of
the proposed storm drainage and erosion control systems.
[Amended 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1-1992]
(5) Where development is proposed on a single lot which is located in
an area not having a central storm drainage system, runoff from
impervious surfaces shall be diverted and carried to an acceptable
outlet by one or a combination of the following methods: filtration
beds, subsurface drywells, storm drainage systems and/or
underground conduit systems or other adequate and protected
outlets approved by the Township Engineer.
F. Restriction of construction and uses on prohibitive steep slopes.
(1) There shall be no erection or construction of any building,
structure, road, driveway, parking area or other similar structure
or impervious surface on prohibitive steep slopes, except for one
primary road which is designed and intended to serve as an access
road to the subdivision or a driveway which is designed and
intended to serve as sole access to a lot therein, provided that there
is no other way to design access to the property or lot in
§ 84-54 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-54
72:702
compliance with this § 84-54 and the access is approved by the
Board of Supervisors as part of the final subdivision or land
development plan. [Amended 10-27-1987 by Ord. No. 12-1987]
(2) The uses permitted on prohibitive steep slopes shall be limited to
the following:
(a) Open space reserved as part of a land development so long as
no more than 25% of the open space has a slope greater than
25%.
(b) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum (exclusive of
buildings or structures) and recreation areas (exclusive of
buildings or structures).
(c) Tree farming, forestry and other agricultural uses (exclusive of
buildings or structures) when conducted according to
conservation measures approved by the Soil Conservation
Service.
G. Special exception uses on prohibitive steep slopes. The following uses
shall be permitted as a special exception when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board subject to the requirements of this section and
§ 84-72O. In addition to the criteria contained in the latter referenced
section, the Board shall consider the extent to which the requested use
will disrupt the stability of soils and natural vegetation and contribute
to erosion before and after construction or installation of the permitted
use. The Board shall attach such reasonable conditions as it determines
necessary and reasonable in furthering the intent and purpose of this
§ 84-54.
(1) Sealed public water supply wells that have been approved by all
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction.
(2) Sanitary or storm sewers that have been approved by all regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction.
(3) Access roads suitable for passage of emergency vehicles in the
event of fire or accident. Such roads shall be constructed only when
no viable alternative for emergency access exists, provided that all
applicable requirements of Chapter 72, Subdivision of Land, of this
Code are met and subject to approval by all regulatory authorities
having jurisdiction.
H. Liability. Neither the approval nor the granting of any construction
permit, subdivision or land development approval or site development
plan involving any land governed by the provisions of this section, by an
officer, employee or agency of the Township, shall constitute a
representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township or its
officers, officials, employees or agencies of the practicality or safety of
any structure, use or development; and the same shall create no
liability upon or a cause of action against the Township, its officers,
§ 84-54 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-54
72:703
§ 84-55. Design standards.
Design standards for all areas shall be as follows.
agencies, agents or employees for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
A. Screening. A completely planted visual barrier, consisting of a double
row of evergreen plantings having a minimum height of eight feet (after
planting) and placed no more than 16 feet apart on center, shall be
provided and continually maintained within a planting area reserved for
that purpose, having a minimum width of 16 feet, between any
industrial, commercial or multi-use district and a contiguous residential
district or residential use, and, in a residential district, between an
apartment use and a contiguous single or multifamily residential use.
The required plantings shall be staggered so as to provide as complete
a visual barrier as is possible. A stockade-type fence having a minimum
height of six feet and constructed without gaps or breaks shall be
substituted for one of the two required rows of plantings when
determined necessary by the Zoning Officer to adequately shield the
residential district or use from artificial light, glare, noise, odors,
intrusion or any other cause detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of such residential district or use. All uses permitted by
special exception shall be screened as required by this section from
other uses, regardless of the zoning district in which those uses are
located, when so directed by the Zoning Hearing Board as a condition
of special exception approval. [Amended 6-14-1983 by Ord. No.
4-1983; 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986; 10-27-1987 by Ord. No.
13-1987; 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
B. Storage. All storage shall be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way and any residential district which abuts the district.
Screening shall consist of evergreen planting or an architectural
screen. All organic rubbish or storage shall be contained in airtight,
vermin-proof containers which shall also be screened from view from
any public right-of-way or abutting residential district.
C. Landscaping requirements. Landscaping shall be provided in and
around off-street parking areas and loading areas in accordance with
the standards of this section in order to provide a visual and acoustical
buffer for adjacent properties, to provide a visual buffer for adjacent
streets, to define traffic routes and pedestrian paths through the
parking area, to control erosion, to slow and filter stormwater runoff, to
moderate microclimatic effects and to provide aesthetic benefit for the
users of the lot, users of nearby properties and passersby. [Amended
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
(1) Functions of parking lot and loading area landscaping.
Landscaping of parking lots and loading areas shall perform certain
functions depending upon its arrangement and the type of space
occupied, as described below. Aesthetic considerations are
§ 84-54 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:704
secondary to these functions. Where screening is required, such
screening need not be opaque but must be of sufficient density and
height to obstruct casual observation.
(a) Perimeter of area, abutting street. Landscaping materials so
located shall visually define the parking area, shall emphasize
points of ingress and egress to and from the street and shall
visually screen the parking or loading area from the street so
that headlights shining into or out of the area will not irritate
other drivers. Effectiveness of this landscaping may be
enhanced by earthen berms.
(b) Perimeter of area, abutting other properties. Landscaping so
located shall provide a windbreak as well as a visual and
acoustical buffer for adjoining properties, particularly of any
residential properties which may abut the parking area. When
a parking or loading area abuts a residential property, a dense
screen of living matter, designed to be an effective screen year
round, shall be provided to a minimum height of six feet from
the ground at time of planting. Earthen berms may be used to
enhance the effectiveness of landscaping elements.
(c) Landscaping within the interior of the parking area.
Landscaping located within the parking area shall be designed
to promote pedestrian safety by defining walkways, to enhance
driver safety by defining traffic lanes and discouraging crosslot
taxiing, to act as a windbreak trapping trash and dust, to
provide shade, to reduce stormwater runoff and to enhance the
appearance of the parking area. Interior landscaping shall be
designed to preserve sight distances and not obstruct the
vision of motorists or pedestrians and shall in no way create a
hazard to safety.
(2) Applicability of standards.
(a) Perimeter landscaping along abutting properties shall be
required for all off-street parking areas with more than 10
parking spaces and for all loading areas, regardless of size.
(b) Interior landscaping and perimeter landscaping along abutting
properties and the street shall be required for all off-street
parking areas with more than 20 parking spaces.
(3) Minimum landscaped area; minimum size of landscaped area.
(a) Perimeter landscaping shall occupy a strip at least five feet in
width.
(b) Interior landscaping shall occupy no less than 5% of the
parking lot area, exclusive of perimeter landscaping.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:705
(c) Each individual plot of landscaping shall occupy an area of no
less than 50 square feet and shall have no side dimension of
less than five feet.
(4) Landscaping plan. A parking lot landscaping plan shall be included
as an element of both the preliminary plan and final plan for all
developments for which landscaping is required, to be reviewed
with those plans in accordance with the process defined in the West
Goshen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.236
The landscaping plan may be featured with other elements on a
single sheet of the submission to the extent that that sheet remains
legible.
(5) Sight distances. No landscape elements or other objects may
obstruct vision above the height of two feet and below 10 feet
measured from the center-line grade of the driveway and the
intersecting street. Such clear sight triangle shall be bound by two
points 200 feet on either side of the point of intersection of the
driveway and street center lines along the street, and the third
point shall be 12 feet back from the street right-of-way on the
center line of the driveway.
(6) Permitted landscaping materials. Landscaping materials intended
to form a screen shall create a reasonably dense, although not
necessarily opaque, screen, adequate to obstruct casual
observations to a height of eight feet within three years of planting,
except as required in § 84-55C(1)(b). All landscaping elements
within the parking lot area and all perimeter landscaping shall be
in place upon occupancy of the facility served by the parking area.
[Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
(a) Nonliving materials. The following materials are permissible as
landscape elements: stones, pebbles, sand, wood chips or other
decorative mulch, water or art. Under no circumstances shall
artificial plants or bare earth be considered landscape
elements.
(b) Nonliving buffers. Fences, walls and earthen berms, preferably
covered with plant material, may be used as buffers. The Board
of Supervisors may reject such nonliving buffers as it may
deem to be incompatible with the aesthetic function of
landscaping.
(c) Living material. All living materials used for parking area
landscaping shall be appropriate for this climate, hardy, longlived,
salt-tolerant, heat-tolerant, pollution-resistant and
require low maintenance. The following requirements shall
apply:
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:706
[1] Grasses. All grasses used for landscaping must be
indigenous to the area or well-suited to this area.
Hydroseeding is an adequate method of application in
most areas: swales and slopes in excess of 15% must be
sodded.
[2] Shrubs. Flowering, ornamental shrubs shall be preferred
(but not required) for their ornamental effect. Thorn
bushes are discouraged, except in areas where security is
a concern, and should be arranged to ensure against
causing damage to vehicles or injury to pedestrians.
Flowering shrubs should be sufficiently mature at time of
planting to flower by the second season following planting.
[3] Trees. Specimens used in parking areas shall provide
moderately dense shade in summer. Species with large
leaves which could clog drains shall be avoided. Species
that are brittle, disease-prone, have low, spreading
brachiation or shallow root systems, which drop large fruit
or much sap or which are otherwise messy shall also be
avoided. Except for trees native to the site being retained,
all trees shall be healthy nursery stock with a minimum
caliper of 1 1/2 inches, two feet from the ground. Existing
healthy trees shall be retained in accord with § 69-9N of
the West Goshen Township Code, known as the "Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance."
[a] The following trees are recommended for use in
parking lots:
Willow oak (Quercus Phellas)
Ginkgo (male) (Ginkgo biloba)
Locust (Gleditsia triacanthos)
Amur maple (Ater Ginnala)
Hedge maple (Acer Campestre)
Red cedar (Juniperus virginiana)
Black cherry (Prunus serotina)
Flowering cherry (Prunus serotina)
Linden (Tilia cordata, Tilia europaea)
Japanese zelkova (Zelkova serrata)
Serviceberry (Amelanchier)
[b] The following trees are unsuitable for use in parking
lots and are discouraged from such use:
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:707
Maple (most varieties) (genus Acer): see suggested
list237
Birch (most varieties) (genus Betula): see suggested
list238
Chestnut (all varieties) (genus Castaenea)
Euonymus (all varieties) (genus Euonymus)
Walnut (all varieties) (genus Juglans)
Poplar (all varieties) (genus Populus)
Oak (most varieties) (genus Quercus): see suggested
list239
Willow (all varieties) (genus Salix)
Hemlock (all varieties) (genus Tsuga)
Speckled alder (Alnus incana)
Hawthorn (Crataegus coccinea)
Ginkgo (female) (Ginkgo biloba)
Tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipfera)
White pine (Pinus strobus)
Sycamore, London plane (Platanus acerifolia)
Mountain ash (Pyrus aucuparia)
American elm (Ulmus americana)
[c] The evergreen trees below are most suitable for
buffering and perimeter landscaping, but may not be
appropriate for other parking lot landscaping:
Fir trees (Abies)
Douglass fir (Pseudotsuga Menziesii)
Norway spruce (Picea abies)
Oriental arborvitae (Thuja orientalis)
Canadian hemlock (Tsuga canadensis)
Carolina hemlock (Tsuga caroliniana)
Leyland cyprus (cupressocyparis Leyladii)
Cryptomeria
[d] Problematic trees which should not be used:
Box elder
Norway maple
237. Editor's Note: Said list is included at the end of this chapter.
238. Editor's Note: Said list is included at the end of this chapter.
239. Editor's Note: Said list is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:708
Ginkgo (female)
Black walnut
Osage orange
Mulberry
Austrian pine
Bradford pear (flowering)
Red oaks
Pin oaks
Ash
Black locust
[e] The trees and shrubs which are listed on the
Recommended Planning Guide, which is attached
hereto, and adopted by reference as part of this
chapter,240 may be used for the screening and
landscaping required by this § 84-55. This list is not
exclusive and an applicant may choose different
species provided such different species are approved
by the Board as part of an overall landscaping plan.
When multiple trees are required, an applicant is
encouraged to choose a variety of species unless
necessary for a specific design objective.
(7) Maintenance provisions. The owner of the facility served by the
parking area shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
parking area landscaping in a healthy and attractive condition.
Dead and pruned plant material and debris shall be routinely
removed or within 30 days of a directive to do so issued by the
Township Codes Enforcement Officer.
(8) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings, other
structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage areas shall be planted and continually
maintained with an all-season ground cover and shall be
landscaped in accordance with an overall landscape plan approved
by the Zoning Officer and Township Engineer. Regarding the
commercial and industrial districts, the green areas shall be visible
to the public from the roads.
D. Access and traffic control. [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
(1) All driveways connecting to or intersecting with any street shall be
located at least 80 feet from the intersection of any street line and
shall be designed in accordance with Township specifications
240. Editor's Note: The Recommended Planting Guide is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:709
unless connection is to a state highway and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation requires a design specification
different from that of the Township's. Where feasible and if so
directed by the Township Engineer, access shall be located on a
minor local streets or collector streets rather than on a major street
or through highway. The developer shall be responsible to install
any traffic control devices, acceleration lanes or deceleration lanes
required by PennDOT, in the case of state highways, or the
Township Engineer or Supervisors, in the case of Township streets,
related to the driveway installation.
(2) Every use shall be served by adequate access for fire-fighting and
other emergency service equipment. Such access shall include but
not necessarily be limited to turning radii sufficient to
accommodate fire equipment, adequacy of roadway and right-ofway
widths to accommodate the free flow of such equipment and
emergency access roads, including provision for adequate access in
front of, between and behind buildings and structures, which shall
be sufficient to support the weight of fire equipment in all types of
weather, as approved by the Township Engineer and Township Fire
Marshal.
E. Design standards. The standards of this section shall apply to all
commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational and multi-unit
residential uses served by off-street parking areas. [Amended
10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 10-1978; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988
241]
(1) Parking space size and design requirements. Parking spaces shall
be reasonably level, sloping not more than 5% in any direction. A
rectangular block of the dimensions specified in this subsection
shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces, regardless of
pull-in angle, and shall not be occupied nor intruded upon by light
standards or their foundations, landscape elements, pedestrian
walkways, driveways, passageways or any other elements or
features which would result in a reduction in area of the specified
minimum dimensions available for occupation by a vehicle. Parking
stalls (spaces) shall be designed to agree with the definition thereof
specified in § 84-8 of this chapter. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord.
No. 6-1992; 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
241. Editor's Note: Section I of this ordinance also provided the following: "The purpose of this
ordinance is to provide for adequate off-street parking space for the purpose of preserving
and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the general public by: "A. Reducing
congestion on public streets. "B. Providing adequate parking for all permitted land uses,
avoiding the circulation and congestion related to inadequate parking areas and the
environmental and safety problems associated with over designed parking areas.
"C.Minimizing pedestrian conflict with motor vehicles allowing motorists to exit and enter
their vehicles away from the flow of traffic and separating pedestrian circulation from
vehicular circulation within parking areas. "D. Addressing the special needs of
handicapped persons through the provision of specially designed and located parking
spaces. "E. Minimizing impervious surfaces to allow for groundwater recharge through
landscaping requirements and discouragement of excessively large parking areas."
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:710
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, parking spaces shall have
the minimum dimensions of nine feet wide by 18 feet long. The
parking spaces for any use involving retail sales, including
restaurants within a shopping center, shall have the minimum
dimensions of 10 feet wide by 18 feet long. [Amended
3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006]
(b) Parking spaces for use by handicapped drivers shall be in
accordance with ADA standards, and shall have the following
minimum dimensions: the first required handicapped parking
space and, thereafter, each one space in every eight such
spaces shall have the minimum dimensions of 16 feet wide by
18 feet long. The remainder of such spaces shall have minimum
dimensions of 14 feet wide by 18 feet long. All such spaces
shall be clearly marked as being reserved for use by
handicapped drivers. Handicapped parking spaces shall be
reasonably level, sloping not more than 2% in any direction.
[Amended 3-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999; amended
3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
(c) Off-street parking areas shall provide parking spaces for
handicapped drivers according to the total size of the parking
area, as follows:
Total Parking in Lot
Required Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20 (plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000)
(d) Parking spaces for use by handicapped drivers shall be located
to minimize the distance to a wheelchair-accessible entrance to
the facilities served, and such stalls and parking areas shall
otherwise comply with the technical requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as the same may from
time to time be amended.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:711
(e) All parking lots/school parking garages shall comply with the
following requirements: [Added 9-25-2002 by Ord. No.
11-2002; amended 6-11-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
[1] Parking lot/school parking garage configuration. When
ninety-degree parking is proposed, the vehicular travel
aisle shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide and shall provide
for two–way traffic. [Amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No.
7-2008]
[2] Parking lot/school parking garage configuration. When
sixty-degree parking is proposed, the vehicular travel aisle
shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide when two–way traffic is
proposed. [Amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
[3] Parking lot/school parking garage configuration. When
seventy-five-degree parking is proposed, the vehicular
travel aisle shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide when oneway
traffic is proposed.
[4] Parking lot/school parking garage configuration. When
sixty-degree parking is proposed, the vehicular travel aisle
shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide when one-way traffic is
proposed.
(f) A parking garage which is accessory to principal multifamily
residential building and which is owned and operated by
private entity shall comply with the requirements of
§ 84-55E(1), except that when ninety-degree parking is
proposed, the vehicular travel aisle shall be a minimum of 24
feet wide and shall provide for two-way traffic. [Added
1-23-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(2) Traffic lane and driveway dimensions.
(a) Lanes designed for circulation of motor vehicles within the
parking area shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for twoway
traffic. Lanes designated for circulation within the parking
area for one-way traffic shall have a minimum width of 18 feet
with sixty-degree angled parking and 22 feet for seventy-fivedegree
angled parking. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
3-2004; 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
(b) Driveways providing access to the parking area from the street
shall be of adequate length to accommodate off-street stacking
of vehicles waiting to enter the parking area. The stacking area
shall accommodate at least one vehicle, plus one vehicle for
every 50 spaces provided in the parking area, up to 20 stacking
spaces.
(c) Off-street parking areas shall have separate, marked lanes for
ingress and egress. For parking areas with access solely onto a
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:712
minor local street and providing 10 or fewer off-street parking
spaces, a single lane for both ingress and egress is adequate.
(d) Miniwarehouses shall be separated on all sides by a paved
driveway access having a minimum width of 30 feet. [Added
7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1990]
(e) Parallel parking shall be permitted along straight driveway
sections if the minimum driveway width exclusive of the
parking spaces is 24 feet for two-way traffic and 18 feet for
one-way traffic. [Added 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004;
amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
F. Purpose. This section sets forth minimum criteria for the installation,
use and maintenance of exterior lighting, the purposes of which are to
require lighting in outdoor public places where safety and security are
concerns; protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby streets from
disabling glare from non-vehicular light sources that shine directly into
their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; shield neighboring properties
from nuisance glare resulting from excessive light sources and from
nonexistent or improperly directed or shielded light sources; limit the
height of light standards to preclude or lessen light pollution; and
promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy
conservation. As used herein, the term "glare" means distracting, harsh
or blinding or uncomfortably bright light originating from or reflecting
off man-made objects. [Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988;
9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 11-2001].
(1) Lighting standards: applicability. Lighting facilities shall be
required for all off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas
and for all driveways providing ingress and egress thereto for all
subdivisions and/or land developments for business, commercial,
personal service, industrial, multifamily, recreational, institutional
and public uses. In the approval of any subdivision or land
development plan, the Supervisors shall have the authority to
require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations
where in their reasonable discretion such lighting is warranted. In
addition, the provisions of this section shall apply to signs,
architectural lighting and landscape lighting.
(2) Plan submission.
(a) Lighting plans shall be submitted for review and approval for
all subdivisions and land developments and for all uses
identified in Subsection (3)(b) of this § 84-55F, and shall
include a schematic lay-out of all proposed exterior fixture
locations, ISO footcandle data and a plat demonstrating
intensities and uniformities within the limitations established
in Subsection F(3) of this section, and manufacturer's
description of the equipment (catalog cuts), glare control
devices, lamps, mounting heights and means, proposed hours
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:713
of operation of the lighting and maintenance schedule.
Illumination intensities shall be plotted on a 10 feet by 10 feet
grid.
(b) When required by the Township Engineer, the applicant shall
submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates
both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the
proposed lighting plan and the provision for adequate
measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution and
disabling glare, both on the use or development site and on
adjacent properties.
(3) Design standards and illumination standards.
(a) Lighting facilities located in off-street parking areas and
loading areas for uses and developments governed by this
§ 84-55F, or in connection with signs and recreational and
institutional activities, shall provide an illumination level
utilizing the current recommended practice and/or standards
of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA), unless otherwise recommended by the Zoning Officer,
or Township board or commission having jurisdiction for
justifiable cause shown, except as otherwise modified by the
provisions of this § 84-55F.
(b) Illumination, where required by this § 84-55F shall, as a
maximum, have the intensities and uniformity ratios in
Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IESNA), 9th Edition, except as modified herein
as follows:
Use/Task
Maintained
Footcandles
(MFC)
Uniformity
Average:
Minimum
(i) Parking, multifamily Low
vehicular/pedestrian
activity Medium vehicular/
pedestrian activity
0.2 mm. 0.6
mm.
4:1 4:1
(ii) Parking, industrial/
commercial/ institutional,
municipal
High activity, e.g.,
regional shopping centers,
fast-food facilities, major
athletic/ civic/cultural
events
0.75 mm. 4:1
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:714
Use/Task
Maintained
Footcandles
(MFC)
Uniformity
Average:
Minimum
Medium activity, e.g.,
community shopping
centers, office parks,
hospitals, commuter lots,
cultural/civic/ recreational
events
0.6 mm. 4:1
Low activity, e.g.,
neighborhood shopping,
industrial employee
parking, schools, church
parking
0.2 mm. 4:1
(iii) Nonresidential walkways
and bikeways
0.5 avg. 5:1
(iv) Building entrances 5.0 avg. —
(v) Canopy over gasdispensing
devices/service
station pump islands
35.0 avg.
(vi) Car dealerships 35.0 max.1 4:1 max.:min.
NOTE:
135.0 MFC is the maximum permitted and is limited to the
first 100 feet of outdoor display or parking along any street
frontage, subject to otherwise applicable setbacks mandated
by the district regulations. The remainder of the property
shall be limited to 20.0 MFC, except for the rear yard, which
shall be limited to 10 MFC.
(c) In the application of the above standards, the following
regulations shall apply:
[1] Illumination levels shall be defined as maintained
horizontal footcandles on the task; for example, the
pavement or area surface. A footcandle is defined as a unit
of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot and
measurable with an illuminance meter, also known as a
footcandle or light meter. Illuminance is defined to mean
the quantity of light measured in footcandles or lux. Lux is
defined to mean a unit of light intensity stated in lumens
per square meter. There are approximately 10.7 lux per
footcandle.
[2] Uniformity ratios dictate that average illumination values
shall not exceed minimum values by more than the product
of the minimum value and the specified ratio. For example,
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:715
in the case of commercial parking high activity, the
average footcandles shall not be in excess of 3.6 (0.9 x 4).
[3] In no case shall illumination exceed 0.2 footcandle
measured at the property lines, except at driveway
entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway
centerline of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0
footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is required
by another provision of this § 84-55F; and the amount of
illumination projected onto a residential zoned property or
use from another property shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle
at the property line.
[4] Lighting standards in parking areas shall be located no
more than 100 feet apart; provided that the Zoning Officer,
Township board or commission having jurisdiction shall
apply the standards of this § 84-55F by prohibiting the
location of lighting standards in such close proximity to
each other as would result in a violation of the footcandle
and light spillage restrictions imposed by this § 84-55F.
[5] Lamp types and colors shall be in harmony within the
adjacent community, any special circumstances existing on
the site and with surrounding installations. Lamp types
and colors shall be consistent with the task and setting,
and shall not create a mix of colors unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Officer, Township board or
commission having jurisdiction for cause shown.
[6] Canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface
(ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush lens
fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Drop lens fixtures
are prohibited. Up-lens lighting fixtures mounted on the
canopy structure above the level of gas pumps are
permitted if they have the effect of reducing glare from the
lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. In no
event shall any other lighting fixtures be located on or
otherwise attached to or used to light a canopy or any area
of the property adjacent to the canopy. Outdoor canopies
include, but are not limited to, the following applications:
[a] Fuel island canopies associated with service stations
and convenience stores;
[b] Exterior canopies above storefronts in shopping
centers and malls;
[c] Exterior canopies above driveways and building
entrances;
[d] Pavilions and gazebos.
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:716
[7] All other lighting proposed for use after 10:00 p.m. for
commercial, industrial, institutional and recreational
applications shall be reduced by 75% from then until
dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose and approved
by the Zoning Officer, Township board or commission
having jurisdiction.
(4) Glare control. For purposes of these regulations, "glare" is defined
as the sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance,
discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility to the eye.
(a) All lighting fixtures shall meet IESNA cut-off criteria. No
lighting shall be permitted which shines directly into
residential units, or results in glare beyond an angle of 30°
from a vertical plane, measured from the light source.
(b) Light fixtures, including mounting base, shall not exceed 25
feet in height above finished grade.
(c) All lighting sources shall be effectively shielded and shall be
installed and/or aimed so as to shield nearby public or private
streets and neighboring properties from direct glare light
radiation, or light pollution which may create a safety hazard
or a nuisance.
(d) All lighting sources shall be completely shielded from any
public right-of-way.
(e) Illuminated signs shall have an indirect lighting source or
shielded source.
(f) The Zoning Officer, Township board or commission having
jurisdiction may require that lighting be controlled by
automatic timing devices to extinguish light sources during
specific periods to mitigate the adverse consequences of light
pollution when such action is necessary to protect adjacent
properties and uses.
(g) Glare control shall be accomplished primarily through the
proper selection and application of lighting equipment. Only
after those means have been exhausted shall vegetation,
fences and similar screening methods be considered
acceptable for reducing glare.
(h) Fixtures used for architectural lighting, such as facade, feature
and landscape lighting, shall be aimed or directed so as to
preclude light projection beyond the immediate objects
intended to be illuminated. All such lighting shall be
extinguished between the hours of midnight prevailing time
and dawn.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:717
(i) In all residential districts or in connection with residential
uses, floodlighting, spotlighting and other high-intensity
lighting over 100 watts shall be located so that glare or
reflection is not greater than 0.2 footcandle at the lot line of
the receiving land. Such lighting fixtures shall be installed and/
or aimed so that they do not project their output into windows
of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, skyward or onto a
public street. All such lighting shall be extinguished after
10:00 p.m. prevailing time, except in case of emergency use.
(j) Unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Officer, or Township
board or commission having jurisdiction for purposes of safety
or security or all-night operations, lighting for commercial,
industrial, public recreational and industrial applications shall
be controlled by automatic switching devices such as time
clocks or combination motion detectors and photocells, to
permit extinguishing outdoor lighting fixtures between 10:00
p.m. and dawn, to mitigate nuisance glare and sky-lighting
consequences.
(5) Installation and maintenance.
(a) The applicant/landowner shall install or cause to be installed
all lighting fixtures and facilities at his/its expense. Light
fixtures and poles shall be in accordance with a lighting plan
approved by the Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and Township Engineer, in compliance
with this § 84-55F. The landowner shall be responsible for all
costs involved in the maintenance, upkeep and operation of all
lighting of parking and loading areas and other areas required
by this § 84-55F.
(b) Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be run
underground, not overhead.
(c) Lighting fixtures shall be maintained by the landowner so as to
always meet the requirements of this § 84-55F.
(6) Compliance.
(a) Board of Supervisors' approval of a lighting plan upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and/or Township
Engineer does not relieve the landowner of responsibility
should any light standards or light fixtures, after construction,
fail to conform or continue to conform to the provisions of this
§ 84-55F. The Township reserves the right to conduct a postinstallation
nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the
requirements of this § 84-55F and, if appropriate, to require
remedial action at the expense of the landowner.
(b) Authority for determination of correct lighting installation shall
rest with the Zoning Officer, with advice from the Township
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:718
Engineer. If the Zoning Officer determines that any lighting
installation creates a safety or personal security hazard due
to insufficient illumination levels or produces unacceptable
levels of nuisance glare, light pollution or skyward light, the
landowner or other person/entity then responsible for the use,
maintenance and operation of the lighting shall be so notified
and required to take timely remedial action at the expense of
the landowner or other responsible person.
(c) If appropriate remedial or corrective action has not been
effected within 30 days of notification, the landowner or other
responsible person/entity shall be issued an enforcement
notice and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this
Chapter 84.
G. (Reserved)242
H. Loading area requirements for industrial and commercial uses. The
requirements of this section shall apply to all industrial and commercial
subdivisions or land developments and to all uses that include industrial
and commercial uses and to all expansions of such existing uses
resulting in a gross floor area gain of 20% or more. [Amended
8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
(1) Siting and landscaping requirements.
(a) Loading areas for all uses shall be completely on-site and shall
not occupy any street right-of-way.
(b) Loading areas shall not occupy parking spaces, traffic lanes
within a parking area, driveways or any public cartway.
(c) Loading areas shall be located only in rear or side yard areas.
Loading areas are expressly prohibited in any front yard.
(d) Loading areas shall have perimeter landscaping in accordance
with § 84-55C.
(2) Required minimum dimensions of loading berths. Loading berths
shall be sized according to the type of facility served, as indicated
below:
(a) Large loading berth.
[1] Minimum of 14 feet by 60 feet.
[2] Required for factories, warehouses, distribution centers,
shopping centers, supermarkets, retail stores offering
large products (e.g., major home appliances, furniture),
242. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Shopping cart storage, was repealed 6-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-1988.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:719
automobile and farm implement dealers and office
buildings larger than 500,000 square feet.
(b) Small loading berth.
[1] Minimum of 12 feet by 30 feet.
[2] Required for retail uses not specified in § 84-55H(2)(a)[2],
convenience stores, all services, institutions and office
buildings under 500,000 square feet.
(3) Surface requirements for loading areas. All loading areas shall
have a dustfree surface over the entire area customarily used by
delivery vehicles for parking and maneuvering. The surface may be
asphalt, concrete, oil-sealed gravel, compacted gravel or any other
dustfree surfacing material approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Number of loading berths required by land use. The number of
loading berths required for commercial, industrial and institutional
uses shall, as a minimum, equal the number specified in this
section. The size of the loading berths shall be in conformance with
§ 84-55H(2).
(a) Retail sales, business and personal services, shopping centers,
wholesale sales and commercial services:
Size
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces
Less than 5,000 0
5,000 to 15,000 1
15,000 to 40,000 2
40,000 to 100,000 3
100,000 to 300,000 4
300,000 to 1,000,000 5
(b) All industrial uses, warehousing and distribution centers:
Size
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces
Less than 5,000 0
5,000 to 40,000 1
40,000 to 70,000 2
70,000 to 110,000 3
110,000 to 160,000 4
160,000 to 240,000 5
240,000 to 350,000 6
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:720
Size
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces
350,000 to 500,000 7
500,000 to 700,000 8
700,000 to 1,000,000 9
Over 1,000,000 10
(c) Offices (including office parks), banks, financial and
professional services and medical clinics:
Size
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces
Less than 5,000 0
5,000 to 40,000 1
40,000 to 100,000 2
100,000 to 300,000 3
Over 300,000 4
(d) Hotels, motels, nursing homes and hospitals; excludes
ambulance spaces and emergency room spaces for nursing
homes and hospitals:
Size
(square feet) Number of Loading Spaces
Less than 10,000 0
10,000 to 100,000 1
100,000 to 200,000 2
Over 200,000 3
I. Conformance. [Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988243]
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use
served, except as provided by § 84-551(5) below. For each land use
proposed, the applicant shall provide the minimum number of off-
243. Editor's Note: Section I of this ordinance also provided the following: "The purpose of this
ordinance is to provide for adequate off-street parking space for the purpose of preserving
and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the general public by: "A. Reducing
congestion on public streets. "B. Providing adequate parking for all permitted land uses,
avoiding the circulation and congestion related to inadequate parking areas and the
environmental and safety problems associated with over-designed parking areas. "C.
Minimizing pedestrian conflict with motor vehicles, allowing motorists to exit and enter
their vehicles away from the flow of traffic and separating pedestrian circulation from
vehicular circulation within parking areas. "D. Addressing the special needs of
handicapped persons through the provision of specially designed and located parking
spaces. "E. Minimizing impervious surfaces to allow for groundwater recharge through
landscaping requirements and discouragement of excessively large parking areas."
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:721
street parking spaces that are set forth in § 84-551(2) below. If the
calculation to determine the required number of spaces results in
a fractional space, the number of spaces required shall be the next
highest whole number. Proposed parking areas which are greatly
in excess of those requirements hereunder shall be discouraged.
[Amended 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015; 6-18-2019 by Ord.
No. 6-2019]
(2) Minimum number of parking spaces required per land use.
Throughout this section, "sq.ft." shall be interpreted as "square
feet" and "GFA" shall be interpreted as "gross floor area."
[Amended 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1990; 5-25-1993 by Ord.
No. 2-1993; 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001; 8-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 7-2005; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006; 3-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 9-2007; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007; 12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 10-2008; 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011;
9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 10-2013; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No.
11-2013; 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Residential uses
Single-family detached dwelling
and mobile home used as
permanent dwelling
2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily dwelling except
apartment
2 per dwelling unit plus 1
space for every 5 units for
multi-unit structures and
townhomes
Apartment 2.0 per dwelling unit
Commercial uses; industrial uses
and services
Manufacturing 2.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Less than 100,000 sq. ft. GFA
Equal to or greater than
100,000 sq. ft. GFA
2.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Office buildings, research and
development facilities,
laboratories and business services
3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Office parks 3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Personal and professional services 5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Bank; other financial services 4.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Car wash
Nonautomated 2.0 per bay, plus 3 stacking
spaces per bay
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:722
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Automated/tunnel 6.0, plus 6.0 dry-off spaces,
plus 15.0 stacking spaces
Commercial services 3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Funeral home 20.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. occupied
by viewing rooms
Laundromat 20.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Dog day-care facility 1 space per every employee
per shift plus 2 additional
spaces per 1,000 square feet
Eating and drinking place
With table service 15.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Without table service 20.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Within a shopping center which
has a minimum floor area of
100,000 sq. ft.
3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
Gas station (in addition to service
station requirement, if applicable)
1 per pump island, plus 6
stacking spaces for each
pump island
Home occupation Requirement varies. Applicant
must demonstrate that
parking is adequate for the
proposed use; in no case less
than 1 space in addition to the
number of spaces required by
the residential district
regulations.
Hotel and motel 1 per unit, plus 4 per 50 units,
plus spaces as required for
ancillary uses
Junkyard 0.1 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Lumberyard 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Personal storage; miniwarehouse A minimum of 2 spaces and a
maximum of 5 spaces per
development tract
Retail sales of consumed or
perishable items, items with little
seasonal variation in demand
(includes supermarkets and
convenience stores)
3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:723
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Retail sales of nonperishable
items, often some seasonal
variation in demand (includes
department stores, auto dealers,
apparel and personal accessory
stores, gift shops, jewelers,
nurseries, bookstores, computer
stores and all similar uses)
5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA (Up
to 20% may be in a reserve
parking area.)
Service station; auto body repair
shop service (in addition to gas
station and auto dealer
requirements, where applicable)
2.0 per garage bay
Wholesale sales; commercial
sales; freight terminal
1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Institutional and public uses
Airport 30.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA in
terminal/administration
building
College, university
Community college or any
college where less than 1/2 of
the student body resides oncampus
10.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA in
classroom buildings
College or university where
at least 1/2 of the student
body resides on-campus
1.0 per each campus
residential accommodation,
plus 2.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. in
classroom buildings
Community center; social club 12.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. in main
assembly room
Day-care center 3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus
8 stacking spaces
Elementary school, middle
school, including boarding
schools
12.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. in main
assembly room (25% may be
in a reserve lot.)
2.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of
classroom area if there is no
main assembly room
High school, including boarding
schools
10.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
classroom area or 12.0 per
1,000 sq. ft. in main assembly
room, whichever is greater
Hospital 2.0 per bed
Library 3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:724
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Museum or similar institution 3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Place of worship 12.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. in main
assembly room (25% may be
in reserve lot.)
Utility installation 2.0 per installation
Recreational uses
Bowling alley 5.0 per lane
Cinema 12.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Country club; golf club 5.0 per tee, plus any spaces
required for ancillary uses
Health club; spa 5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Indoor amusement arcade 5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Miniature golf course 3.0 per tee
Stadium; theater; gymnasium 0.3 per seat
Swim club; public pool 10.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
swimming pool floor
Forestry 1.0 per every employee during
the shift with the largest
number of employees, plus an
additional five parking spaces
Mineral extraction 1.0 per every employee during
the shift with the largest
number of employees plus an
additional five parking spaces
Convenience store with retail sale
of gasoline
12.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA,
plus 1 space for each fueling
position
Pharmacy 3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Independent living facility and/or
assisted living facility
2 spaces per dwelling unit
unless the Board of
Supervisors approves a
reduction in the number of
parking spaces required as
part of the conditional use
approval based on evidence
that the parking demand for
the particular independent
and/or assisted living facility
proposed is less than 2 spaces
per unit
(3) Surfacing requirements.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-55
72:725
(a) The surface of all parking areas shall be dustfree under
conditions of normal use, as follows:
[1] Primary parking areas shall have an approved paved
surface.
[2] Reserved parking areas may be asphalt, grasscrete or,
with approval of the Township Engineer, oil-sealed gravel
or grass, depending upon the degree of use anticipated.
(b) In those cases where parking space areas, direction of traffic
flow or traffic lanes are not readily apparent, they shall be
clearly delineated by reflective, painted lines in primary
parking areas. Additional signage shall be as required by the
Township Engineer, depending upon the necessities of each
individual situation.
(c) Concrete bumper blocks or concrete curbing shall be provided
for all parking spaces in primary parking areas.
(d) All subdivision and/or land development plans, whether
preliminary or final, featuring off-street parking areas shall be
accompanied by a stormwater management plan for the entire
site in accordance with Chapter 69 of the West Goshen Code.
(4) In any zoning district, if a single lot is developed with multiple uses
which are permitted in such district, the required number of
parking spaces for such development shall be computed by totaling
the number of parking spaces required for each discrete use
specified in Subsection I(2) of this § 84-55. When any discrete use
within the development is replaced with another use, the parking
requirements for the entire development shall be recomputed, and
such additional number of parking spaces shall be added as is
necessary to comply with the parking requirements for that new
discrete use. Should the single lot containing the multiple uses (or
the ownership thereof) be subdivided, parking may continue to be
shared, provided proof of necessary cross-easements to facilitate
said shared parking are provided as may be required by the
Township. [Added 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993; amended
7-31-2013 by Ord. No. 09-2013]
(5) The parking spaces for nonresidential uses required in § 84-551(2)
may be located elsewhere than on the same lot as the use served
("off-site parking") when authorized by the Board of Supervisors,
subject to the following conditions: [Added 6-18-2019 by Ord.
No. 6-2019]
(a) The owners of two or more lots shall submit with their
application a site plan which depicts the location of the off-site
parking and a calculation of the number of spaces required for
each use on the lots.
§ 84-55 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-55
72:726
§ 84-56. Utility uses.244 [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014;
amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(b) The owners shall submit an agreement in a form satisfactory to
the Solicitor signed by the owners of the lots which guarantees
that the parking spaces shall be available for the uses
proposed. The agreement shall be recorded and must remain
in effect for as long as the uses require the off-site parking.
(c) Some portion of the off-site parking area designated for a
particular use shall lie within 300 feet of a building entrance
regularly used by patrons of the use.
(d) The lot(s) used for off-site parking must have cross access
easements such that the off-site parking spaces must be
accessible from inside of the lot or lots without the need to exit
onto a public street to gain access.
J. Single-family residential parking controls.
(1) Standards. Parking space or spaces with proper and safe access
from street or alley shall be provided on each lot, either within a
structure or in the open to serve the dwellings within the district
adequately. Parking space for one vehicle shall be equal to at least
350 square feet for purposes of computing car spaces including
stalls and driveways, and shall have a parking space of at least 10
feet by 20 feet in size. Parking spaces shall have an approved allweather
surface and shall have a safe and convenient access in all
seasons.
(2) Requirements.
(a) Two spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
(b) Where eight or more spaces are provided or service a single
residential use, the following additional requirements shall be
imposed:
[1] All accessways and parking spaces shall be paved.
[2] The outlines of all parking spaces shall be permanently
marked.
[3] At least 3% of the total area shall be landscaped. Planting
along the perimeter shall be considered as within the
required minimum.
A. Essential utilities, community utilities and governmental utilities, as
defined in § 84-8, shall be uses permitted by right in all zoning districts,
subject to the following regulations:
244. Editor’s Note: Former § 84-56, Conversion of residence to college dormitory, as amended,
was repealed 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013.
§ 84-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-56
72:727
(1) No such use shall include an office open to the general public,
trucking or repair facilities or housing of work crews.
(2) The portion of any such use not located within a building shall be
enclosed or adequately screened in such a manner as to not be
visible across property lines.
(3) No advertising shall be affixed to any structure.
B. A public utility facility and a gas and liquid pipeline facility, as defined in
§ 84-8, shall be permitted by conditional use of the Board of Supervisors
in the I-1, I-2, I-2R, I-3 and I-C Districts subject to the performance
standards in this section. Gas and liquid pipeline facilities and
hazardous liquid and/or gas pipelines are only permitted in the I-1, I-2,
I-2R, I-3 and I-C districts by conditional use and subject to compliance
with the following standards:
(1) No obnoxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted as
a result of the use.
(2) No use shall emit offensive odors which are perceptible at lot lines.
(3) No use shall discharge into the air dust or other particulate matter
in a manner or quantity which does not conform to all applicable
federal and state laws and implementing regulations.
(4) No use shall emit smoke from operations.
(5) No use shall produce any heat perceptible at or beyond the lot
boundaries.
(6) No use shall utilize lighting in a manner which does not conform
with the lighting standards in this chapter.
(7) No use shall permit physical vibrations perceptible at or beyond the
lot boundaries.
(8) No use shall emit potentially harmful radiation.
(9) No use shall engage in the production or storage of any material
designed for use as an explosive.
(10)No use shall engage in the storage of waste materials on the lot for
any period beyond five days. Such waste material storage shall be
located behind the front building line of the primary building and
no closer than 50 feet to any rear or side lot line and shall be
completely screened from the view of any street or adjoining
property.
(11)No use shall discharge any objectionable and/or potentially
dangerous effluent from plant operations.
(12)No industrial lagoons for chemicals or other liquid waste shall be
permitted.
§ 84-56 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-56
72:728
§ 84-57. Antenna regulations.245 [Added 6-14-1983 by Ord. No.
3-1983; amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 5-1987]
§ 84-57.01. Microwave antennas.
Microwave antennas for satellite communication (hereinafter "microwave
antennas") shall be subject to the following regulations:
(13) The portion of any such use not located within a building shall be
enclosed or adequately screened in such a manner as to not be
visible across property lines.
(14) All uses shall be conducted in compliance with applicable
governmental regulations, including the noise and lighting
regulations in this chapter.
(15) No retail activity shall be permitted.
(16) The owner of the public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline
facility shall provide the Township with an emergency liaison that
may be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of
an emergency.
(17) The public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility shall
prepare and file with the Township an emergency response plan
which shall be followed in the event of an emergency at the facility.
(18) A public utility facility and gas and liquid pipeline facility that
involve hazardous liquid and/or gas pipelines shall be set back from
all occupied structures a minimum distance equal to the pipeline
impact radius.
A. All residential zones. Microwave antennas shall be a permissible
accessory use, subject to the following:
(1) The diameter of the microwave antenna shall not exceed 10 feet.
(2) When separately supported, the total height of the microwave
antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
(3) The microwave antenna shall be located only in a rear yard or in
the side yard not extending beyond the building setback and not
closer than 20 feet to any property line.
(4) When roof-mounted, the microwave antenna shall be located on a
portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot and no part
thereof shall project above the ridgeline; provided, however, that in
no event shall a roof-mounted microwave antenna exceed four feet
in diameter.
245. Editor's Note: Former § 84-57, Planned residential development controls, as amended, was
repealed 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80.
§ 84-56 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.01
72:729
(5) Before erection of any such microwave antenna, a permit
application shall be made to the Township, and a permit shall be
issued in accordance with § 84-67E of this chapter.
B. All commercial, industrial, Multipurpose, M-S and POP Districts.
Microwave antennas shall be a permissible accessory use, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) When ground-mounted, the total height of the entire structure of
the microwave antenna, including the pedestal, shall not exceed 15
feet, and in no event shall the height of the antenna be increased by
raising the natural contour or level of the ground.
(2) When roof-mounted, the maximum diameter of the microwave
antenna shall not exceed four feet, unless placed on a flat-roofed
building, in which event the maximum diameter shall be 10 feet.
When located on a flat roof, the antenna shall not be placed on the
front half of the roof relative to the front yard.
(3) The microwave antenna shall be located only in the rear yard or in
the side yard not extending beyond the building setback; provided,
however, that no microwave antenna shall be permitted within that
portion of a rear or side yard designated or required to be a buffer
area by any provision of this chapter.
(4) Before erection of any such microwave antenna, a permit
application shall be made to the Township, and a permit shall be
issued in accordance with § 84-67E of this chapter.
C. General regulations. Microwave antennas shall, in all zoning districts,
be subject to the following additional general regulations: [Amended
4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
(1) No more than one microwave antenna shall be permitted on any
lot. An exception is retail sales of microwave antennas for
permanent display purposes in any commercial district where retail
sales thereof are permitted, and provided, further, that such display
shall be in accordance with the applicable area and bulk
regulations and design standards of such commercial district.
(2) Microwave antennas shall be properly anchored and installed to
resist minimum wind loads in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications. Where no minimum standards are provided,
anchorage and installation shall be capable of resisting a minimum
wind load of 30 pounds per square foot of projected horizontal
area. The Township Engineer is authorized to establish minimum
design specifications governing anchorage and installation and,
when requested by the Zoning Officer, shall review and approve
plans and specifications for any installation. Supports, anchors and
foundations shall take into account overturning movements and
forces created by wind loading.
§ 84-57.01 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.01
72:730
§ 84-57.02. (Reserved)246
§ 84-57.03. Wireless communications facilities. [Added 4-22-1998
by Ord. No. 5-1998; amended 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002;
8-11-2004 by Ord. No. 19-2004; 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008;
7-15-2009 by Ord. No. 06-2009; 10-10-2012 by Ord. No. 07-2012;
6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013; 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
(3) Microwave antennas shall be limited to the following colors: black,
white, olive drab and beige.
(4) Section 84-57.01 shall in no event be construed to permit as a
permissible accessory use any microwave antenna for satellite or
land-based communication used or intended to be used for the
propagation or transmission of radio or elect magnetic waves, it
being the intent hereof that such microwave antennas be permitted
only within the I-1, I-2 and I-3 Industrial Districts.
(5) No microwave antenna installation shall be permitted in any
parking lot or parking area.
D. Regulations applicable to microwave antennas associated with radio
and television studios permitted in the I-1 Campus Light Industrial
District. The following regulations shall apply to microwave antennas
associated with radio and television studios permitted as a use by right
in the I-1 Zoning District and shall supersede any inconsistent
provisions set forth in § 84-57.01A, B and C set forth above: [Added
7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 3-1995]
(1) Multiple microwave antennas may be permitted on any lot.
(2) When ground-mounted, the total height of the entire structure of
any antenna, including the pedestal, shall not exceed 40 feet and,
in no event, shall the height be increased by raising the natural
contour or level of the ground.
(3) The microwave antennas shall be enclosed with a fence in
compliance with applicable provisions of this Chapter 84.
[Amended 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
A. Purposes and findings of fact.
(1) The purpose of these provisions is to establish uniform standards
for the siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in West Goshen Township. While the
Township recognizes the importance of wireless communications
facilities in providing high-quality communications service to its
residents and businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has
an obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse
246. Editor's Note: Former § 84-57.02, as amended, was repealed 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015.
§ 84-57.01 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:731
visual effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in
the following provisions.
(2) By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
(a) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision for necessary services;
(b) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(c) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
nontower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
(d) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable wifi
and other wireless communications facilities;
(e) Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing
towers;
(f) Ensure the structural integrity of commercial communications
antenna support structures through compliance with
applicable industry standards and regulations; and
(g) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's
residents.
B. General requirements for all nontower wireless communication
facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower wireless
communications facilities located within the Township, including
those inside the public rights-of-way:
(a) Permitted in all zoning districts subject to regulations.
Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to
the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and subject to
applicable permitting by the Township.
(b) Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:732
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property
in the Township.
(c) Wind. All nontower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association and the Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended).
(d) Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(e) Public safety communications. No nontower WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(f) Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by itself or
in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(g) Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or
portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Township.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF
and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:733
(h) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a nontower WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Township shall make its final decision on whether to
approve the application and shall advise the applicant in
writing of such decision. If additional information was
requested by the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the Township's ninety-day review period.
Time extensions may be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
(h.1) Timing of approval for SWF. Within 10 calendar days of the
date that an application for a nontower WCF that is also a SWF
is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. The Township shall have 10 days
from receipt of the additional information to issue a letter of
completeness, or to request additional information as
appropriate. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete
application, the Township shall make its final decision on
whether to approve the application and shall advise the
applicant in writing of such decision. If additional information
was requested by the Township to complete an application, the
time required by the applicant to provide the information shall
not be counted toward the Township's sixty-day review period.
[Added 11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
(i) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a nontower WCF
shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the nontower WCF.
(j) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the nontower WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a nontower WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:734
maintenance or removal of a nontower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(k) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The nontower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(l) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Township reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any nontower WCF for numerous
factors, which include, but are not limited to, visual impact,
design, and safety standards.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower wireless
communications facilities, such as antennas, that do not
substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
(a) Permit required. Applicants proposing the modification of an
existing wireless support structure shall obtain the required
permits from the Township. In order to be considered for such
permits, the applicant must submit a permit application to the
Township.
(b) Such nontower WCFs that do not substantially change the
physical dimension of the wireless support structure may be
eligible for a sixty-day time frame for review. The applicant
shall assert such eligibility in writing to the Township and
provide documentation reasonably related to the determining
whether the application is eligible for the shortened review
time frame, and if warranted, such application shall be
reviewed within the sixty-day time frame.
(c) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment
greater than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet
of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:735
(d) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate, fair and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF as set forth in fee schedules
established by the Township. [Amended 11-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 10-2019]
(3) The following additional regulations shall apply to all nontower
wireless communications facilities, such as antennas, that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they
are attached:
(a) Permitted in all zoning districts subject to regulations.
Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to
the restrictions and conditions prescribed below. In residential
districts, the height of an antenna shall not exceed 20 feet, and
such WCF shall be located not closer than 25 feet to any
property line.
(b) Prohibited on certain structures. Nontower WCFs greater than
10 feet in height shall not be located on single-family detached
residences, single-family attached residences, or any
residential accessory structure.
(c) Permit required. Any applicant proposing the construction of a
new nontower WCF, or the modification of an existing
nontower WCF, shall first obtain the required permits from the
Township. New construction and modifications shall be
prohibited without a permit. After receipt of the permit
application, the Township Zoning Officer shall determine
whether zoning relief is necessary under the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(d) Historic buildings. No nontower WCF may be located on a
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places, or is eligible to be so
listed, or is listed on the official historic structures and/or
historic districts list maintained by the Township, or has been
designated by the Township to be of historical significance.
(e) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the nontower
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of this section.
The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the
Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:736
(f) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate, fair and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF as set forth in fee schedules
established by the Township. [Amended 11-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 10-2019]
C. Nontower wireless communications facilities outside rights-of-way.
(1) The following additional regulations shall apply to nontower
wireless communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way
that do substantially change the wireless support structure to
which they are attached:
(a) Development regulations. Nontower WCFs shall be co-located
on existing structures, such as existing buildings or towerbased
WCFs, subject to the following conditions:
[1] The total height of any support structure and mounted
WCF shall not exceed the maximum building height
permitted in the underlying zoning district, unless the
applicant obtains a variance.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all nontower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the nontower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the area and bulk requirements for the
applicable zoning district.
[4] A security fence of not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet shall surround any separate communications
equipment building.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] Nontower WCFs shall employ stealth technology subject to
the approval of the Township.
[2] Antennas, and their respective accompanying support
structures, shall be no greater in diameter than any crosssectional
dimension that is reasonably necessary for their
proper functioning.
[3] Noncommercial usage exemption. Township citizens
utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of
maintaining television, phone, and/or Internet connections
at their respective residences shall be exempt from the
design regulations enumerated in this section.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:737
(c) Removal and replacement.
[1] The removal and replacement of nontower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not increase the overall size of the WCF or
the number of antennas.
(d) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section
and any other provisions found within the Township Code or
state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have
the authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is
located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to
ensure such compliance.
D. Nontower wireless communications facilities in rights-of-way.
(1) The following additional regulations shall apply to all nontower
wireless communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
(a) Co-location. Nontower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If colocation
is not technologically feasible, the WCF applicant shall
locate its nontower WCFs on existing poles that do not already
act as wireless support structures.
(b) Design requirements.
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW, including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to
the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
[2] Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to
match the supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying
equipment shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be
visually compatible with the support structure upon which
they are mounted.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all nontower WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:738
(d) Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb or within an easement extending onto a privately
owned lot.
[2] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be located
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on any accessory equipment shall be removed
at the sole expense of the owner within 10 business days of
notice of the existence of the graffiti.
[5] Any proposed underground vault related to nontower
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary, or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF
when the Township, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
E. General requirements for all tower-based wireless communications
facilities.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:739
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities in the Township:
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified and licensed personnel, so that the same
shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of a conditional use application for a
tower-based WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing
upon the application, the applicant shall mail notice to all
owners of every property within 500 feet of the proposed
facility. The applicant shall provide proof of the notification to
the Township.
(c) Conditional use authorization.
[1] Tower-based WCFs are permitted in certain zoning
districts by conditional use and only in such location within
such districts and at a height necessary to satisfy their
function in the applicant's wireless communications
system.
[2] The applicant for conditional use approval shall prove to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the applicant
cannot adequately extend or infill its communications
system by the use of equipment such as radomes,
repeaters, antennas and other similar equipment installed
on existing structures, such as utility poles or their
appurtenances and other available tall structures. The
applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed
WCF must be located where it is proposed and at the
height proposed in order to serve the applicant's service
area and that no other viable alternative location exists.
[3] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the applicant, the power in
watts at which the applicant transmits, the design gain of
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:740
the applicant's antenna(s), the subscriber equipment
sensitivity expressed in dBm, the design dBm of the
transmission and receiving equipment and the results of
the drive test conducted by the applicant in determining
the need for the proposed site and installation.
[4] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[5] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present
documentation to the Board that the owner of the property
has granted an easement for the proposed WCF and that
vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
[6] Tower-based WCFs shall employ stealth technology,
subject to the Board's approval, as part of the conditional
use approval process. All wireless communications
equipment buildings and other accessory facilities shall be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the
surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a
like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible.
[7] The Board of Supervisors shall consider whether its
decision and conditions placed upon any conditional use
approval will promote the harmonious and orderly
development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of
the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at
the site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage
sound engineering and land development design and
construction principles, practices and techniques.
[8] An application for a new tower-based WCF shall not be
approved unless it is shown by the applicant that the
wireless communications equipment planned for the
proposed tower-based WCF cannot be accommodated on
an existing or approved structure or building, or on
Township property. The Board of Supervisors may deny an
application to construct a new tower-based WCF if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
antenna(s) on an existing structure as set forth in this
section. The applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted
the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers within
a one-quarter-mile radius of the site proposed, sought
permission to install an antenna on those structures,
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:741
buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
[a] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[b] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or
tower, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
[c] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not
have adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[d] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
[9] An applicant for a tower-based WCF must demonstrate
that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and
that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage
shall be a factor in the Township's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCFs.
(d) Development and design regulations.
[1] Compliance with the following regulations shall be shown
during the conditional use process, or prior to issuance of
building permits, and remain applicable to the towerbased
WCF during its lifetime of use:
[a] Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance
of a permit authorizing construction and erection of a
tower-based WCF, a structural engineer registered in
Pennsylvania shall issue to the Township a written
certification of the proposed WCF's ability to meet the
structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication
Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure.
[b] Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:742
the Township with a written commitment that it will
allow other service providers to co-locate antennas
on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based
WCF shall not install any additional antennas without
obtaining the required permits from the Township.
[c] Permit required for modifications. To the extent
permissible under applicable state and federal law,
any applicant proposing the modification of an
existing tower-based WCF which increases the overall
height of such WCF shall first obtain a zoning permit
from the Township. Nonroutine modifications shall be
prohibited without a zoning permit.
[d] Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind according to
the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and the Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended).
[e] Site plan. A full site plan shall be required for all
tower-based WCFs, showing all existing and proposed
structures and improvements, including but not
limited to the antenna(s), antenna support structure,
building, fencing, buffering and ingress and egress.
[f] Height. All tower-based WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the total
height of the structure. The maximum total height of
any tower-based WCF which is not located in the
public ROW shall not exceed 120 feet, as measured
vertically from the ground level to the highest point on
the structure, including antennas and subsequent
alterations. Should the applicant prove that another
provider of wireless communications services has
agreed to co-locate antennas on the applicant's towerbased
WCF and requires a greater tower height to
provide satisfactory service for wireless
communications than is required by the applicant, the
total height of such tower-based WCF shall be
permitted to extend to, but not exceed, 150 feet.
[g] Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding
500 square feet in area or up to five metal boxes
placed on a concrete pad not exceeding 10 feet by 20
feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting
equipment may be located on the site for each
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:743
unrelated company sharing antenna space on the
tower-based wireless communications facility.
[h] Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[i] Maintenance.
[i] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated
and unattended on a daily basis and shall be
visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[ii] Maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the Township's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[j] Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF
shall, by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but
not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[k] Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF
shall be located on a property, building or structure
that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania
Register of Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed,
or is included in the official historic structures and/or
historic districts list maintained by the Township.
[l] Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a
readily visible location identifying the name and
phone number of a party to contact in the event of an
emergency. The only other signage permitted on the
WCF shall be those required by the FCC, or any other
federal or state agency.
[m] Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially
lighted, except as required by law. If lighting is
required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:744
and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations.
[n] Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of
applicable noise standards under state law and the
Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only.
[o] Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
[p] Retention of experts. The Township may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Township in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this section.
The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[q] Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a tower-based WCF is filed
with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. All applications
for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for
the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the
Township shall advise the applicant in writing of its
decision. If additional information was requested by
the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the applicant to provide the information
shall not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day
review period. Time extensions may be granted if
mutually agreed upon by the parties.
[q.1] Timing of approval for SWF. Within 10 calendar days
of the date that an application for a tower-based WCF
that is also a SWF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such
application. The Township shall have 10 days from the
receipt of the additional information to issue a letter of
completeness, or to request additional information as
appropriate. Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:745
complete application, the Township shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and
shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
If additional information was requested by the
Township to complete an application, the time
required by the applicant to provide the information
shall not be counted toward the ninety-day review
period. If the application is subject to conditional use
approval, such conditional use provisions will remain
applicable to the application; however, the timing of
approval shall not fall outside the timeline set forth
in this section unless otherwise agreed upon by the
applicant and the Township. [Added 11-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 10-2019]
[r] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based
WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
at their former location, but must otherwise comply
with the terms and conditions of this section.
[s] Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF
is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the Township of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions
of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[ii]] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and
accessory facilities shall be removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the
Township.
[iii] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not
removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the WCF.
[iv] Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs,
including antennas, shall be removed within six
months of the time of cessation of operations. The
Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
[t] Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate,
fair and reasonable permit fees directly related to the
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:746
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a tower-based WCF as
set forth in fee schedules established by the Township.
[Amended 11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
[u] FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
facility.
[v] Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable
law, the Township reserves the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of any
tower WCF for numerous factors, including, but not
limited to, visual impact, design, and safety standards.
[w] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$5,000,000 per occurrence covering the tower-based
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the
Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
[x] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents,
at all times against any and all claims for personal
injury, including death, and property damage arising
in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with
any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the tower-based WCF.
Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Township in which it is claimed that personal
injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the tower-based WCF. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:747
pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[y] Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a
tower-based WCF and associated antenna shall
contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
[z] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit
for the construction or placement of a tower-based
WCF, the applicant shall provide to the Township
financial security sufficient to guarantee the removal
of the tower-based WCF. The amount of financial
security required shall be determined by the Township
Engineer based on cost estimates of the cost to
dismantle the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based
WCF is removed.
F. Tower-based WCFs outside rights-of-way.
(1) The following additional regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located outside the rights-ofway:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Location. Tower-based WCFs may be located in the
following zoning districts by conditional use:
[a] I-1 Campus Light Industrial.
[b] I-2 Light Industrial.
[c] I-3 General Industrial.
[d] I-C Commercial Industrial.
[e] C-4 Special Limited Business and Apartment.
[2] Sole use on lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a
sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets
the minimum lot area of the district in which it is located.
The minimum distance between the base of a tower-based
WCF and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way
line shall equal 110% of the proposed WCF structure
height, unless it is demonstrated to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board and its engineer or consultants
that in the event of failure the WCF is designed to collapse
upon itself within a setback area less than the required
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:748
minimum setback without endangering such adjoining
uses and their occupants.
[3] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a
vacant parcel in combination with another use, except
residential, subject to the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable district, and need not be
affiliated with the WCF.
[b] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall comply
with the requirements for the applicable district and
shall be the area needed to accommodate the towerbased
WCF, the equipment building, security fence,
and buffer planting.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall equal
110% of the proposed tower-based WCF's height,
unless it is demonstrated to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board and its engineer or
consultants that in the event of failure the WCF is
designed to collapse upon itself within a setback area
less than the required minimum setback without
endangering such adjoining uses and their occupants.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing tower-based WCF shall require zoning permit
approval from the Zoning Officer.
[2] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the
Township complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as
amended, to document and verify the design specifications
of the foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for
guy wires, if used.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:749
(d) Fence/screen.
[1] A security fence having a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet shall completely surround
any tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height and
any building housing WCF equipment.
[2] Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required to screen as
much of a newly constructed tower-based WCF as
possible. The Board of Supervisors may permit any
combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping
if, in the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, they
achieve the same degree of screening.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected
with, a tower-based WCF shall be located underground or
screened from public view using stealth technologies, as
described above.
[2] All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in
which they are situated and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(f) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking
shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to tower-based WCFs. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize
ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades
shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(h) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this section and any other applicable provisions found within
the Township Code or state or federal law. The Township and/
or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property
upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
G. Tower-based WCFs in rights-of-way.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:750
(a) Development regulations. [Amended 11-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 10-2019]
[1] Tower-based WCFs greater than 55 feet in height shall be
prohibited in the public rights-of-way.
[2] Tower-based WCFs 55 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted by conditional use, regardless of the underlying
zoning district, within the rights-of-way of the roads as
listed and specifically described in Attachment 084d,
Aerial Utility Roadways,247 which is herein adopted.
[3] Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in a right-of-way
that directly fronts or abuts the front yard setback of a
dwelling unit that is currently used for residential
purposes or zoned residential.
(b) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(c) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or
visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW
as determined by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb.
[2] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be located
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner within
10 business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
247. Editor's Note: Attachment 084d, Aerial Utility Roadways, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:751
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(d) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact
and shall be subject to the approval of the Township.248
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an Emergency, an owner of tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(f) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to applicable permit
fees, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is subject to the
Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW.
Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other
ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of
each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township
to compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred
in connection with the activities described above.
H. Wireless communications facilities in MCX Municipal Complex District.
248. Former Subsection G(1)(d)[2], regarding tower-based WCFs in the public right-of-way,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-19-2019 by Ord. No.
10-2019.
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.03
72:752
(1) The following regulations shall apply to wireless communications
facilities in the MCX Municipal Complex District:
(a) Tower-based wireless communications facilities may be
permitted in the MCX Municipal Complex District when
approved by conditional use pursuant to the procedures and
applicable regulations specified in the preceding Subsections
governing tower-based WCFs, and subject to the following
additional criteria, each of which shall be a condition
precedent to the grant of any such approval.
[1] No more than two tower-based WCFs shall be located in
the MCX Municipal Complex District. Lattice tower
structures shall not be permitted.
[2] The specific location of the tower-based WCF and related
equipment within the MCX Municipal Complex District
shall be at the absolute discretion of the Board and shall be
an express condition of approval thereof.
[3] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
scaled plan prepared by a Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer showing the proposed facilities and
their location within the MCX Municipal Complex District,
and their visual and spatial relationship to all other
buildings, structures and natural features located within
the MCX Municipal Complex District, and scaled
elevations of the proposed structures.
(b) When no tower-based structure is proposed, or in the case
where a previously approved tower-based WCF is located
within the MCX Municipal Complex District, antennas of
providers other than the entity owning the tower may co-locate
on the tower, if the proposed co-location meets all of the
requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act, and subject to the applicable co-location
permitting process of the Township.
I. Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any
other action pursuant to this section, does not waive, reduce, lessen or
impair the lawful police powers vested in the Township under
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
J. Consistency with state and federal laws and regulations. The provisions
contained herein regulating wireless communications facilities are
intended to comply with federal and state laws and regulations in effect
as of the date of adoption of this section. To the extent that any of the
provisions in this section conflict with any federal or state statute or
regulations, the federal or state statutes or regulations shall control
unless the applicable federal or state statutes or regulations allow for
more stringent provisions in local ordinances. In which case, the more
§ 84-57.03 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.03
72:753
§ 84-57.1. General performance standards. [Added 8-8-1978 by Ord.
No. 6-1978; amended 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005; 4-25-2012 by
Ord. No. 03-2012]
stringent provisions of local ordinances shall remain in effect and shall
control in such instances. [Added 11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. Manufacturing activities in this section shall be carried on in
completely enclosed buildings. Only storage may be permitted out of
doors, under the provisions of § 84-55B of this chapter.
B. (Reserved)
C. Control of vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any
device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception
threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the
source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if on a public
space or public right-of-way shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this
section, "vibration perception threshold" means the minimum groundor
structure-born vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal
person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not
limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
D. Control of outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground, except for tanks or drums of fuel directly
connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances
located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors, including those permitted in Subsection D(1)
above, shall be enclosed by a fence of a type, construction and size
as shall be adequate to protect and conceal the facilities from any
adjacent properties. Fencing shall not only encompass the question
of safety but also of screening, and the screening shall preferably
be evergreen. All National Occupational Safety and Health
Administration regulations shall be met.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will
destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
Applicable Department of Environmental Protection regulations
shall apply.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
§ 84-57.03 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.1
72:754
Applicable County Department of Health and National
Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations shall
apply.
E. Control of dust, dirt, smoke, vapors, gases and odors. The air pollution
control regulations promulgated by the State Air Pollution Control Act
of January 8, 1960, Public Law 2119, as amended, shall be used to
control the emissions of dust, dirt, smoke, vapors, gases and odors in
West Goshen Township. The regulations are part of Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection, Subpart Co.,
Protection of Natural Resources, Article III, Air Resources.
F. Storage of materials.
(1) Highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored underground.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
enclosed containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
G. Light, glare and heat control. No use shall carry on an operation that
will produce light, heat or glare perceptible beyond the property line of
the lot on which the operation is situated.
H. Electric, diesel, gas or other power. Every use requiring power shall be
so operated that any service lines, substation, etc., shall conform to the
highest applicable safety requirements and shall be constructed,
installed, etc., so that they will be an integral part of the architectural
features of the plant or, if visible from abutting residential properties,
shall be concealed by evergreen planting.
I. Control of radioactivity or electrical emissions or electrical
disturbances. Activities which may emit radioactivity beyond enclosed
areas shall comply with the codes of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Division of Radiology. The Federal Nuclear
Regulatory Commission shall also regulate the control of radioactive
material associated with any activity in the Township. No electrical
disturbances, except from domestic household appliances, shall be
permitted to adversely affect any equipment at any time other than the
equipment creating the disturbance.
§ 84-57.1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.2
72:755
§ 84-57.2. Vehicle restrictions in residential districts. [Added
6-4-1985 by Ord. No. 10-1985; amended 9-22-1987 by Ord. No.
10-1987; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
No commercial vehicle or part thereof having a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR), either solely or in combination, exceeding 8,000 pounds or which
is in excess of 18 feet in length shall be parked, stored or maintained
on any street, road, right-of-way, lot or within any building or structure
in any residential district established in § 84-4 of this chapter, except a
construction vehicle or vehicles owned by a building contractor or other
tradesman temporarily engaged in the performance of actual work or
delivery of materials to any such street, road, right-of-way, lot, building or
structure. The proper maintenance and storage of farm equipment, horse
vans and recreational vehicles or a motor home, a recreational trailer or a
farm truck, as the latter terms are defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
on a lot owned or occupied by the owner of such equipment or vehicle shall
not be deemed to be prohibited by this section. For purposes of this section,
the term "gross vehicle weight rating" shall have the meaning ascribed to it
in the definition section of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 84-57.3. Bed-and-breakfast inns. [Added 11-24-1987 by Ord. No.
17-1987]
No single-family residential building may be used or occupied as a bed-andbreakfast
inn without compliance with all of the regulations established in
this section and the issuance by the Zoning Officer of a use and occupancy
permit.
A. A bed-and-breakfast inn may be located in any zoning district but only
within a building determined by the Pennsylvania Historic and Museum
Commission to be an historic building or within a building eligible to be
listed on the National Register of Historic Places. [Amended
4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1999]
B. The number of guest rooms for transient accommodation shall not
exceed three in any building having a habitable floor area, as defined in
§ 84-56C(1), of 3,000 square feet or less. One additional guest room
may be added for each additional 600 square feet of habitable floor area
up to a maximum total number of six guest rooms.
C. The minimum lot size shall be the minimum lot size designated in the
applicable zoning district, plus an additional 10,000 square feet for
each guest room for any lot less than one acre.
D. The building shall be the "principal residence" of the "owner," as these
latter two terms are defined in § 84-56C(1).
E. At a minimum, parking shall be provided as required by the minimum
parking regulations of the applicable district; provided, however, that
one additional parking space shall be required for each guest room and
for one employee, if any. In all residential districts, the minimum
§ 84-57.2 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.3
72:756
parking setback from an adjacent property line shall be 15 feet, and,
when four or more guests and employee parking spaces are provided,
the parking area shall be screened from direct view of any adjacent
residential use by a completely planted visual barrier consisting of
a double row of evergreen plantings with a minimum height of six
feet after the planting and placed no more than eight feet apart. The
required plantings shall be staggered so as to provide as complete a
visual barrier as is possible.
F. No more than one employee shall be permitted to work on the premises
at any time, and none shall be present between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. Members of the owner's immediate family who are
residents on the premises shall not be considered employees, whether
or not paid.
G. Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the applicable district
regulations, any inn containing four or more guest rooms shall be
served by public sewer.
H. All applicable requirements of the Township's Building, Electrical, Fire
and Plumbing Codes249 shall be met.
I. No guest may be registered for a maximum continuous period in excess
of seven consecutive nights. The owner shall maintain a guest register
and shall preserve registration records for a minimum of three years.
The register and all records shall be made available for inspection by
the Township Zoning Officer or Codes Enforcement Officer at any time.
J. Any meals provided and any amenities connected with the guest rooms,
such as a swimming pool or tennis court, shall be solely for the use of
the owner, the owner's family and the owner's registered guest.
K. One sign shall be permitted identifying the property as a bed-andbreakfast
inn. The sign shall not exceed three square feet in area, shall
be set back a minimum of three feet from the road right-of-way and
shall contain no information other than identification of the premises as
the named bed-and-breakfast inn.
L. An application for a use and occupancy permit and the procedure for
issuance shall be as set forth in § 84-56B(1)(a) through (f) and B(2).
M. Upon compliance with all of the requirements of this section and other
applicable codes and regulations, the Zoning Officer shall be authorized
to issue a permit which shall be valid for a period of one year unless
sooner revoked for violation of any condition imposed by the Zoning
Officer, any misrepresentation of fact made to the Zoning Officer or
Codes Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the application and
review process or violation of this section or any provision of this Code.
Within 30 days prior to the expiration of any such permit, the property
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Building Construction, Art. I, Building Code; Ch. 39, Electrical
Standards; Ch. 41, Fire Prevention; and Ch. 62, Plumbing, respectively.
§ 84-57.3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.3
72:757
§ 84-57.4. Child day-care and adult day-care accessory facilities.
[Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
In any zoning district which permits child day-care centers and/or adult daycare
centers, any such facility shall, in addition to the minimum standards
established in this chapter, be designed to the minimum specifications of
commonwealth regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, including indoor
and outdoor recreational areas and may include eating and drinking
facilities for the exclusive use of employees and clients/students, but shall
not be used as a permanent or temporary residence by employees and
clients/students.
§ 84-57.5. Minimum building lot requirements. [Added 1-28-1992
by Ord. No. 1-1992]
In each district established in § 84-4 of this chapter:
owner shall make application for a permit renewal to the Zoning Officer,
who shall, as a condition of issuance of such renewal, make an
inspection of the premises for which the permit is sought to determine
continued compliance with this Code. In the event that the Zoning
Officer determines that a violation exists, the permit shall not be
renewed until the violation is cured.
N. Upon nonrenewal or revocation of the permit for cause shown, the use
of the premises as a bed-and-breakfast inn shall immediately cease, and
continuation thereof shall subject the owner to the penalty provisions of
this chapter and/or such other legal action as the Township shall
determine necessary.
A. Eighty percent of the minimum required lot size shall be outside the
boundary of and unencumbered by the identified floodplain area,
wetlands or stormwater management basin. For purposes of this
regulation, the area of a stormwater basin shall be calculated by
measuring the area of the water surface within the basin projected to
exist at the level of the basin overflow. [Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 5-2017]
B. Each lot shall contain a minimum contiguous lot area having a slope of
less than 15% percent equal to the following designated percentages of
the minimum lot size required by the applicable district regulations:
Minimum Lot Size Percentage Under 15%
2 acres and over 60%
30,000 square feet to 2 acres 65%
22,000 square feet to 29,999
square feet
70%
18,000 square feet to 21,999
square feet
75%
§ 84-57.3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.5
72:758
§ 84-57.6. Performance standards for reception halls, museums,
exhibition halls and similar uses on country house estates;
conversion to single-family detached dwellings.
Minimum Lot Size Percentage Under 15%
Under 17,999 square feet 80%
A. A mansion located on a country house estate may be used as a reception
hall, museum, exhibition hall or any use of the same general character
upon compliance with all of the regulations established in this section.
(1) A reception hall, museum, exhibition hall or any use of the same
general character may be located only in the R-3B District within a
mansion located on a country house estate as those terms are
defined in § 84-8.
(2) No new buildings or structures shall be located in a buffer zone not
less than 100 feet wide meeting the requirements of
§ 84-39B(12)(c)[1], [2] and [4] of this chapter. The buffer zone shall
be located and maintained within each required side, rear and front
yard around the perimeter of the lot. Buildings, structures,
driveways and parking areas currently existing on a country house
estate lot on the effective date of this section may be located in the
required buffer zone on a lot created by subdivision after
enactment of this section. New driveways, parking areas and
associated directional signs may be located in the required buffer
zone, provided that said parking areas are screened by a vegetative
buffer screen approved by the Board of Supervisors shielding the
proposed parking areas from adjacent streets and/or residential
properties and said signs conform to the requirements of § 84-52 of
this chapter.
(3) The lot shall have minimum side, rear and front yards (including
building setback) of 200 feet, and no new buildings or structures
shall be located within the minimum yards. Buildings, structures,
driveways and parking areas currently existing on a country house
estate lot on the effective date of this section may remain within the
required yards and required buffer zones as established in
§ 84-57.6A(2) above on a lot created by subdivision after enactment
of this section. New driveways, parking areas and associated
directional signs may be located in the required yards, provided
that said parking areas are screened by a vegetative buffer screen
approved by the Board of Supervisors shielding the proposed
parking areas from adjacent streets and/or residential properties
and said signs conform to the requirements of § 84-52 of this
chapter. The lot shall have a minimum lot width at the building line
of 600 feet and at the street right-of-way line of 400 feet and shall
be limited to a total lot impervious coverage of 20% maximum and
minimum green area of 80%. The required green area may contain
pervious trails and paths.
§ 84-57.5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.6
72:759
(4) Parking shall be located only onsite with no off-site parking
permitted and pursuant to the following minimum standards:
(a) For a reception hall use, 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
reception hall area shall be required.
(b) For a museum, exhibition hall or any other use permitted on a
country house estate lot other than single-family residential
use, three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be required.
(c) Spaces may be asphalt, grasscrete or, with the approval of the
Township Engineer, oil-sealed gravel or grass, depending upon
the degree of use anticipated.
(d) The design standard for parking shall be in accordance with
§ 84-55E of this chapter.
(5) A reception hall shall not be operated as a commercial service and
shall be solely for the use of either the owner of the country house
estate and his invited or previously ticketed guests or the host
lessee and the host lessee's invited or previously ticketed guests.
(6) Rental of a reception hall by the owner to a host lessee shall be only
for individual events not involving a continuous commercial
enterprise. Leases for use of the reception hall by caterers,
organizations or other similar commercial enterprises for
continuous use is prohibited.
(7) Kitchen facilities within the mansion for food preparation shall be
permitted but only in conjunction with food prepared to be served
on site in conjunction with use of the reception hall, museum,
exhibition hall or any use of the same general character as
specified in this section.
(8) Reception hall, museum, exhibition hall and functions associated
with any other use of the same general character may be conducted
on the grounds surrounding the mansion and in accessory facilities
existing on the effective date of this chapter surrounding the
mansion but not within the buffer zone, subject to the general
performance standard for residential property specified in
§ 84-57.1B.
(9) One place sign shall be permitted identifying the property by its
name and/or the name of the owner. The sign shall contain no other
information other than such identification of the premises and shall
comply with § 84-52 of this chapter.
(10) All applicable requirements of the Township's Building, Electrical,
Fire and Plumbing Codes shall be met.250
250. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Building Construction, Ch. 39, Electrical Standards, and Ch. 41,
Fire Prevention, and Ch. 62, Plumbing.
§ 84-57.6 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.6
72:760
§ 84-57.7. Group home regulations. [Added 3-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2-1999]
Group homes are permitted in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, subject to
compliance with the following regulations:
(11) If a country house estate lot is used for a reception hall, the
following procedure for application and issuance of a use and
occupancy permit shall apply:
(a) Upon compliance with all of the requirements of this section
and other applicable codes and regulations, the Zoning Officer
shall be authorized to issue a permit which shall be valid for a
period of one year unless sooner revoked for violation of any
condition imposed by the Zoning Officer, any
misrepresentation of fact made to the Zoning Officer or Codes
Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the application and
review process, or violation of this section or any provision of
this Code. Within 30 days prior to the expiration of such
permit, the property owner shall make application for a permit
renewal to the Zoning Officer who shall, as a condition of
issuance of such renewal, make an inspection of the premises
for which the permit is sought to determine continued
compliance with this Code. In the event that the Zoning Officer
or Codes Enforcement Officer determines that a violation
exists, the permit shall not be renewed until the violation is
cured. In the event that the Zoning Officer is unable to
complete a required inspection within 30 days from the date of
the application through no fault of the applicant, a temporary
permit renewal shall be deemed to have been issued until such
required inspection has been completed.
(b) Upon nonrenewal or revocation of the permit for cause shown,
the use of the premises as a reception hall shall immediately
cease, and continuation thereof shall subject the owner to the
penalty provisions of this chapter and/or such other legal
action as the Township shall determine necessary.
(c) If a country house estate lot is used for a museum, exhibition
hall or any other use of the same general character, the use
and occupancy permit requirements of § 84-68 shall apply.
(d) The minimum lot size of a country house estate utilizing the
performance standards for reception halls, museums,
exhibition halls and uses of the same general character shall be
no less than 25 gross acres.
B. A mansion located on a country house estate which is used as a
reception hall, museum, exhibition hall or use of the same general
character may be converted back to use as a single residence, provided
the lot area shall not be less than 25 acres.
§ 84-57.6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.7
72:761
A. Supervision. There shall be adequate twenty-four-hours-per-day
professional supervision, as needed, by person(s) trained in the field for
which the group home is intended. Staffing shall, at a minimum, equal
two staff persons during the day and one during the night or shall
otherwise meet minimum requirements of any applicable federal, state
or county standards.
B. Certification. Any group home involving three or more unrelated
persons living in a dwelling unit or that is otherwise required to be
licensed or certified under an applicable state, county or federal
program shall be certified or licensed, as applicable, as a condition to
the Township's issuance of a use and occupancy permit.
(1) A copy of any such license or certification shall be filed with the
Township and shall be required to be shown to the Zoning Officer in
the future upon request. The group home shall notify the Township,
in writing, within 14 days if there is a change in the type of clients,
the sponsoring agency, the maximum number of residents or if an
applicable certification/license expires, is suspended or is
withdrawn.
(2) If such group home is not so certified or licensed, then the
applicant shall provide a written and signed statement from a
qualified medical professional stating that adequate staffing, as
required by Subsection A of this section is being provided for the
type of client being served. Such statement shall be subject to the
reasonable review and acceptance by the Township.
C. Registration. The group home shall register in writing with the
Township its location, general type of care, maximum number of
residents and sponsoring agency.
D. Counseling. Any medical or counseling services provided on the
property shall be limited to the residents of the group home.
E. Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee on duty at any one time and for every resident reasonably
expected to be capable of driving a motor vehicle. Off-street parking
areas of more than four spaces shall be buffered from adjacent existing
single-family dwellings by a landscape screen meeting the
requirements of § 84-55A.
F. The use shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center." A group
home shall not house persons who can reasonably be considered to be a
physical threat to others.
G. Appearance. The residence, both house and grounds, shall be
maintained and/or constructed to ensure that they are closely similar in
appearance, condition and character to the other residential structures
in the area. No exterior signs shall be permitted.
§ 84-57.7 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.7
72:762
§ 84-57.8. Forestry regulations. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No.
6-2001]
H. The restriction on the number of residents in a group home shall
include any employee(s) who resides in the group home on a permanent
basis. A group home shall be regulated by the maximum number of
unrelated persons permitted to live in a dwelling unit under the
definition of "family." However, that number of unrelated persons may
be increased to a maximum of eight persons if the group home is
operated in a single-family detached dwelling that is over 2,500 square
feet in floor area and in compliance with all area and bulk regulations
for the district in which the property is located. [Amended
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
I. Septic. If a group home will use an on-lot septic system and will involve
five or more persons routinely on the premises at any one time, the
property owner shall be required to have the septic system certified as
adequate by the County Health Department.
J. Employees of the group home shall be prohibited from having visitors
on the premises, unless such visitation is necessary for the operation of
the group home and except for emergencies.
K. The use shall provide illuminated exit signs, emergency batterypowered
lighting and a minimum of two ABC-rated fire extinguishers.
The use shall also have an interconnected smoke detector system with a
central-station fire alarm system.
L. Use and occupancy permit. Prior to occupancy, the applicant shall
secure a use and occupancy permit from the Township Zoning Officer
following inspection of the property by both the Fire Marshal and the
Building Official.
M. Reasonable accommodation. In any case where an applicant seeks a
reasonable accommodation pursuant to provisions of the federal Fair
Housing Act, a written application shall be filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board which is hereby empowered to grant such an
accommodation subject to the provisions of the federal Fair Housing
Act. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
A. Intent. The forestry and timber harvesting regulations contained in this
section are intended to accomplish the following goals:
(1) Promote good forest stewardship.
(2) Protect the rights of adjoining property owners.
(3) Minimize the potential for adverse environmental impacts caused
by a timber harvesting operation.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings given to them below:
§ 84-57.7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.8
72:763
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the
ground.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled
for transportation to processing facilities.
LANDOWNER — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association
or corporation that is in actual control of forest land, whether such
control is based on legal or equitable title, or on any other interest
entitling the holder to sell or otherwise dispose of any or all of the
timber on such land in any manner, and any agents thereof acting on
behalf, such as forestry consultants, who set up and administer timber
harvesting.
LITTER — Discarded items not naturally occurring on the site, such as
tires, oil cans, equipment parts and other rubbish.
LOP — To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to
settle close to the ground.
OPERATOR — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association
or corporation engaged in timber harvesting, including the agents,
subcontractors and employees thereof.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the
landing by any means.
SLASH — Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs,
chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps and broken or uprooted trees
or shrubs.
STAND — Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions, past
history and current species composition are sufficiently uniform to be
managed as a unit.
STREAM — Any natural or artificial channel of conveyance for surface
water with an annual or intermittent flow within a defined bed and
banks.
TIMBER HARVESTING, TREE HARVESTING or LOGGING — The
process of cutting down trees and removing logs from the forest for the
primary purpose of sale or commercial processing into wood products.
TOP — The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable
because of small size, taper or defect.
C. Scope; applicability. This section shall apply to all forestry, timber
harvesting, tree harvesting or logging within the Township where the
value of the trees, logs or other timber products removed exceeds
$1,000.
D. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging on any lot in the
Township without first submitting a forest management plan as
described herein and securing a permit from the Township; provided,
§ 84-57.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.8
72:764
however, that no permit shall be required for the annual removal of up
to four trees per acre on any one lot.
E. Permit application procedure.
(1) Any person proposing to engage in any forestry, timber harvesting,
tree harvesting or logging on any lot in the Township shall apply for
a permit by written application on a form available from the
Township. Such permit shall require the applicant's agreement to
comply with the regulations established in this section. Failure of
the applicant to abide by such regulations shall be a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) The application for permit shall be accompanied by the following
materials and/or documents:
(a) Any filing fee imposed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
(b) A forest management plan of the property where the proposed
forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging activity
shall occur, which includes the following:
[1] An identification of the concerned property, the legal
owners of the property, the mailing address(s) of the
landowners and phone number(s) at which they can be
reached during normal business hours.
[2] The property's boundaries as well as the specific areas of
the site on which the work is to be performed and
describing existing and proposed improvements and
features of the property and the area surrounding the site
of the work, including topography, existing vegetation,
watercourses, man-made features, the affected
watersheds and other natural features.
[3] A topographical survey of the site depicting topographic
features, both existing and proposed, at a suitable scale of
no less than one inch equals 50 feet and contour intervals
of no more than two feet, prepared by a registered
surveyor or registered engineer, including a boundary line
survey, the location and description of vegetative cover,
soil types and other pertinent existing natural or manmade
features.
[4] A description, submitted by an approved forester, of the
planned forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting, or
logging operation as well as a description of the planned
replanting of the lot. Where no replanting is planned, a
statement from the approved forester describing the
reasons why, in his opinion, the characteristics of the lot
and vegetation situate thereon make natural regeneration
§ 84-57.8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.8
72:765
appropriate or why such replanting is not otherwise
necessary.
[5] An analysis by the approved forester of the soil erosion
likely to occur as a result of the planned forestry, timber
harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation and
recommended counter-erosion measures.
[6] A description of the counter-erosion measures that will be
utilized by the landowners.
[7] A drawing showing the design, construction, maintenance
and retirement of the access system, including haul roads,
skid roads, skid trails and landings.
[8] The location of protective fencing for areas which will not
to be harvested.
(c) A soil erosion and sediment control plan in compliance with
Chapter 69 of the Code of West Goshen Township.
(d) A stormwater management plan.
(e) Copies of any permits or licenses required by federal or
commonwealth laws and regulations.
(3) The requirements of this section shall be in addition to rather than
in substitution of those provisions of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance251 relating to storm and surface
drainage and stormwater management, grading and erosion
control and stormwater management criteria. The Township
Engineer may, in his discretion, authorize variances from strict
adherence to the permit application provisions of this section when
a subdivision or land development application is being reviewed by
the Township under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and when, in such review procedure, the Township
Engineer determines that the data required to be submitted in an
application for a permit hereunder has been included in the
subdivision or land development plans and such plans are
supported by documentation in substantial compliance with the
requirements of this section. In such cases, the subdivider or land
developer shall not be obligated to make application for a permit
hereunder.
(4) A separate application shall be required for each permit. Three
copies of all plan documents referred to in this section shall be
submitted with each application, one of which, at the discretion of
the Township Engineer, shall be submitted to the Chester County
Conservation District for review and comment.
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 84-57.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.8
72:766
F. Forest regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all forestry,
timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging operations in the
Township.
(1) Felling or skidding on or across any public road is prohibited
without the express written consent of the Township or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is
responsible for maintenance of the public road.
(2) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public road.
(3) All tops and slash between 25 feet and 50 feet from a public road or
private road providing access to adjoining residential property or
within 50 feet of adjoining residential property shall be lopped to a
maximum height of four feet above the surface of the ground.
(4) No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the operation.
(5) Litter resulting from the forestry, timber harvesting, tree
harvesting or logging operation shall be removed from the property
at least once a week.
(6) All holes created in the course of any tree harvesting operation
shall be filled to grade with soil.
(7) The total number of trees harvested over any three-year period may
not exceed 65% of the total basal area per acre in interior areas
other than those described in Subsection (8) below.
(8) In areas within 50 feet of lot boundaries, the total number of trees
harvested over any three-year period may not exceed 40% of the
total basal area per acre in such area. Moreover, harvesting in
these boundary areas may not be undertaken in such a manner as
to concentrate most or all of the tree harvesting in portions of such
boundary areas, if the result thereof would be the harvesting of
more than 40% of the trees in such portions.
G. Inspection and permit fees and permit approval.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall by resolution establish a schedule of
fees for all permit applications required by this section. The
required fee shall be submitted with the application, which shall
not be considered for approval until the application fee is paid.
(2) The Township's consulting engineer shall review the applicant's
permit application, together with all plans, surveys, schedules,
design criteria and other documents submitted or required to be
submitted as part of the permit application procedure, together
with any and all amendments thereto, and shall prepare a report of
his findings and recommendations with respect to same for the
Township as he shall determine necessary prior to the issuance of
§ 84-57.8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.8
72:767
§ 84-57.9. Mineral extraction regulations. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 6-2001]
any permit or permits. The cost of all such plan review and
inspections shall be paid for by the applicant.
(3) The Township Engineer shall approve and issue all permits in letter
form, and no work shall commence without the issuance of such
approval.
H. Revocation or suspension of permit. Any permit issued under this
section may be revoked or suspended by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township, after notice to the permit holder for:
(1) Failure to comply with the terms of this section.
(2) A violation of any condition of the permit.
(3) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the forestry, timber
harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation.
(4) Existence of any condition on the property or the doing of any act
which constitutes or creates a nuisance, hazard or endangers
human life or the property of others.
I. Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding. The
landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any
damage to Township roads caused by traffic associated with a forestry,
timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation. Pursuant to 67
Pennsylvania Code, Capter 189, the landowner or operator shall furnish
a bond in an amount determined by the Township Engineer to
guarantee the repair of such damages.
J. Inspections/remedies. The Township may go upon the property where
any forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation is
occurring to determine if the requirements of this section and of the
permit, including conditions thereof, or to the plans and specifications
submitted with the permit application, including modifications thereof,
or to the approved runoff and erosion control plan, are being followed.
If the Township determines that the landowner or operator is not
complying with any of the above, the Township shall send a written
notice to the permittee, which notice shall set forth the nature of
corrections required and the time within which corrections shall be
made. If the permittee fails to comply with the notice in the time
specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation of this section,
in which case the Township is entitled to seek all appropriate remedies
at law, including the enforcement procedures provided in § 84-64 of this
chapter.
A. Landscaping and screening. There shall be a berm around the
perimeter of the mining operation, which shall be located within the
§ 84-57.8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.9
72:768
required side, rear and front yard areas and not closer than 50 feet to
the property boundary, or where a street forms the property boundary,
not closer than 50 feet to the ultimate right-of-way of such street. The
berm shall have a minimum height of 15 feet and maximum height of
35 feet. The slope of sides of the berm shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio.
Berms shall be planted and all landscaping shall be in accordance with
§ 84-55C.
B. Fencing. A chain-link-type fence at least six feet in height, surmounted
by three strands of barbed wire, shall be provided around the perimeter
of the mining operation and maintained in a constant state of good
repair. Appropriate warning signs shall be mounted or posted along the
fence at intervals of not more than 100 feet. The fence shall be set back
at least 15 feet from any property line or street line.
C. Slope of excavation. The mining operation walls shall be sloped in
accordance with the provisions of Pennsylvania Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act252 and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. No slope shall be maintained exceeding the
normal limiting angle of repose of the material in which the excavation
or extraction should be made. No undercutting shall be permitted
within any required setback area. The depth of extraction shall be
limited so it will not contribute to lowering the aquifer or water table off
site.
D. Setback. Extraction shall not be conducted closer than 200 feet to a
property line nor closer than 300 feet to the street line, nor closer than
400 feet to the point of intersection of the street line. The setback area
shall not be used for any other use in conjunction with extraction except
access streets, berm, screening, directional signs, public notice signs
identifying the excavation, business signs identifying the occupant and
buildings and structures in conformity with the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
E. Lateral support. All operations shall be conducted with sufficient lateral
support to prevent: Hazard to persons, physical damage to adjacent
lands or improvements or damage to any street, sdewalk, parking area
or utility by reason of slide, sinking or collapse.
F. Stockpiles. Stockpiles shall not exceed 100 feet in height and the toe of
the slope shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any property line
nor closer than 300 feet to the street line.
G. Drainage. All drainage from a mining extraction site shall be controlled
by dikes, barriers or drainage structures sufficient to prevent any silt,
debris or other loose materials from filling any existing drainage course
or encroaching on streets and adjacent properties.
H. Control of vibration. Ground vibration caused by blasting or machinery
shall not exceed the limits established by the Act of July 10, 1957, P.L.
252. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.2 et seq.
§ 84-57.9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.9
72:769
§ 84-57.10. Educational use regulations. [Added 9-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 11-2002]
685, as amended, 73 P.S., §§ 164 to 168, and the rules and regulations
adopted thereunder, with the exception that blasting shall not cause a
peak particle velocity greater than one inch per second, measured at
any property line or street line.
I. Internal circulation. An adequate internal circulation pattern of streets
shall be maintained between excavation and processing areas. The use
of a public street shall not be permitted for hauling between extractions
and processing except as stated in Subsection J below.
J. All necessary precautions must be taken to ensure the safety of
motorists traveling on any public highway intersected by any internal
circulation pattern. These precautions shall include but not be limited
to the following items:
(1) Stop signs shall be placed at the intersection of all internal
roadways with public highways, halting all internal traffic in any
direction before the crossing of the public highway.
(2) Street signs as permitted by PennDOT on all public highways
intersected by internal roadways, at a point 150 feet from the
intersection of the public highway and internal roadway, one on
either side of the intersection on the public highway indicating that
caution should be observed and the trucks will be crossing 150 feet
from the signs.
(3) Caution lights as permitted by PennDOT are to be provided, having
at least two blinking yellow lights sufficient to attract the attention
of a passing motorist, attached to a sign advising that caution
should be observed due to a truck crossing ahead. The signs shall
be at a distance of 300 feet from the intersection of the public
highway and internal roadway or less if necessary so that one sign
faces each direction of travel upon the public highway.
(4) All public roads shall be clean from dust and spillage.
K. The operator shall submit a land development plan in accordance with
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.253
L. Parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of § 84-55.
M. Prior to any mineral extractions, the landowner must obtain a grading
permit pursuant to § 69-4G.
A. Purpose and intent.
253. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision of Land.
§ 84-57.9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:770
(1) It is the intention of this section to regulate educational uses and
accessory uses thereto and the expansion/extension of educational
uses existing on the effective date of this amendment which are
proposed to be located or are located within the zoning districts
where such uses are permitted by this chapter. In those cases
where an educational use is determined to be a nonconforming use
or is otherwise nonconforming with respect to any nonconformity
governed by Article XV of this chapter, in granting any relief
authorized by Article XV, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
the applicant to conform to the regulations specified in this
§ 84-57.10 to the greatest extent reasonably possible.
(2) The Township recognizes that educational uses, of necessity, are
intensive land uses that have special needs associated with them,
such as, but not necessarily limited to, athletic facilities, student
housing, student and faculty parking, event parking, the adequacy
of the existing and proposed streets, intersections and driveways to
accommodate vehicular traffic, pedestrian access, and the
integration and compatibility of such uses with contiguous and
nearby established uses.
(3) Because of their intensity, educational uses are, for various
reasons, often incompatible with many other permitted uses within
the Township, especially in relation to the impact of such
educational uses upon surrounding uses caused by substantial
traffic, large concentrations of people, either transient or resident,
and heavy pedestrian and vehicular access.
(4) It is the intent of the Township to establish land use regulations
that foster educational uses and accessory uses associated with
them, while at the same time protecting existing land uses,
especially residential uses, and making adequate provision for the
protection and enhancement of the public health, safety and
general welfare of all of the Township's residents.
(5) All educational uses shall be subject to the requirement that the
applicant file a conditional use application with the Board of
Supervisors and that the Board approve such use in accordance
with the conditional use procedures specified in this chapter,
subject to such terms and conditions imposed by the Board
consistent with the provisions of this § 84-57.10, the other
applicable provisions of this chapter, and the effects of the
proposed use upon the community, the existing street
infrastructure, and nearby land uses.
B. Use regulations. In those zoning districts where educational uses are
permitted by conditional use subject to the provisions of this § 84-57.10,
a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used for any
of the following purposes and for no other when approved as a
conditional use, subject to the area and bulk regulations, design
standards and other regulations of this § 84-57.10.
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.10
72:771
(1) Educational facilities, including classrooms, laboratories required
as a part of the curriculum, school libraries and administrative
offices of a public or private college or university and/or public and
private elementary, middle and high schools.
(2) Dormitory, college.
(3) Dormitory, private.
(4) Athletic fields.
(5) Athletic/field house.
(6) Stadium.
(7) Gymnasium.
(8) School parking garage.
C. Accessory use regulations. The following are permitted accessory uses
in those zoning districts where educational uses are permitted by
conditional use when approved by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use in conjunction with either a proposed new educational
use permitted by § 84-57.10B, or an educational use existing on the
effective date of this amendment, when such accessory uses constitute
a component of such educational use.
(1) Cafeteria.
(2) Student theater/performing arts.
(3) Student union building.
(4) Parking lots.
(5) Geothermal pump house. [Added 8-10-2011 by Ord. No.
13-2011]
D. Existing/future facilities. In those zoning districts where educational
uses are permitted by conditional use, all existing buildings, structures
and facilities and accessory buildings, structures and facilities of an
established educational use, lawfully existing on the effective date of
this amendment, are herewith recognized and protected as existing
permitted uses to the extent provided by law. Provided, however, any
addition to or expansion or enlargement of any such buildings,
structures, or facilities, and any new buildings, structures or facilities
constructed after the effective date of this amendment shall be subject
to the granting of a conditional use approval by the Board of
Supervisors and shall comply with the requirements of this § 84-57.10,
the other applicable provisions of Chapter 84, and any additional
conditions imposed by the Board as warranted by the facts and
circumstances of the particular application for which approval is
sought. In any case where the Zoning Hearing Board is called upon to
grant an approval or relief from the applicable provisions of this
§ 84-57.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:772
chapter to any use permitted by § 84-57.10B or C or with respect to
any nonconformity governed by Article XV of this chapter, in granting
such approval or relief, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require the
applicant to conform to the regulations specified in this § 84-57.10
to the greatest extent reasonably possible. [Amended 6-11-2003 by
Ord. No. 10-2003]
E. Area and bulk regulations. The following area and bulk regulations shall
apply to all educational uses except a geothermal pump house which is
an accessory use to a building or buildings used for an educational use.
[Amended 6-11-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003; 8-10-2011 by Ord. No.
13-2011]
(1) Section 84-57.10B and C educational uses: 10 gross acres.
(2) Dormitory, college: eight gross acres minimum.
(3) Dormitory, private: eight gross acres minimum.
(4) Athletic fields: five gross acres minimum.
(5) Stadium, field house: 10 gross acres minimum.
(6) Gymnasium: five acres.
(7) School parking garage: five gross acres minimum.
(8) Lot width at the building line: 300 feet minimum.
(9) Lot width at the street line: 200 feet minimum.
(10) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(11) Green area: 35% minimum.
(12) Paved area: 30% maximum.
(13) Building setback line: 100 feet minimum.
(14) Yards, side and rear: 60 feet minimum, except when contiguous to
a residential use, which shall be 100 feet minimum, with the 20
contiguous feet nearest the lot line planted and permanently
maintained as a buffer area.
(15) Building height: four stories, but not greater than 50 feet for all
uses except a school parking garage. A school parking garage shall
not exceed three levels above grade and shall not be higher than 45
feet. Below-grade parking shall be permitted without restriction,
subject to acceptability of underlying soils and geology and lateral
ground support.
(16) Parking setback from property lines. The parking setback shall be
measured from the nearest edge of the existing street line or as the
right-of-way is required to be widened in accordance with the
approved traffic study required by § 84-57.10G.
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.10
72:773
(a) Side or rear yard: 30 feet minimum, except as provided by
§ 84-57.10F(1) and (2).
(b) Front yard: 30 feet minimum, except as provided by
§ 84-57.10F(1) and (20.
(17) Area and bulk regulations for geothermal pump houses which are
an accessory use to a building or buildings used for an educational
use. The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all
geothermal pump houses that are built as an accessory use to a
building or buildings used for an educational use.
(a) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum height: 25 feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(f) Minimum green area: 50%.
(g) The architectural design and style of all structures or buildings
built for the utility facility shall be harmonious and compatible
with the architectural design and style of structures and
buildings on the same lot and on adjacent lots.
(h) Minimum setback from a single-family dwelling: 100 feet.
(i) The Board of Supervisors may require as a condition of
conditional use approval the use of building materials that
attenuate the noise emanating from the geothermal pump
house.
(j) The Board of Supervisors may require as a condition of
conditional use approval the installation of a landscape screen
or fence to buffer the geothermal pump house from adjacent
land uses.
(18) If a geothermal pump house which is an accessory use to a building
or buildings used for an educational use requires the installation of
subsurface equipment (other than pipes) or structures, the
following minimum setbacks shall apply to such subsurface
equipment or structures.
(a) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 25 feet.
F. The following design standards shall apply in addition to those specified
in § 84-55. Whenever this § 84-57.10F applies a more stringent
§ 84-57.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:774
regulation or regulations in addition to or in place of those required by
either the sections of Chapter 84 cited in this § 84-57.10F, any other
applicable design standard or general performance standard imposed
by the regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located, or other applicable provision of Chapter 84, the more stringent
and/or additional regulation(s) specified herein shall apply and shall
be considered mandatory. In all other respects, the design standards
and general performance standards for the zoning district in which the
property is located shall apply.
(1) When the use is proposed for development along an existing street
opposite, adjacent to, or within the immediate area (100 feet) of
existing residential dwellings, the following special regulations
shall apply unless otherwise approved by the Board during the
conditional use process.
(a) Sidewalks. A sidewalk not less than five feet in width shall be
installed and permanently maintained on the property parallel
to each adjacent street abutting the property for the full length
of the lot unless the applicant is able to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that pedestrian access will not
occur in that area.
(b) Fencing. Unless a sidewalk is not required to be installed per
Subsection F(1)(a) above, a wrought iron or equivalent
aluminum fence at least six feet in height shall be installed and
permanently maintained on the property along the sidewalk
(on the property side of the street line) of such use for the full
length of the lot. Two or more gated walkways for pedestrian
access not exceeding six feet each in width shall be permitted,
as approved by the Board.
(c) Screening. In addition to the requirements specified in
§ 84-55A and C, the following regulations shall apply.
[1] A planted landscape bed having a minimum width of 30
feet, within which area the sidewalk and any contiguous
green area may be included, shall be required. The
landscape bed shall be measured from property side of the
street line and shall be installed and permanently
maintained on the property between the sidewalk and any
proposed parking lot, parking stalls or other parking areas
or, when no parking is proposed in that area, the nearest
wall of any building or structure.
[2] Trees shall have a minimum planted height of eight feet at
the time of planting. The Board may grant a conditional
use to approve an alternate landscape plan not meeting
the requirements of § 84-55A if it determines that such
completely planted visual barrier is unnecessary to protect
adjacent property owners and that the proposed landscape
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.10
72:775
plan creates an adequate landscape enhancement of the
project.
(d) Vehicular and street access. In addition to the requirements
specified in § 84-55D, the following regulations shall apply.
[1] Purpose. To minimize traffic congestion and hazard,
control street access, and encourage orderly development
of street frontages, where the proposed use is located
opposite or adjacent to or in the immediate area (100 feet)
of existing residential development and to limit vehicular
access to the development property from contiguous
residential streets which serve existing houses unless no
other access is possible.
[2] Unless otherwise approved by the Board during the
conditional use process, where the lot abuts two or more
streets, such use shall have direct access only to and from
a street of greater functional classification, unless
otherwise approved by the Board. The Board may approve
an emergency access not more than 12 feet in width,
controlled by a locked gate, from the street of lesser
functional classification if the applicant proves it is
necessary for such purpose.
[3] Where the proposed use abuts only one public street, no
more than one vehicular access street or driveway shall be
permitted on the street frontage for any lot, except in the
case of a lot with more than 500 continuous feet of street
frontage, in which case a second vehicular access street or
driveway may be permitted when approved by the Board if
separated by at least 300 feet of otherwise undisturbed
frontage from the first such access, as measured from
center line to center line. The Board may by conditional
use permit a variation from this requirement if the
applicant proves that such is required for public safety.
[4] To avoid congestion on existing residential streets, where
possible and appropriate, the Board may require one or
more new vehicular access streets or driveways serving
the proposed use be constructed either on the
development property or on a contiguous property with
the written approval of the owner thereof, the use and
access of which shall be provided by means of a permanent
written and recorded easement or land acquisition
dedicated to such purpose. Such access(s)shall have its
direct access to one or more other existing public streets
as the Board determines will avoid congestion on
contiguous residential streets only at such location(s) as is/
are approved by the Board during the conditional use
process.
§ 84-57.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:776
[5] The provision for vehicular access to a school parking
garage shall comply with this § 84-57.10F(1)(d).
(2) Parking lots/spaces. The requirements of Section § 84-55C, E and I
shall apply in addition to the following regulations:
(a) No parking lot or parking spaces shall be permitted within a
front yard or side yard along an existing street opposite
existing residential dwellings unless separated by the
landscape buffer required by § 84-57.10F(1).
(b) When a parking lot or parking spaces are proposed to be
constructed and maintained in any other location, the parking
lot shall be set back the minimum distance required by
§ 84-57.10E(16) from the abutting property, existing
residential dwellings, or street line, as the case may be, and
shall be buffered by a planted landscape screen for a minimum
width of 30 feet meeting the requirements of § 84-55C(1)(a)
and (b) measured from the street line.
(c) When one or more buildings are proposed to be constructed,
all parking lots and parking spaces shall be located principally
behind such buildings or within a triangle or quadrangle
formed by the buildings, unless otherwise approved by the
Board as a conditional use.
(d) The adequacy and safety of vehicular and pedestrian access to
parking lots and parking spaces from existing contiguous or
adjacent public streets, and the capacity of the existing street
system to accommodate the proposed conditional use shall be
demonstrated by the applicant's submission of the traffic study
required by § 84-57.10G with the conditional use application.
(e) Individual parking spaces shall have a minimum paved
dimension of nine feet wide and 18 feet long, excepting
required handicapped spaces, which shall meet the standard of
§ 84-55E(1)(b). The Board shall have the power during the
conditional use process to require compliance with
§ 84-55E(1)(a) if it determines in the exercise of its reasonable
discretion that such compliance is necessary under the specific
facts presented by an application.
(3) School parking garage.
(a) A parking garage shall be set back a minimum distance of 50
feet from the abutting property line, existing residential
dwellings, or street line, as the case may be, and shall be
buffered by a planted landscape screen for a minimum width of
30 feet meeting the requirements of § 84-55C(1)(a) and (b)
measured from the street line or, where there is no abutting
street, the property boundary line.
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.10
72:777
(b) The adequacy and safety of vehicular and pedestrian access to
parking lots and parking spaces from existing contiguous or
adjacent public streets, and the capacity of the existing street
system to accommodate the proposed conditional use shall be
demonstrated by the applicant's submission of the traffic study
required by § 84-57.10G with the conditional use application.
(c) The access requirements of this § 84-57.10D shall apply.
(4) Loading. The requirements of § 84-55H shall apply in addition to
the following regulations:
(a) No loading space or loading area, and no loading activity shall
be permitted within a front or side yard along an existing street
opposite existing residential dwellings; provided, one student
loading space/area contiguous to a dormitory, such space being
located as approved by the Board, shall be provided for each
100 students residing therein, which shall be devoted to
loading/unloading of personal effects of students.
(b) Loading space or loading areas shall be located principally
behind buildings or within a triangle or quadrangle formed by
the rear of such buildings within an area separately and
permanently marked and devoted to such purpose only.
(5) Landscaping. The applicant shall submit a proposed landscaping
plan with the conditional use application. The requirements of
§ 84-55C, E and I shall apply, in addition to those specified in
§ 84-57.10F(1)(c) unless otherwise approved by the Board in the
conditional use process.
(6) Storage. The requirements of § 84-55B shall apply in addition to the
following regulations:
(a) No storage shall be located in either a front or side yard;
(b) Storage proposed to be located in a rear yard shall be buffered
by a planted landscape screen for a minimum width of 30 feet
meeting the requirements of § 84-55C(1)(a) and (b) measured
from the property line; and
(c) Trash and recycling dumpsters and/or containers shall be
enclosed in a masonry or wooden-fenced accessory structure
(no roof shall be required) located to the rear of the building,
and shall not visible from the street.
(7) Lighting. The requirements of § 84-55F shall apply in addition to
the following regulations. Exterior lighting for a stadium and/or an
athletic field shall be permitted when approved by the Board as a
conditional use in accordance with the recommended specifications
of the Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society
of North America, 9th Edition, subject to modification upon
§ 84-57.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:778
recommendation of the Township's Lighting Consultant for the
specific application proposed, and subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The height of the light standards shall not exceed 85 feet,
including the mounting base;
(b) With the exception of the existing lights at Farrell Stadium at
the South Campus of West Chester University, all exterior
stadium lights and/or athletic field lights of an educational use
shall be extinguished by not later than 10:00 p.m. prevailing
time;
(c) Stadium lighting may not be used for more than two
consecutive nights in any one calendar week;
(d) The height of the light standards within parking lots shall not
exceed 16 feet, including the mounting base;
(e) No lighting shall be permitted which shines onto adjoining
properties or streets;
(f) All other proposed lighting not governed by § 84-55F shall
comply with the recommended specifications of the Lighting
Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America, 9th Edition, subject to modification upon
recommendation of the Township's Lighting Consultant for the
specific application proposed.
(8) Building features.
(a) When any college dormitory or private dormitory is proposed
to be constructed contiguous to or adjoining an existing street
opposite or adjacent to existing residential dwellings, no
balconies shall be constructed as part of the building feature
such as would allow access to the balconies from any portion of
the interior or exterior of the building and shall be and remain
only architectural features of the building.
(b) When any college dormitory or private dormitory is proposed
to be constructed contiguous to or adjoining an existing street
opposite or adjacent to existing residential dwellings, no
exterior lighting shall be placed either on the building or
shining onto the building, except minimal lighting over the
entry and exit doors and security lighting approved by the
Board as part of the conditional use approval.
(c) Light standards shall be permitted along pedestrian sidewalks
and along interior streets and driveways on the property, when
approved by the Board as part of the conditional use
application, subject to compliance with the Lighting Handbook
of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 9th
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.10
72:779
Edition, as modified by the Township's Lighting Consultant for
the specific application proposed.
(d) At a minimum, an architectural facade of stone, brick or
equivalent shall be required in the construction of all buildings
and structures, including a school parking garage.
(e) All HVAC equipment shall be shielded from view, including
roof-mounted equipment, by a architectural or landscape
barrier approved by the Board.
(9) Educational use cooperation.
(a) It is the intent of this provision to relieve vehicular and
pedestrian congestion on existing public streets and to lessen
traffic impacts upon neighboring and community properties
and residents affected by the proposed use.
(b) With respect to any application of a private entity seeking
conditional use approval to locate a private dormitory in a
zoning district where educational uses are permitted by
conditional use, it shall be incumbent upon the applicant to
secure to the extent reasonably possible, the cooperation and
approval of the college, university or other educational entity,
some of whose students will reside in the private dormitory, in
providing or facilitating by means of written and recorded
access easements, land dedication or otherwise, necessary
access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by such
use over nearby or adjoining property owned or controlled by
such college, university or educational entity, if any, to and
from the dormitory to such educational entity when the Board
so requires as a condition of a conditional use approval.
(10) Required inspections. All educational uses shall be subject to an
annual inspection conducted by the Township Fire Marshal and the
Township Building Inspector to insure compliance with these
regulations.
(11) Required inspections. All educational uses shall be subject to an
annual inspection conducted by the Township Fire Marshal and the
Township Building Inspector.
G. Traffic study submission requirement. In addition to the requirements
of §§ 84-74 and 84-75, the applicant shall submit with the conditional
use application a traffic study prepared by a Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer having a specialty in traffic engineering and
design meeting the requirements of § 72-19C(4) of the West Goshen
Township Code. In addition to such other reasonable conditions as the
Board determines necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community and the enforcement of
the intent and purposes of this § 84-57.10, the Board shall have the
additional specific power and authority to impose as a condition of any
§ 84-57.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.10
72:780
§ 84-57.11. Regulations for outdoor dining as accessory use to
restaurant, brewery pub and microbrewery. [Added 8-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 7-2005; amended 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006; 4-12-2017
by Ord. No. 1-2017]
Outdoor dining may be permitted as an accessory use to a restaurant in the
C-2, C-4 and C-5 Zoning Districts and as an accessory use to a brewery pub
and microbrewery in the C-2, C-4, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Zoning Districts subject to
the following criteria:
approval the implementation by the applicant of a plan for the handling
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic deemed adequate by the Board that
will most efficiently and effectively relieve traffic impacts on existing
streets and intersections impacted by the proposed use and funnel
traffic generated by the proposed use to those streets, intersections
and other traffic arteries that will lessen such public impacts. In no
event shall such traffic be connected to or diverted through primarily
residential neighborhoods unless it is demonstrated by a
preponderance of the evidence that no other means of access is
reasonably available. In such case, the Board shall impose such
restrictions as it deems necessary for the health, safety and general
welfare of the affected residential neighborhoods.
A. An area not to exceed 1,500 square feet which is on the sidewalk, patio
or deck which directly abuts the restaurant, brewery pub or
microbrewery building may be used for the purpose of furnishing food
and beverages outside to the patrons of the restaurant.
B. The outdoor dining area must meet the setbacks for the zoning district
where the restaurant, brewery pub or microbrewery is located and
must be separated from all parking areas, streets or driveways by a
barrier which is at least four feet in height and no higher than six feet in
height. The barrier must prevent patrons of the restaurant, brewery
pub or microbrewery from exiting directly onto the parking area, street
or driveway adjacent to the outdoor dining area and instead must
require the patrons of the restaurant, brewery pub or microbrewery to
exit the outdoor dining area in a safe manner, either onto a sidewalk or
through another means of ingress and egress which is approved by the
Township Engineer. The barrier may be a fence, wall, or another
suitable barrier approved by the Township Engineer which will prevent
a hazardous condition and protect the health and safety of the outdoor
diners from vehicular traffic on adjacent parking areas, streets or
driveways.
C. Prior to serving food or beverages outdoors, the restaurant, brewery
pub or microbrewery must obtain all necessary permits from all
governmental and municipal agencies having jurisdiction, including but
not limited to the Health Department and Liquor Control Board.
D. The area used for outdoor dining shall only be used for dining and may
not be used for outdoor entertainment or amplified sound.
§ 84-57.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.11
72:781
§ 84-57.12. Convenience store regulations. [Added 8-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 7-2005]
In addition to the general conditional use standards in § 84-75 of this
chapter, the following additional standards must be met in order for the
Board of Supervisors to grant conditional use approval for the use of a lot
as a convenience store:
E. All food or beverages served in the outdoor dining area shall be served
in nondisposable containers.
A. Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the regulations of the district
in which the lot is located shall govern.
B. All gasoline pump dispensers and automobile window washing
materials shall be covered by a canopy and shall be illuminated by
overhead lighting during nondaylight hours.
C. All gasoline pump dispensers and the canopy covering such dispensers
shall be set back at least 50 feet from the legal right-of-way line of all
streets abutting the lot upon which the convenience store is located.
[Amended 7-31-2013 by Ord. No. 09-2013]
D. Equipment intended to be utilized for the washing of windows of motor
vehicles, as well as places for the storage of such equipment, shall be
permitted.
E. No building on a lot upon which there is proposed to be located a
convenience store shall contain more than 5,500 square feet of gross
floor area, exclusive of any area of such lot being used for gasoline
pump dispensers or a canopy over such dispensers.
F. All ingress and egress from any lot upon which there is proposed to be
located a convenience store shall be designed to promote safe and
convenient travel.
G. The internal circulation pattern of any lot upon which there is proposed
to be located a convenience store which will support the retail sale of
gasoline shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles waiting for such
gasoline service from stacking onto public streets.
H. No outdoor display of products shall be permitted.
I. All trash generated from a convenience store shall be stored in a
completely fenced-in or screened enclosure for periods not to exceed
seven days. Trash bins shall be subject to setback regulations for the
district where the lot is located.
J. Parking on any lot used as a convenience store shall be provided as
required by § 84-55 of this chapter.
K. Landscaping and screening on any lot used as a convenience store shall
be provided as required by this chapter and the applicable sections of
§ 84-57.11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.12
72:782
§ 84-57.13. Pharmacy/drug store regulations. [Added 8-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 7-2005]
In addition to the general conditional use standards in § 84-75 of this
chapter, the following additional standards must be met in order for the
Board of Supervisors to grant conditional use approval for the use of a lot
as a pharmacy/drug store.
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, provided that, so
as to allow for the safe and efficient circulation of vehicles utilizing
gasoline dispensing pumps, parking lot landscaping shall not be
required on a lot used as a convenience store containing the retail sale
of gasoline, but such landscaping shall be located around the perimeter
of such a lot.
L. The Board of Supervisors may request that the applicant submit a
traffic study illustrating the adequacy of existing or proposed roadways
to accommodate any increase in traffic from the proposed convenience
store. Any such traffic study shall be prepared in sufficient detail to
determine peak traffic volumes and roadway capacity and provide
reasonable solutions to traffic congestion.
M. The maximum number of gasoline pump dispensers and the location of
the same on any lot upon which there is proposed to be located a
convenience store shall be as permitted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, or any successor
agency or entity.
N. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from spotlights, floodlights,
searchlights or other sources, shall be visible from adjoining streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level or from
floor level on an adjacent property.
O. Exterior lighting on any lot used as a convenience store shall be
properly shielded so as to not be directed towards, or shine onto, other
lots.
P. Except as provided herein, the use shall conform to all requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
A. Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the regulations of the district
in which the lot is located shall govern.
B. The building used as the pharmacy/drug store shall contain no more
than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. [Amended 7-31-2013 by
Ord. No. 09-2013]
C. All ingress and egress from any lot upon which there is proposed to be
located a pharmacy/drug store shall provide safe and convenient travel.
D. No outdoor display of products shall be permitted.
§ 84-57.12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.13
72:783
§ 84-57.14. Dog day-care facility. [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
11-2007; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 10-2013]
A dog day-care facility shall be permitted by special exception in the
Multipurpose MPD District and in the C-5 General Highway Commercial
District, when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board by special exception
subject to Article XVII of this chapter and the following additional
standards:
E. All trash generated from a pharmacy/drug store shall be stored in a
completely fenced-in or screened enclosure and may be so stored for
periods not to exceed seven days. Bins shall be subject to setbacks in
underlying districts.
F. Parking on any lot used as a pharmacy/drug store shall be provided as
required by § 84-55 of this chapter.
G. Landscaping and screening on any lot used as a pharmacy/drug store
shall be provided as required by this chapter and the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
H. The Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to submit a traffic
study illustrating the adequacy of existing or proposed roadways to
accommodate any increase in traffic from the proposed pharmacy/drug
store. Any such traffic study shall be prepared in sufficient detail to
determine peak traffic volumes and roadway capacity and provide
acceptable solutions to traffic congestion.
I. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from spotlights, floodlights,
searchlights or other sources, shall be visible from adjoining streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level, or
from floor level on an adjacent property.
J. Exterior lighting on any lot used as a pharmacy/drug store shall be
properly shielded so as to not be directed towards, or shine onto, other
lots.
K. Except as provided herein, the use shall conform to all requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
A. The lot shall contain a minimum of one (1) acre when located in the
Multipurpose MPD District. A lot located in the C-5 General Highway
Commercial District shall contain a minimum of 0.5 acre, and the
facility shall be located in a stand-alone building.
B. All dogs must be kept inside the building at all times except for dropoff
and pickup; provided, however, if the lot area is one acre or more, a
fenced-in area may be provided for the use of exercise of the dogs. Such
fenced-in area shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from all
property lines. If the lot is less than one acre, a fenced-in area may be
§ 84-57.13 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.14
72:784
§ 84-57.15. Independent living facility. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-2008]
In addition to the general conditional use standards in § 84-75 of this
chapter, the following additional standards must be met in order for the
Board of Supervisors to grant conditional use approval for an independent
living facility:
provided for and shall only be used for the sanitary relief of the dogs
subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The building where such use is conducted must contain sufficient
soundproof devices so that barking of dogs may not be heard beyond
the property line.
D. The overnight boarding of dogs shall not be permitted.
E. Such facility shall be licensed as a boarding kennel in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Dog Law,254 and the operator/owner shall abide by all
relevant provisions in such law.
A. The dwelling units shall be leased or sold as independent dwelling units
where the occupants of the dwelling units are independent with respect
to their daily living activities such as bathing, dressing and grooming.
B. The dwelling units shall be limited to studio, one- and two-bedroom
apartment units; provided that no more than 40% of the total number of
dwelling units shall contain two bedrooms.
C. The independent living facility must be age restricted for persons 55
years of age and older and must qualify for the exemption to the
prohibition against discrimination based on familial status found in
Section 3607(b)(1) of the United States Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3601 et seq., and the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.
D. The accessory uses which are provided within an independent living
facility shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
building and shall be for the exclusive use of the residents and their
invitees.
E. If a sundries shop is provided within the independent living facility as
an accessory use, the purpose of the shop is to afford an opportunity for
the residents of the facility and their guests to purchase necessary
toiletries and other miscellaneous dry goods and snack food items. The
maximum size of the shop shall not exceed 500 square feet and there
shall not be any advertising for the store outside of the facility.
F. The building and all units therein shall be connected to public water
and public sewer.
254. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 84-57.14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.15
72:785
§ 84-57.16. Geothermal energy systems. [Added 4-25-2012 by Ord.
No. 04-2012; amended 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
Geothermal energy systems shall be permitted as follows:
G. There shall be no accessory buildings on the lot.
H. If the dwelling units are sold in fee simple or condominium ownership,
the common areas in the independent living facility must be owned and/
or managed by a professional management company.
A. For residential use:
(1) Geothermal energy systems shall be permitted in all residential
zoning districts by right subject to the regulations contained in this
§ 84-57.16A.
(2) Prior to the installation of a geothermal energy system, the
property owner shall obtain a zoning permit pursuant to this
chapter and a grading permit pursuant to Chapter 69 of the West
Goshen Township Code.
(3) All wells drilled for geothermal energy systems shall be set back a
minimum of 30 feet from any building foundation and a minimum of
10 feet from property lines.
(4) If the geothermal well is proposed to be located on property that is
owned by a person or entity different than the applicant, the
applicant shall provide documentation to the Township with the
zoning permit application that evidences that the property owner
has consented to the installation of the geothermal well in the
location proposed.
B. For nonresidential use:
(1) Geothermal energy systems shall be permitted in all nonresidential
zoning districts by right subject to the regulations contained in this
§ 84-57.16B.
(2) Prior to the installation of a geothermal energy system, the
property owner shall obtain a zoning permit pursuant to this
chapter and a grading permit pursuant to Chapter 69 of the West
Goshen Township Code.
(3) All wells drilled for geothermal energy systems shall be set back a
minimum of 30 feet from a lot which is used for any nonresidential
use. The setback shall be increased to 100 feet from any lot which
is used for a single-family detached dwelling or single-family
attached dwelling.
(4) If the geothermal well is proposed to be located on property that is
owned by a person or entity different than the applicant, the
applicant shall provide documentation to the Township with the
§ 84-57.15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.16
72:786
§ 84-57.17. Solar energy systems. [Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No.
04-2012]
zoning permit application that evidences that the property owner
has consented to the installation of the geothermal well in the
location proposed.
A. Solar energy systems as an accessory use:
(1) Solar energy systems shall be permitted as an accessory use to a
single family detached dwelling in all zoning districts by right
subject to compliance with all applicable requirements in this
§ 84-57.17 and upon the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
this chapter and a grading permit pursuant to Chapter 69 of the
West Goshen Township Code.
(2) Solar energy systems shall be permitted as an accessory use to all
other uses in all zoning districts by special exception subject to
compliance with all applicable requirements in this § 84-57.17 and
upon the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to this chapter and a
grading permit pursuant to Chapter 69 of the West Goshen
Township Code.
(3) Ground-mounted solar energy systems which are built as an
accessory use to a commercial use shall require land development
approval.
(4) A solar energy system that is built as an accessory use shall be
designed to provide energy primarily for the principal use which is
located on the same property.
(5) A solar energy system built as an accessory use may be rooftop
mounted or ground mounted subject to the applicable criteria in
this § 84-57.17.
(6) Rooftop-mounted solar arrays shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) The solar panels shall not be located so as to exceed a height of
three feet above the roof areas to which they are mounted.
(b) No portion of a rooftop solar array attached to a pitched roof
shall extend above the ridge line of the pitched roof.
(c) Solar panels shall not exceed the building height limitation for
the zoning district within which the principal building is
located.
(d) A roof-mounted solar energy system shall not extend beyond
the existing overhangs of the structure to which it is attached.
(7) Ground-mounted solar arrays shall comply with the following
standards:
§ 84-57.16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.17
72:787
(a) All ground arrays shall comply with the setback requirements
in the applicable zoning district regulations, plus an additional
setback of 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
(b) Ground arrays shall not be permitted in a front yard or
between the front facade of the principal building and the
street line.
(c) Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 12 feet.
(d) Ground arrays shall be screened from view from adjacent
street(s) upon which the property has frontage and from
adjacent properties. Such screening shall screen the
supporting infrastructure for the panels and control
equipment; the screening shall not be required to screen the
solar panels, as reception of sunlight is essential for proper
operation thereof.
(8) All rooftop-mounted and ground-mounted solar arrays shall also
conform to the following additional requirements:
(a) The design and installation of solar energy systems shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of
ANSI, Underwriters Laboratories (UL), International
Standards Organization (ISO) and ASTM, as applicable, and
shall comply with applicable building code and fire and safety
requirements. The applicant shall submit manufacturer's
specifications as part of the application for the building permit
when accessory to a single-family dwelling or as part of the
application for special exception when accessory to all other
uses.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the solar energy system
shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective
glare from reaching adjacent properties or streets.
(c) No aerial wiring system shall be employed in transmitting
energy generated by a solar energy system. All exterior
electrical and/or plumbing lines serving ground-mounted solar
energy systems shall be buried below the surface of the ground
and placed in a conduit.
(d) The area of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall be
calculated as building coverage and shall not exceed the
building coverage of the underlying zoning district. The area of
a ground-mounted solar energy system shall be calculated as
the dimension of the footprint of the cumulative solar panels.
(e) Solar energy systems built as an accessory use shall not
generate in excess of 125% of the estimated energy need of the
principal use of the property. The energy generated in excess
of the requirements of the principal use of the property may be
§ 84-57.17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.17
72:788
purchased or acquired by a public utility in accordance with all
applicable laws and government regulations.
(f) Solar energy systems shall comply with the area and bulk
regulations of the underlying zoning district.
(g) A solar energy system shall be located to ensure solar access
without reliance on adjacent properties.
B. Solar energy systems as a principal use in the I-1 Industrial District.
(1) Solar energy systems shall be permitted as a principal use in the I-1
Industrial District by conditional use of the Board of Supervisors
subject to compliance with all applicable regulations in § 84-57.17A
and B.
(2) Net lot area. A minimum of five acres of net lot area shall be
required for solar energy systems as a principal use of a lot.
(3) Safety measures. The solar energy system shall be enclosed by a
fence, barrier or other appropriate means to prevent or restrict
unauthorized persons or vehicles from entering the property. The
specifications and details of the fence or barrier shall be approved
by the Board as part of the conditional use approval. Clearly visible
warning signs shall be placed on the fence, barrier or at the
perimeter of the property to inform individuals of potential voltage
hazards.
(4) Setbacks. All structures and buildings associated with a solar
energy system shall be set back from property lines a distance of
not less than 100 feet; however, as part of the conditional use
approval, the Board may modify the appropriate setback based on
the site characteristics, topography and the abutting land uses.
(5) Screening. Each solar energy system shall be screened by a buffer
yard to create a continuous visual screen between the facility and a
person standing at ground level on an adjacent lot. Such buffer
yard shall be comprised of fencing or landscaping or some
combination thereof and shall comply with the provisions in
§ 84-55A.
(6) Abandonment. The following requirements shall apply and shall be
a condition of approval of a conditional use for a solar energy
system:
(a) A solar energy system that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
(b) The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner, to be sent by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, at the address of record as set forth on the
tax duplicate. The owner shall have the right to appeal from
such notice to the Zoning Hearing Board, in which event the
§ 84-57.17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.17
72:789
§ 84-57.18. Wind energy systems. [Added 4-25-2012 by Ord. No.
04-2012]
Township shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the system has been abandoned, applying
the same tests as would apply in the context of an alleged
abandonment of a lawful nonconforming use.
(c) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months after the owner receives a notice of
abandonment or, in the event of an appeal, within six months
after the entry of a final order by either the Zoning Hearing
Board or by a reviewing court, as the case may be. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall constitute a violation of this
chapter subjecting the property owner to the remedies and
penalties as set forth in Article XVI of this chapter.
(d) In granting a conditional use for a solar energy system, the
Board may impose a requirement that the property owner post
financial security with the Township in an amount sufficient to
cover the cost of removal of the solar energy system in the
event of abandonment.
(7) Vehicular access. Each solar energy system shall be provided with a
means of vehicular access to and from a public or private road.
(8) Land development. The applicant shall obtain land development
approval for the solar energy system.
A. A wind energy system shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
zoning districts by special exception, subject to compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) A minimum lot size of one acre shall be provided.
(2) All wind energy systems shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to the greater of:
(a) Ten feet plus 100% of the height of the structure measured to
the height of the blade at its highest point; or
(b) The applicable yard setback requirements for principal
buildings, plus 10 feet, measured to the closest point of the
foundation.
(3) Wind energy systems shall not be permitted in a front yard area or
between the front facade of the principal building and the adjacent
street line.
(4) Wind turbines shall not exceed a height of 30 feet, measured to the
height of the blade at its highest point.
§ 84-57.17 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.18
72:790
(5) No more than one wind energy system shall be permitted per
property.
(6) The design and installation of wind energy systems shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories
(UL), International Standards Organization (ISO) and the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), as applicable, and shall
comply with applicable building code and fire and safety
requirements. The applicant shall submit manufacturer's
specifications as part of an application for special exception.
(7) Noise.
(a) Wind energy systems shall not generate noise levels, measured
at any property line, which would exceed the following:
[1] Five decibels above pre-existing ambient noise levels
during the day; and
[2] The ambient noise level in decibels from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
(b) The applicant shall conduct a three-day ambient noise test to
demonstrate compliance with these standards and shall submit
proof of such standards to the Zoning Hearing Board at the
special exception hearing.
(8) Wind energy systems shall be designed with an automatic brake or
other similar device to prevent over-speeding and excessive
pressure on the tower structure.
(9) Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted.
(10) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(11) The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step
bolts, a ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the
tower for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
(12) All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a minimum of
10 feet above ground level.
(13) The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed of a
corrosion-resistant material.
(14) The surface of the wind energy systems shall be finished with a
nonreflective coating.
(15) Guy wires shall not be permitted. All parts of the wind energy
system shall be located on the same lot as the energy system.
§ 84-57.18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.18
72:791
§ 84-57.19. Student homes. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013]
An applicant seeking a special exception for a student home in the R-4
District must demonstrate compliance with the following mandatory
criteria.
(16)No aerial wiring system shall be employed in transmitting energy
generated by a wind energy system.
(17) Abandonment. The following requirements shall apply and shall be
a condition of approval of a special exception for a wind energy
system:
(a) A wind energy system that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
(b) The Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Official may issue a
notice of abandonment to the owner, to be sent by regular mail
and certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address of
record as set forth on the tax duplicate. The owner shall have
the right to appeal from such notice to the Zoning Hearing
Board, in which event the Township shall have the burden of
proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the system
has been abandoned, applying the same tests as would apply in
the context of an alleged abandonment of a lawful
nonconforming use.
(c) Any abandoned wind energy system shall be removed at the
owner's sole expense within six months after the owner
receives a notice of abandonment or, in the event of an appeal,
within six months after the entry of a final order by either the
Zoning Hearing Board or by a reviewing court, as the case may
be. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute a
violation of this chapter subjecting the property owner to the
remedies and penalties as set forth in Article XVI of this
chapter.
(d) In granting a special exception for a wind energy system, the
Zoning Hearing Board may impose a requirement that the
property owner post financial security with the Township in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of removal, in the event of
abandonment.
(18) Land development approval shall be required for any wind energy
system that is accessory to a commercial use.
A. A student home is only permitted in the R-4 District in a single-family
detached dwelling, a single-family attached dwelling and a multifamily
dwelling.
B. The dwelling unit must have a floor area of at least 1,000 square feet
exclusive of basements, garages and accessory buildings.
§ 84-57.18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.19
72:792
§ 84-57.20. Home-related business. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No.
03-2013]
C. A student home shall meet the area and bulk requirements for singlefamily
detached dwellings, single-family attached dwellings and
multifamily dwellings in the R-4 District, as the case may be.
D. The owner of the student home or the agent or manager of the student
home shall annually register the student home with the West Goshen
Township Zoning Officer on a form provided by the Township. If the
owner of a student home fails to maintain a current registration of the
student home, the Zoning Officer shall have the discretion to revoke the
zoning permit and rental permit after providing the owner with notice
and an opportunity to cure.
E. The dwelling unit must contain a minimum of two parking spaces for
the dwelling unit and one additional space for every additional
occupant of the dwelling.
F. All owners of student homes which are in existence as of the effective
date of this section shall have 45 days from the effective date of this
section to register their student homes with the Zoning Officer on a
form provided by the Township. Pursuant to Section 613 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10613, the Zoning
Officer shall then confirm a list of nonconforming student homes and
identify any additional student homes which are lawfully in existence as
of the effective date of this section. Such list shall be available for public
inspection. Once the Zoning Officer has confirmed that a student home
is a lawful nonconforming student home, the owner shall complete a
rental registration form and annually register the student home.
A. If permitted by the underlying zoning district regulations, a homerelated
business, as defined in § 84-8 shall be permitted as an accessory
use to a single-family detached dwelling, subject to the following
regulations.
(1) No sign shall be permitted on the property indicating the presence
of a home-related business.
(2) Size. The accessory use shall not exceed 500 square feet of total
floor area of the dwelling unit, including any accessory structures
or space used for storage.
(3) Parking and loading. In addition to the off-street parking that is
required for the single-family detached dwelling use, there shall be
one off-street parking space for every nonresident employee of the
home-related business.
(4) Building appearance. There shall be no change in the outside
appearance of the dwelling unit, accessory structure and/or lot
related to the home-related business as they existed on the date of
§ 84-57.19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.20
72:793
§ 84-57.21. Storage sheds. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 03-2013]
A storage shed is permitted as an accessory structure to a single family
detached dwelling and semidetached dwellings in the R-2, R-3, R-3A and
R-4 Districts. The storage shed may be located within the side and/or rear
yards of the lot, but not in the front yard or in front of the front façade of
the dwelling. The shed must be set back a minimum of six feet from the
property line. On lots of one acre or less, a maximum of one storage shed is
permitted. On lots greater than one acre, a maximum of two storage sheds
are permitted.
issuance of the permit authorizing the home-related business or
other visible evidence of the conduct of a home-related business.
(5) Nuisance. No equipment or process shall be used in a home-related
business which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust
or electrical interference detectable to normal senses beyond the
property line in excess of levels customarily generated by a
residential use. No burning, heating or other process will take
place which might produce toxic or noxious odors, fumes or gasses.
(6) Storage. The outside storage of materials, equipment or products
shall be prohibited. A dumpster shall not be brought onto the
property, or be utilized upon the property, for the use of the homerelated
business.
(7) Business vehicles. A maximum of two motor vehicles, bearing
current and valid inspection and emissions stickers and currently
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Motor Vehicles, which
are used for a home-related business shall be permitted on the lot
on which the home-related business is conducted. No one motor
vehicle shall exceed 8,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight, nor shall
the combined weight of one vehicle and another vehicle (motorized
or nonmotorized, such as a trailer or equipment) that are attached
or capable of attachment together exceed 8,000 pounds of gross
vehicle weight.
(8) Customer/client visits. The home-related business use shall not
involve any customer or client visits to the property, and there shall
be no direct sales of products on or from the lot.
(9) Number of uses. Only one home-related business shall be permitted
on any one lot.
(10) Number of employees. The maximum number of nonresident
employees who may report to the dwelling shall be two.
(11) Permit. It shall be illegal for any person to conduct a home-related
business on any property unless he has applied for and been issued
a home-related business permit by the Zoning Officer. An
inspection by the Zoning Officer shall be required prior to the
issuance of any such permit.
§ 84-57.20 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.22
72:794
§ 84-57.22. Travel center. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 04-2013]
A travel center with the accessory use of an automobile repair shop shall be
permitted in the C-5 District by conditional use of the Board of Supervisors
and subject to the regulations in this section.
§ 84-57.23. Unified development plans. [Added 7-31-2013 by Ord.
No. 09-2013]
Where this chapter allows the development of multiple uses and buildings
on a development tract, individual units, buildings, or parcels of land within
the development tract may be subdivided, leased, purchased, sold,
mortgaged, and developed as individual zero lot line units without meeting
the lot width, lot size, impervious coverage, building coverage, green area,
and lot setbacks from internal parking and building lines for each individual
zero lot line unit; provided, however, that the development tract shall
comply with the applicable area and bulk standards for the zoning district
where the development tract is located.
§ 84-57.24. Domesticated chickens. [Added 9-23-2015 by Ord. No.
6-2015]
A. No more than 50% of the total floor area of the building shall be used
for automobile repair.
B. No repair of vehicles may be conducted outside of the building. All
activity relating to automobile repair shall occur inside the building.
C. There shall be no sale of vehicles on the lot.
D. There shall be no outdoor storage of vehicles for sale or rental on the
lot.
E. The overhead doors and windows shall be kept closed at all times when
any noise-producing activity relating to automobile repair is being
conducted inside the building, with the exception of times when
vehicles are entering and exiting the facility.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the
keeping of domesticated chickens. It is intended to enable residents of
single-family dwellings to keep a small number of female chickens on a
noncommercial basis while limiting the potential adverse impacts on
the surrounding properties.
B. Standards for keeping domesticated chickens.
(1) Domesticated female chickens shall be allowed on lots with singlefamily
dwellings in the following zoning districts:
(a) R-2 Residential District;
(b) R-3 Residential District; and
§ 84-57.22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.24
72:795
(c) R-4 Residential District.
(2) The maximum number of chickens permitted on a lot with a singlefamily
dwelling shall be determined based on the zoning district
and lot size as set forth below:
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Maximum Number
of Chickens
R-2 Residential
District
1 acre 10
R-3 Residential
District
30,000 square feet 8
22,000 square feet 6
18,000 square feet 4
R-4 Residential
District
30,000 square feet 8
22,000 square feet 6
18,000 square feet 4
(3) Roosters are prohibited.
(4) The slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
(5) For identification purposes, all chickens age six months and older
must wear leg bands which identify the permit number issued by
the Township. [Amended 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
(6) All chickens must be maintained in a fully enclosed shelter which
has a roof or overhead covering and which may only be located in
the rear yard or in a fenced-in area. The enclosure must provide
four square feet per chicken with an exterior run and six square
feet per chicken without an exterior run. The shelter must be a
minimum of 20 feet from any rear property line and a minimum of
15 feet from any side property line. The fence must be a minimum
of four feet and a maximum of six feet in height.
(7) It shall be unlawful for the owner of chickens to allow the same to
run at large upon any public land, including, but not limited to,
sidewalks, streets, roads, alleys, parks, or upon another person's
private property.
(8) All enclosures and structures must meet all applicable zoning
requirements. A zoning permit shall be required for the
construction of any enclosure that is less than 500 square feet. A
building permit shall be required for the construction of any
enclosure that is 500 square feet or greater.
(9) All owners of chickens must maintain sanitary living conditions for
the chickens so that the keeping of chickens does not become a
public or private nuisance. Owners shall not allow feces from the
§ 84-57.24 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.24
72:796
§ 84-57.25. In-law suites. [Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
chickens to accumulate on the owner's land such that it becomes
a nuisance caused by odors. The feces must be regularly removed
by double-bagging and placing the bagged feces in the trash for
collection.
(10) All chicken feed must be stored in rodentproof closed containers.
C. Permits. An owner wishing to keep chickens on his/her property must
first obtain a permit from the Zoning Officer. An applicant seeking to
obtain a permit to maintain chickens must submit an application on
forms provided by the Township and pay the applicable permit fee as
determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. If the applicant
resides within a homeowners' association, a letter from the
homeowners' association approving the keeping of chickens must
accompany the application.
D. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. The Township shall deny a
permit if the applicant has not demonstrated compliance with all of the
provisions of this section. A permit to keep domesticated chickens may
be suspended or revoked by the Township where the Township finds
that the keeping of the chickens creates a public nuisance or for any
violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the provisions of this
section or with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance or law.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for the creation of an inlaw
suite for personal, noncommercial use, as defined by § 84-8, within
the Township's R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts, subject to certain
Township regulations.
B. Standards for in-law suites. In-law suites shall only be permitted in the
R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts and are subject to the following
standards and regulations:
(1) An in-law suite shall be restricted for the occupancy and/or care of
a relative as defined by § 84-8 of this chapter. The Township Zoning
Officer may require proof of relative status.
(2) An in-law suite may be occupied by a maximum of two occupants.
(3) The in-law suite shall comply with the Township Building Code in
effect at the time of building permit application.255
(4) The in-law suite may be contained in an existing accessory
structure, such as a garage.
(5) The floor area of the in-law suite shall not exceed 35% of the
combined floor area of the principal dwelling plus the in-law suite.
255. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Art. II, Residential Code, and Ch. 32, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 84-57.24 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.25
72:797
§ 84-57.26. Brewery pub and microbrewery facilities. [Added
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
(6) The principal dwelling must retain its appearance as a single-family
dwelling.
(7) All utilities shall be shared, including, but not exclusive to, gas,
electric, heat, water service and sewer service.
(8) A use and occupancy and zoning permit shall be required prior to
the occupancy of an in-law suite.
(9) The Zoning Officer shall require the property owner(s) to execute
an agreement in the form which is attached hereto and
incorporated herein,256 which shall be recorded, at the owner's
expense, with the Office of the Chester County Recorder of Deeds.
The agreement shall specify the restrictions of an in-law suite and
shall prohibit the property owner(s) and future property owner(s)
from renting the in-law suite as an apartment to nonrelatives.
C. Denial, suspension or revocation of use and occupancy permit. The
Township shall deny a use and occupancy permit if the owner(s) has not
demonstrated compliance with all of the provisions and standards of
this section. Any such use and occupancy permit issued may be
suspended or revoked by the Township where the Township finds that
the owner(s) failed to comply with any of the provisions or standards of
this section or with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance or
law.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for brewery pubs and
microbreweries, as defined in § 84-8, as permitted uses within the
Township's C-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Zoning Districts subject to the
regulations in this section.
B. Standards for brewery pubs and microbreweries.
(1) Brewery pubs and microbreweries shall be permitted to sell all
products and merchandise that they are authorized to sell pursuant
to their liquor license as well as food prepared on site, snack foods
and merchandise, such as t-shirts, hats, and glassware.
(2) Brewery pubs and microbreweries shall comply with all parking
requirements set forth in § 84-55I(2) for an eating and drinking
place.
(3) Brewery pubs and microbreweries may have outdoor dining and
seating at their facility if they meet the criteria in § 84-57.11.
(4) Brewery pubs and microbreweries may provide tours of their
facility to the public.
256. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 84-57.25 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.26
72:798
§ 84-57.27. Sale of consumer fireworks. [Added 11-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 8-2018]
(5) No exterior display or sale of retail merchandise shall be permitted
outside of the brewery pub or microbrewery.
(6) Any signs installed for the brewery pub and microbrewery shall
comply with all Township sign regulations, as set forth in § 84-52.
(7) Brewery pub and microbreweries shall obtain all requisite licenses
from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, the Chester County
Health Department, and the West Goshen Township Department of
Code Enforcement prior to operation.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for the sale of consumer
fireworks, as defined in § 84-8, as a use permitted by conditional use in
the MPD District, subject to the regulations in this section.
B. Standards for the sale of consumer fireworks. Sales of consumer
fireworks from either a permanent facility or temporary structure are
subject to compliance with the general provisions regarding conditional
uses contained in §§ 84-74 and 84-75 of this chapter as well as all the
following specific regulations with respect to such use:
(1) The facility from which the fireworks are sold, whether permanent
or temporary, shall comply with the MPD District's dimensional,
area, and parking regulations, including, but not limited to,
setbacks and buffers.
(2) Such use shall not be located within 1,500 feet of any premises
selling alcoholic liquors, alcohol, malt or brewed beverages for
consumption on or off premises.
(3) Such use shall not be located within 1,500 feet of any local or state
park, school or child day-care facility, recreational establishment,
house of worship, dwelling, hospital, group home or nursing home.
(4) Any structure containing quantities of consumer fireworks, as
defined herein, exceeding 50 pounds shall be no closer than 150
feet to any building, state highway, railway, local street or alley,
waterway, or utility right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a
natural gas line.
(5) Such use shall not be located within 1,500 feet of any premises
selling firearms.
(6) All land development plans for construction, use or renovation of an
existing building for the purposes of selling fireworks shall be
reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with all
required fire safety codes, including, but not limited to, the
International Fire Code, and his comments and/or report shall be
copied to the officer municipality-designated fire company officer.
§ 84-57.26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.27
72:799
(7) Sale of fireworks shall be subject to compliance with all of the
provisions of Pennsylvania Act 43 of 2017257 pertaining to the sale
thereof. Hours of operation shall be confined to 9:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. Security and site management shall be provided 24 hours per
day.
(8) All sales of consumer fireworks shall be conducted only within a
facility approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Fireworks Law, 72 P.S. § 9407, as
amended.
(9) All sales of consumer fireworks, as defined herein, shall be
conducted only from a facility exclusively dedicated to the storage
and sale of fireworks.
(10) If the facility in which the sale of consumer fireworks is conducted
is a temporary structure, it shall comply with the following
regulations, in addition to the other regulations set forth in
Subsection B(1) to (9):
(a) The temporary structure is located no closer than 250 feet
from a facility storing, selling or dispensing gasoline, propane
or other flammable products.
(b) An evacuation plan is posted in a conspicuous location for a
temporary structure in accordance with NFPA 1124.
(c) The outdoor storage unit, if any, is separated from the
wholesale or retail sales area to which a purchaser may be
admitted by appropriately rated fire separation.
(d) The temporary structure complies with NFPA 1124.
(e) The temporary structure is located one of the following
distances from a permanent facility licensed to sell consumer
fireworks under the Act of May 15, 1939 (P.L. 134, No. 65),
referred to as the "Fireworks Law,258" at the time of the
effective date of this article: prior to January 1, 2023, at least
five miles; or beginning January 1, 2023, at least two miles.
(f) The temporary structure does not exceed 2,500 square feet.
(g) The temporary structure is secured at all times during which
consumer fireworks are displayed within the structure.
(h) The temporary structure has a minimum of $2,000,000 in
public and product liability insurance.
(i) The sales period is limited to June 15 through July 8 and
December 21 through January 2 of each year.
257. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
258. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 84-57.27 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-57.27
72:800
(j) Consumer fireworks not on display for retail sale are stored in
an outdoor storage unit.
(k) Limitations. The sale of consumer fireworks from the
temporary structure is limited to the following: helicopter,
aerial spinner (APA 87-1, 3.1.2.3); Roman candle (APA 87-1,
3.1.2.4); and mine and shell devices not exceeding 500 grams.
(l) Storage of consumer fireworks shall be permitted only as an
accessory use to the sale of consumer fireworks on premises.
§ 84-57.27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-57.27
72:801

ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Uses, Premises, Structures and Lots
§ 84-58. Nonconformities. [Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No.
10-1981]
A. Except as otherwise noted in this article, the following regulations shall
apply in all districts to any lot where there is any nonconformity on the
effective date of this chapter. For purposes of this article, the words
"area and bulk regulations" shall mean the lot size, lot width at building
line, lot width at street right-of-way line, lot coverage, green area,
building setback line, side yard, rear yard, maximum building height
and similar regulations established in each of the district regulations.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
B. Continuation. Any nonconforming building or structure, nonconforming
use of a building or structure, nonconforming use of a lot or use of a
nonconforming lot existing on the effective date of this chapter may be
continued, except as otherwise provided in this article.
C. Extension, enlargement or additional buildings. The erection of new
buildings, enlargement of existing buildings or structures, extension of
existing uses of land or establishment of use on a lot where there is any
legal nonconformity of use, size or location on the lot at the effective
date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, shall be regulated
according to the type of nonconformity in accordance with the
provisions of this article regulating the type of nonconformity involved.
D. Nonconforming uses of land. A nonconforming use of land, exclusive of
buildings on the lot, or of land containing no buildings may be extended
on the lot so used where such use exists at the effective date of this
chapter, provided that the area of such use shall not be increased by
more than 25% of the area of that portion of the lot actually occupied by
the use, and such extension shall conform to the most restrictive area
and bulk requirements and to the design standards for the district. The
extension of a nonconforming use of land shall be limited to that which
was in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this
chapter, except that any portion of the lot which is subdivided after the
effective date of this chapter and to which the nonconforming use has
not been extended before subdivision shall, after subdivision, be used
only in conformity with all the provisions of this chapter.
E. Conforming uses of conforming buildings on nonconforming lots.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) Conforming buildings of which a conforming use is made and which
are located on a lot which is nonconforming at the effective date or
amendment of this chapter may be enlarged or additional buildings
may be erected subject to the following:
§ 84-58 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-58
72:803
(a) Provided that all of the area and bulk regulations (except
minimum lot size and minimum lot width at the building line)
and all design standards for the district in which the lot is
located are complied with and not exceeded.
(b) If a lot on which a single-family detached dwelling has been
constructed is rendered nonconforming in minimum lot size by
an amendment to this chapter adopted after the construction
and residential use and occupancy of such dwelling, subject to
the granting of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, the owner may enlarge the dwelling by encroachment
into the existing rear yard, provided that there is no
encroachment of such enlargement within any side yard and
the dwelling, as enlarged, is a minimum of 30 feet from the
rear property line in the R-2 District and a minimum of 20 feet
from the rear property line in the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
[Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(c) Provided that if the owner of such lot owns or controls adjacent
land sufficient to enable him to enlarge the lot in conformity or
more nearly in conformity with the district regulations, he shall
be required to enlarge the lot before any extensions,
enlargements or additional buildings are permitted; provided,
however, that any such enlargement of a nonconforming lot
shall not create nonconformity of any kind on such adjacent
land.
F. Conforming uses of nonconforming buildings on conforming lots.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) Buildings of which a conforming use is made, but which are
nonconforming in area and bulk by exceeding the allowable lot
coverage or height for the district in which they are located, may
not be enlarged unless the lot size is enlarged to conform to the
district regulations. If the lot size is enlarged, the addition or
enlargement shall conform in all respects to all of the area and bulk
regulations and design standards for the district in which the lot is
located.
(2) Buildings of which a conforming use is made, but which are
nonconforming in location on a lot, may be enlarged or additional
buildings may be constructed, subject to the following:
(a) Additional buildings and enlargement of existing buildings
shall conform to all of the area and bulk regulations and all
design standards for the district in which the lot is located.
(b) A nonconforming building located entirely outside the building
envelope shall not be enlarged or added to.
(c) A nonconforming building which is located partially outside the
building envelope may be enlarged or added to, provided that
§ 84-58 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-58
72:804
such enlargement or addition is located wholly within the
building envelope and the area of the building envelope is
reduced by an area equal to twice the area of the
nonconforming building footprint measured to the outside
walls which is outside the building envelope.
(d) Where an additional building is proposed to be constructed
within the building envelope on a lot on which an existing
nonconforming building is located wholly outside the building
envelope, the conforming building envelope shall be reduced
by an area equal to twice the area of the nonconforming
building footprint measured to the outside walls.
(e) If a single-family detached dwelling is rendered nonconforming
in location on the lot by an amendment to this chapter adopted
after the construction and residential use and occupancy of
such dwelling, the owner may, as of right, enlarge the dwelling
laterally along and within the existing building setback of such
dwelling, provided that there is no encroachment into any
minimum side yard, and/or the owner may, as of right, enlarge
the dwelling laterally along the line established by the rear
wall of the existing dwelling, provided that there is no
encroachment into any minimum side yard. There shall be no
encroachment permitted into that part of the rear yard
extending from the face of the rear wall of the existing dwelling
to the rear property line. Subsection F(2)(c) of this § 84-58
shall not apply. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
(f) A building may be enlarged within the existing building
footprint by the construction or enlargement of one or more
additional stories or parts thereof not exceeding the maximum
height limitation for the district in which the building is
located. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
G. Conforming uses of nonconforming buildings on nonconforming lots.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) A nonconforming building existing on a nonconforming lot at the
effective date or amendment of this chapter, if such building is used
in conformity with the use provisions of the district in which it is
located, may be enlarged or additional buildings may be
constructed, subject to the following: [Amended 10-25-1994 by
Ord. No. 3-1994]
(a) Provided that all of the area and bulk regulations (except
minimum lot size and minimum lot width at the building line)
and all design standards for the district in which the lot is
located are complied with and not exceeded. No building which
exceeds minimum lot coverage or height limitations of the
district shall be enlarged or extended.
§ 84-58 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-58
72:805
(b) A building may be enlarged within the existing building
footprint by the construction or enlargement of one or more
additional stories or parts thereof not exceeding the maximum
height limitation for the district in which the building is
located.
(c) A nonconforming building located wholly or partially outside
the building envelope shall be subject to the provisions of
Subsection F(2)(b) through (d) of this § 84-58.
(d) If a lot on which a single-family detached dwelling has been
constructed is rendered nonconforming in minimum lot size
and location of the dwelling on the lot, by an amendment to this
chapter adopted after the construction and residential use and
occupancy of such dwelling, the owner may, as of right, enlarge
the dwelling laterally along and within the existing building
setback of such dwelling, provided that there is no
encroachment into any minimum side yard and/or the owner
may, as of right, enlarge the dwelling laterally along the rear
wall of the existing dwelling, provided that there is no
encroachment into any minimum side yard. There shall be no
encroachment permitted into that part of the rear yard
extending from the face of the rear wall of the dwelling to the
rear property line, absent the grant of a special exception as
provided for in § 84-58G(1)(e). Subsection F(2)(c) of this
§ 84-58 shall not apply.
(e) If a lot on which a single-family detached dwelling has been
constructed is rendered nonconforming in minimum lot size by
an amendment to this chapter adopted after the construction
and residential use and occupancy of such dwelling, subject to
the granting of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, the owner may enlarge the dwelling by encroachment
into the existing rear yard, provided that there is no
encroachment of such enlargement within any side yard and
the dwelling, as enlarged, is a minimum of 30 feet from the
rear property line in the R-2 District and a minimum of 20 feet
from the rear property line in the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
Subsection F(2)(c) of this § 84-58 shall not apply.
(f) Such enlargements or additional buildings shall be limited to
the lot which was in single and separate ownership at the
effective date or amendment of this chapter. If the owner of
such lot owns or controls adjacent land sufficient to enable
such owner to enlarge the lot in conformity or more nearly in
conformity with the district regulations, he shall be required to
enlarge the lot before any building enlargement or addition is
permitted; provided, however, that any such enlargement or
addition on a nonconforming lot shall not create nonconformity
of any kind on such adjacent land.
§ 84-58 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-58
72:806
H. Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings on conforming lots.
[Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) A building which is conforming in area and bulk regulations and
design standards on a conforming lot which houses a
nonconforming use may be increased in area by enlargement of the
existing building or by construction of additional buildings, subject
to the following requirements:
(a) A special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for
expansion of the proposed use.
(b) The existing building plus such extension, enlargement or
additional buildings do not exceed the area and bulk
regulations or design standards for the district in which the lot
is located or for that use in a zoning district where the use is
allowed or otherwise cause the lot to become nonconforming.
(c) The area of such building shall not be enlarged nor shall any
additional buildings be constructed which exceed in floor area
more than 25% of the floor area of such building on the date it
first became nonconforming.
(d) The enlargement or additional building for extension of a
nonconforming use shall be limited to the lot which was in
single and separate ownership at the effective date or
amendment of this chapter.
I. Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings on nonconforming lots.
Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings located on nonconforming
lots shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection H of this section.
J. Nonconforming uses of nonconforming buildings on conforming lots. A
nonconforming use of a nonconforming building located on a
conforming lot shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) In all districts, buildings nonconforming in area and bulk by
exceeding the allowable lot coverage or height for the district shall
not be enlarged or additional buildings constructed.
(2) In all districts, buildings nonconforming in location on the lot by
reason of being closer to a lot line or setback line than the
minimum regulations established for the district may be enlarged
or additional buildings constructed, subject to the following
provisions: [Amended 9-24-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
(a) A special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for
expansion of the existing use.
(b) The existing building plus such extension or enlargement or
additional buildings do not exceed the area and bulk
regulations or design standards for the district in which the lot
is located.
§ 84-58 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-58
72:807
(c) The area of such building shall not be enlarged nor shall any
additional buildings be constructed which exceed in floor area
more than 25% of the floor area of such building on the date it
first became nonconforming.
(d) The enlargement or additional building for extension of a
nonconforming use shall be limited to the lot which was in
single and separate ownership at the effective date or
amendment of this chapter.
K. Nonconforming uses of nonconforming buildings on nonconforming
lots. A nonconforming building of which a nonconforming use is made
on a nonconforming lot may not be enlarged nor may additional
buildings be constructed.
L. Nonconforming lots containing no buildings. [Amended 9-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) A nonconforming lot which contains no buildings and which is in
single and separate ownership at the effective date or amendment
of this chapter and which does not meet the minimum lot size
requirement or lot width at building line requirement for the
district in which it is located or which is of such unusual dimensions
that the owner cannot reasonably comply with one or more of the
other area and bulk regulations for the district in which it is located
may be used or a building erected thereon subject to the following
conditions:
(a) A special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) The owner does not own or control adjoining property
sufficient to enable him to comply or more nearly comply with
the area and bulk regulations and design standards of the
district in which the property is located.
(c) The use of the lot and the buildings to be constructed thereon
shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the
lot is located.
(d) The proposed building shall comply with all of the area and
bulk regulations (except minimum lot size and lot width at the
building line) and design standards of the district in which the
lot is located.
(2) In any residential district, a single-family dwelling may be
constructed on a nonconforming lot containing no buildings
without the requirement that the owner obtain a special exception,
provided that the owner does not own or control adjoining property
sufficient to enable him to comply or more nearly comply with all of
the area and bulk requirements for the district, and provided,
further, that all setback, yard coverage and other requirements for
§ 84-58 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-58
72:808
the district are met; otherwise, a special exception shall be
required.
M. Application to accessory uses. The provisions of this article relative to
continuation and extension of nonconforming uses shall not apply or be
applicable to an accessory use.
N. Standards applicable to nonconformities and to imposition of
requirements by the Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 9-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 5-1991]
(1) In passing upon any application for a special exception made with
respect to the provisions of this article, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall require the applicant to strictly comply with the provisions of
this article. No special exception shall be granted in violation of the
area and bulk regulations or design standards of this chapter,
except as expressly provided for in this article or unless a variance
is granted from any applicable area and bulk regulation or design
standard otherwise applicable. The owner of a nonconformity has
no inherent right to build in gross conflict with setback, side and
rear yard requirements, coverage requirements or other area and
bulk regulations or design standards of the district in which the
property is located. For purposes of these provisions, the term
"area and bulk regulations" shall mean the lot size, lot width at
building line, lot width at street right-of-way line, lot coverage,
green area, building setback line, side yard, rear yard, maximum
building height and similar regulations established in each of the
district regulations and the term "building envelope" shall mean
that area established by the district's minimum yard and building
setback regulations within a lot in which a building or structure
may be located.
(2) In those districts in which the district regulations establish
different area and bulk regulations for uses permitted as of right
and for uses permitted by special exception or by conditional use,
no lot shall be construed to be nonconforming, for purposes of the
regulations established in this article, which complies with the
minimum lot size requirement applicable to uses permitted as of
right. Uses by special exception and/or conditional use shall not be
permitted on any such lot, and the area and bulk regulations
applicable to special exception and/or conditional use shall not
render the lot nonconforming unless the applicant demonstrates
that the lot cannot reasonably be used for any use permitted as of
right in such district or unless the area and bulk regulations
applicable to such uses permitted by special exception or
conditional use are the same as those applicable to uses as of right.
(3) No provision of this article which establishes a twenty-five-percent
limitation on the expansion of a nonconforming use shall be
construed to automatically authorize an expansion to such twentyfive-
percent maximum. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to
§ 84-58 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-58
72:809
§ 84-59. Change of use; abandonment of use; restoration. [Amended
10-27-1981 by Ord. No. 10-1981]
prove the need for such expansion consistent with established
principles of law. When such expansion has been permitted, no
further expansion shall be allowed either by action of the Zoning
Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board.
O. If the residential use of a single-family detached residential dwelling is
rendered nonconforming by an amendment to this chapter adopted
after the construction and residential use and occupancy of such
dwelling changing the zoning classification of the lot on which the
dwelling is located to any commercial or industrial zoning district
classification provided for in § 84-4 of this chapter, such dwelling may
be extended and enlarged on the lot held in single and separate
ownership at the time of such amendment subject to compliance with
the area and bulk regulations and design standards applicable to the
R-3 Residential Zoning District and to the owners' execution of a
covenant running with the land, in form suitable for recordation,
binding and enforceable by the Township against the owners, their
heirs, successors, administrators and assigns, in which the owner
agrees on his or their behalves that, upon cessation of the residential
use and occupancy, the lot and dwelling shall be used and occupied only
in compliance with the use and area and bulk regulations and the
design standards of the underlying commercial or industrial zoning, as
the case may be, and that the extension/enlargement authorized by this
subsection shall be removed. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
A. Change of use. A lawful nonconforming use of land or of a building or
other structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use but
may only be changed to a use permitted by the applicable zoning
regulations for the district in which the land, building or structure is
located. [Amended 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1-1992]
B. Abandonment of use. Whenever a nonconforming use of land or of a
building or other structure or any portion thereof is abandoned or
discontinued for a continuous period of one year or more, such
abandonment or discontinuance shall be presumed to constitute an
intention to abandon or discontinue such use and any subsequent use of
such land, building or structure shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1-1992]
C. Restoration. Any lawful nonconforming building or other structure
which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion,
windstorm or other similar act or cause or a nonconforming building
which has been legally condemned may be reconstructed and used for
the same nonconforming use, provided that the reconstructed buildings
shall not exceed in height, area and volume the building destroyed or
condemned and the building reconstruction shall be commenced within
§ 84-58 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-59
72:810
§ 84-60. Nonconforming signs.
§ 84-61. Registration of nonconformity.
The Zoning Officer shall compile and maintain a registration file or list of
all nonconforming uses and structures within West Goshen Township. The
Zoning Officer shall give notice of the registration or refusal to register in
the manner provided in § 84-62B(5) and, in addition, shall send notice of
such action to the property owner and any occupant or user thereof. Any
person aggrieved by the Zoning Officer's registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use or structure shall appeal in the manner and within
the time limits provided in § 84-72 of this chapter or be forever barred
therefrom.
one year from the date the building was destroyed or condemned and
shall be carried on without interruption.
A. Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising device existing at the time
of the passage of this chapter that does not conform with the
regulations of the district in which it is located shall be considered a
nonconforming sign and may be used in its existing location, provided
that it is maintained in good condition and repair at all times.
B. Nonconforming signs once removed may be replaced only with
conforming signs; however, legal nonconforming signs may be
repainted or, after issue of a permit, repaired or modernized, provided
that such repaired or modernized sign does not exceed the dimensions
of the existing sign.
§ 84-59 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-61
72:811

ARTICLE XVI
Administration
§ 84-62. Zoning Officer; duties.
A. Zoning Officer. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Officer
and may appoint such Deputy Zoning Officers as it determines
necessary. Neither the Zoning Officer nor any of his deputies shall hold
any elective office in the Township. The Zoning Officer and his deputies
shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and
shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or
change of use which does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning
Officer and his deputies are hereby given the power and authority to
enforce this chapter and are authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
their employment. They shall be appointed by the Board at its annual
reorganization meeting for terms of one year and shall thereafter be
appointed annually to serve for terms of one year and/or until their
successors are appointed. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
B. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(1) To examine all applications for permits.
(2) To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter and as may be
subsequently amended.
(3) To record and file all applications for permits and accompanying
plans and documents and keep them for public record.
(4) To issue permits for uses by special exception, variances and
conditional uses only after such uses or buildings and structures
permitted in conjunction therewith are ordered and approved by
the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors, as
applicable, in accordance with the regulations of this chapter or as
directed by a competent court of appellate jurisdiction, subject to
such conditions or stipulations contained in any such order.
[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
(5) To inspect nonconforming uses and structures and to keep a filed
record as prescribed under § 84-61.
(6) Upon the request of the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning
Hearing Board, to present to such body facts, records and any
similar information on specific requests to assist such body in
reaching its decision.
(7) To be responsible for the keeping up-to-date of this chapter and the
Zoning Map, filed with the Township Secretary, and to include any
amendments thereto.
§ 84-62 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-62
72:813
§ 84-63. Violations. [Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990 259]
Failure to secure a permit prior to the construction, alteration, extension
or demolition of any building or structure, failure to secure a permit prior
to a change in use of land, buildings or structures, failure to secure a
use and occupancy permit prior to the use or occupancy of any land,
building or structure, failure to obey or comply with an order or condition of
approval of any special exception, variance, conditional use or other zoning
relief ordered and granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of
Supervisors, as applicable, failure to comply with an enforcement notice
duly issued by the Zoning Officer or any authorized Township enforcement
officer in relation to the provisions of this chapter, failure to take any
action required as a condition of any use provisions of this chapter, failure
to comply with a lawful directive of the Zoning Officer issued under the
provisions of this chapter and the undertaking of any deliberate action
which is contrary to the terms of this chapter shall constitute a violation of
this chapter, and the Zoning Officer or any of his deputies are authorized
to take such enforcement action as they determine appropriate under the
provisions of § 84-64.
§ 84-64. Enforcement; remedies. [Added 8-22-1989 by Ord. No.
8-1989 260]
(8) To be responsible for the administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program in the Township and specifically in those areas
where records must be maintained relative to the types of land use
permitted and occurring within any identified floodplain area,
variances issued, base flood elevations, elevation of lowest floor,
including basement, elevation to which a structure is floodproofed
and other administrative functions necessary for participation in
the National Flood Insurance Program. [Added 5-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 3-1990; amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
(9) To be responsible for ensuring that applicable provisions included
in all other Township codes, ordinances and regulations are applied
insofar as they are consistent with the Township's need to minimize
the hazard and damage to persons and property which may result
from flooding. [Added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
A. Enforcement notice. If it appears to the Township or any of its
enforcement officers that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is
occurring, the Zoning Officer or other enforcement officer shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred and
also to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record.
259. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 84-63, Enforcement.
260. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former § 84-64, Violations and penalties.
§ 84-62 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-64
72:814
B. Enforcement notice specifications. The enforcement notice shall state:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps for compliance
must be completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the recipient's receipt of
the enforcement notice.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions which shall be
clearly described. Such notice shall be served by certified or
registered mail or personal service.
C. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Township shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
D. Any filing fee paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
Township if the Zoning Hearing Board or any court in a subsequent
appeal rules in the appealing parties' favor. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 6-2001 261]
E. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person who or which has violated or permitted the violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. In the event that any such person
against whom a judgment has been rendered by the District Justice
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice
261. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection E.
§ 84-64 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-64
72:815
§ 84-65. Additional remedies; causes of action. [Added 8-22-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989 262]
In base any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors, the Township
Zoning Officer or any other enforcement officer of the Township, in addition
to other remedies, may institute an appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land or to prevent in or about such premises any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation of this chapter.
§ 84-66. Appeals. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
determining that there has been a violation further determines
that there was a good faith basis for such person violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation. In that
latter event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice, and, thereafter, each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township of West
Goshen.
A. Appeals arising from a determination of the Zoning Officer or as a result
of the application of any provision of this chapter may be taken by any
landowner or person aggrieved who is affected thereby to the Zoning
Hearing Board with respect to matters within its jurisdiction as
provided for in § 84-72 or to the Board of Supervisors with respect to
appeals within its jurisdiction as provided for in § 84-73. Unless
otherwise specifically allowed by law, no person shall be allowed to file
an appeal later than 30 days after an application for development,
whether preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate
municipal officer, agency or body, if such proceeding is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such
person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. All appeals from
determinations adverse to a landowner shall be filed by the landowner
within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued.
B. Method of appeal. An appeal or application for relief within the
jurisdiction of either the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of
Supervisors shall be filed with the Secretary of the board having
jurisdiction, shall be in form and content as required by the applicable
sections of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the required filing
fee. No application shall be accepted for filing which is not complete or
which is not accompanied by the required filing fee.
262. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former § 84-65, Remedies.
§ 84-64 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-67
72:816
§ 84-67. Permits. [Amended 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 3-1983; 5-8-1990
by Ord. No. 3-1990]
A. General requirements.
(1) Application for permits shall be made, in writing, on an appropriate
form to the Zoning Officer and shall contain all information
necessary for such officer to ascertain whether the proposed use of
land, buildings or other improvements which are the subject of the
application comply or shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable Township ordinances and statutes
of governing authorities having jurisdiction.
(2) Applications for permits required under this chapter shall be
submitted by the landowner or a designated representative
thereof; however, responsibility for obtaining any required permit
in compliance with this chapter and all Township ordinances and
statutes shall be the responsibility of the property owner in title.
(a) Application for building permits. All applications for building
permits shall be made to the Township building official in
accordance with the Building Code.263
(b) Issuance of building permits. No building permit shall be
issued until the Zoning Officer has certified that the proposed
building, structure, extension or alteration complies with the
provisions of this chapter and all applicable Township
ordinances and statutes.
(3) No permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and other existing Township ordinances and
statutes, except upon written order of the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Board of Supervisors or a court of competent jurisdiction, as
applicable; provided, however, that permits issued pursuant to
such written orders shall be subject to any conditions and
stipulations contained in such orders.
(4) In all instances in which the Zoning Officer has or expresses a
reasonable doubt as to the ability of the proposed use or the land on
which it is to be conducted or erected to meet all of the
requirements of this chapter, any other applicable Township
ordinance or statute, it shall be incumbent upon the applicant to
furnish adequate evidence of compliance in support of its
application. If the Zoning Officer determines that such adequate
evidence has not been furnished, the zoning permit will be denied.
(5) The parcel or parcels of land, buildings or structures or parts
thereof for which an application is submitted shall be in full
ownership of the applicant or proof of equitable ownership shall be
furnished at the time of application.
263. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Building Construction.
§ 84-67 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-67
72:817
(6) Permits shall be granted or refused within 30 days from the date of
application and shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year
from the date of issuance. If construction is commenced under any
such issued permit within such period, the Zoning Officer is
authorized to extend the permit for a period not to exceed one
additional year from the date of expiration of the initial one-year
period. The Zoning Officer is authorized to revoke any building
permit where there has been a cessation of construction work of
more than six months.
(7) No application is complete until all necessary documents have been
filed and all fees have been paid.
B. Application for permits.
(1) Applications for zoning and building permits shall be accompanied
by the following in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the following:
(a) The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon
and, when required by the Township Engineer, a soil and
erosion plan.
(b) The exact size and location with relationship to the lot of all
existing buildings and structures of any kind, if any, and the
location and dimensions of all proposed buildings, other
structures, extensions or alterations thereof of any kind.
(c) Existing and proposed uses, giving the number of existing and
proposed units or families the building is designed to
accommodate.
(d) Any additional information that may be required by the Zoning
Officer, the Township Building Official or the Township
Engineer or as required by any other section or provision of
this chapter.
(e) A narrative description of the provision for water and sanitary
sewerage and, in the instance of an on-site sanitary sewer
system and/or water well, a true and correct copy of the permit
therefor issued by the Chester County Health Department or
other regulatory authority having jurisdiction.
(2) In all other zoning districts, the approved subdivision or land
development plan.
C. Sign permit.
(1) A sign permit shall be required prior to the erection of any sign.
(2) Application for permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer designated by the Board of Supervisors and shall contain all
information necessary for such officer to determine whether the
§ 84-67 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-67
72:818
proposed sign or the proposed alterations conform to all the
requirements of this chapter.
(3) Permits shall be granted or refused within 15 days from date of
application.
(4) No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter, except after written order from the
Zoning Hearing Board or the courts.
(5) All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans or
diagrams in duplicate and approximately to scale showing the
following:
(a) Exact dimensions of lot or building upon which the sign is
proposed to be erected.
(b) Exact size, dimensions and location of the said sign on lot or
building.
(c) Any other lawful information which may be required of
applicant by the Zoning Officer. One copy of said plan or
diagram shall be returned to applicant, after the Zoning Officer
shall have marked such copy either approved or disapproved
and attested to the same.
D. Permit for microwave antenna for satellite communication.
(1) A permit shall be required prior to the erection or installation of
any microwave antenna for satellite communication (microwave
antenna).
(2) The application process shall be in conformity with § 84-67A(2)
through (7), inclusive.
(3) All applications shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate and to
scale, showing:
(a) The dimensions of the lot and location of the buildings thereon.
(b) Details of all microwave antenna anchors, supports and
foundations and the exact proposed location thereon on the lot.
(c) The proposed location, type and height of the required screen.
(d) Design, wind load on each anchor and allowable wind load on
each anchor.
(e) Forces on foundation, including live load and dead load.
(f) Allowable soil bearing pressure and actual soil bearing
pressure.
(g) Strength and allowable stresses of cables, rods or braces;
actual force and allowable force for each cable, rod or brace.
§ 84-67 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-67
72:819
§ 84-68. Certificates of use and occupancy. [Amended 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-1990]
(h) When microwave antenna(e) are attached to an existing
structure, details of how microwave antenna loads will be
distributed to the existing structure shall be provided.
A. Certificate of use and occupancy. A certificate of use and occupancy
shall be required prior to the use or occupation of land, buildings or
structures upon completion of construction activity and prior to a
change of use or occupancy of land, buildings or structures. It shall be
unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building and/or land or
portions thereof in any manner until a certificate of use and occupancy
has been issued.
B. Form and time of application. The application for a certificate of use
and occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer
may prescribe, who may also require that the application be
accompanied by an as-built survey prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed
professional engineer or architect.
(1) Application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be made as
follows:
(a) In the case of new construction or alterations to existing
buildings or structures, such application shall be made at the
time application for a building and zoning permit is made.
(b) When no construction or alteration is involved, an application
to occupy and use land may be made at any time prior to
occupancy.
(2) In addition to information required on the Township's standard
application, the Zoning Officer may require the applicant to provide
such additional information as the Zoning Officer shall require to
determine whether the proposed use and occupation conforms to
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Issuance date. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or
refused, in writing, within 15 working days after the Zoning Officer has
been notified of completion of construction or within 15 working days of
application to occupy and use land. In no event shall a certificate of use
and occupancy be issued except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of use and occupancy
may be issued by the Zoning Officer for temporary uses such as tents,
use of land for special functions or occasions and similar temporary use
or occupancy. Such temporary certificates shall be for a period of time
to be determined by the Zoning Officer, however, in no case shall that
period of time exceed six months.
§ 84-67 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-68
72:820
§ 84-69. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. [Amended
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
The Board of Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits,
certificates of use and occupancy, special exceptions, variances, conditional
uses and appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule
of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the Zoning Officer
and may be altered or amended from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution. Until all application fees, charges and expenses
have been paid in full, no appeal or application shall be accepted for filing
nor shall any action be taken thereon.
§ 84-70. Amendments. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
E. Conditional certificates. In zoning districts in which performance
standards are imposed or in instances where the Zoning Hearing Board
or the Board of Supervisors has imposed conditions in conjunction with
any zoning application within its jurisdiction, no certificate of use and
occupancy shall become permanent until 30 days after the permitted
use is fully operating and only after, upon reinspection by the Zoning
Officer, it is determined that the use is in compliance with all such
standards and/or conditions. After said reinspection, the Zoning Officer
shall notify the applicant that the use is in compliance with the
foregoing and that the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent or
that the use does not comply and that the certificate of use and
occupancy shall remain temporary until compliance is effected by the
applicant.
A. Amendment. The provisions of this chapter and the boundaries of the
zoning districts, as set forth and shown on the Township Zoning Map,264
may be amended or changed from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the applicable provisions of the MPC, as
amended.265
B. Petition or application to rezone a parcel or parcels of property. Each
petition or application for a change in the Zoning Map shall be filed
with the Township Secretary, accompanied by the requisite filing fee,
and shall include the following information: [Amended 3-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 3-2004; 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
(1) The name and address of the applicant, the title owner and the
equitable owner of the real estate affected.
(2) The address, exact location, Chester County tax parcel number and
metes and bounds description of the affected real estate.
264. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
265. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 84-68 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-70
72:821
(3) Identification of the present zoning classification of the affected
real estate, a narrative description of the improvements thereon
and the present use thereof, which shall specify in each instance
the square footage area of all existing improvements and all
proposed improvements, including buildings, structures and street
improvements.
(4) Six copies of a plot plan of the affected real estate and all
attachments thereto, prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor, showing the location and
size of the lot with reference to adjoining properties and
landmarks, which shall be identified by name, tax parcel number
and description, as applicable, and with reference to existing
streets and rights-of-way. There shall be included and shown on the
plan the location of all present and proposed buildings, streets,
chives, parking lots, curb-cut accesses, parking lots and facilities,
screening, fences and walls, existing or proposed water wells,
sewage waste facilities, floodplains, wetlands and steep slopes.
Steep slopes shall be identified by shading on the plan,
differentiating between precautionary and prohibitive steep slopes.
Topographical contour lines shall be shown at two-foot intervals.
C. Procedure. The following procedure shall be observed prior to making
any amendment or change of this chapter or the Township Zoning
Map:266
(1) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each
such amendment to the Township Planning Commission and to the
Chester County Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to
conducting a public hearing on the proposed amendment to
provide each with the opportunity to submit recommendations.
(2) The recommendations of the Township Planning Commission shall
be submitted, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors. No public
hearing shall be conducted until the Township Planning
Commission and Chester County Planning Commission
recommendations are made; provided, however, that if either fails
to act within the requisite period, the Board of Supervisors may, at
its discretion, proceed without such recommendations.267
D. Landowner curative amendments.
(1) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Township Zoning Map268 or any
provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
266. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
267. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), regarding no public hearing unless specifically
authorized, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 9-2005.
268. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 84-70 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-70
72:822
development of land in which the applicant has an interest may
submit such challenge, together with a request for a curative
amendment, to the Board of Supervisors with a written request
that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided
as provided in MPC Section 916.1.269 The proposed amendment
shall be accompanied by six copies of the plans, attachments, and
explanatory materials describing the use or development proposed
by the landowner in lieu of the use or development permitted by
this chapter or the Zoning Map. Such plans shall be sufficiently
specific so as to provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged
provision of this chapter or Map in conjunction with such plans.
The Board shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days after
the request is filed. The curative amendment and challenge shall
be referred to the Township Planning Commission and Chester
County Planning Commission as provided in § 84-70D(1) hereof,
and public notice of the hearing thereon shall be given and shall
include notice that the validity of this chapter or Map is in question
and identify the place where and times when a copy of the request,
plans, materials and proposed amendment may be examined by
the public. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
MPC Section 908(4) through (8),270 and all references therein to
the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for purposes of this section, be
references to the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 4-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 4-2002; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
(2) In consideration of the landowner's curative amendment, the
governing body shall consider the plans and explanatory materials
submitted by the landowner as well as the following factors:
(a) The impact of the proposed amendment upon roads, sewer
facilities, water supply, schools and other public service
facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this chapter or the
Zoning Map;271
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
269. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
270. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(4) through (8).
271. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 84-70 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-70
72:823
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(3) If the Board of Supervisors determines that a validity challenge has
merit, it may accept the landowner's curative amendment, with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which
will cure the challenged defects.
(4) The landowner's request for a curative amendment is denied when:
(a) The Board of Supervisors fails to commence the public hearing
within 60 days after the request is filed;
(b) The governing body notifies the landowner that it will not
adopt a curative amendment;
(c) The governing body adopts another amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner; or
(d) The governing body fails to act on the request 45 days after the
close of the last public hearing on the request, unless the time
is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and the
Township.
E. Procedure for Township curative amendments.
(1) If the Township determines that this Zoning Ordinance or any
portion hereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following
actions:
(a) Declare by formal action this chapter or any portion hereof
affected substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such validity.
(b) Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal, the
Board of Supervisors shall:
[1] By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the
declared invalidity thereof which may include references
to specific uses which are either not permitted or not
permitted in sufficient quantity, reference to a class of use
or uses which require revision and reference to the
provision(s) of this chapter which requires revision.
[2] Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to
this chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Board of Supervisors shall enact a curative amendment to validate
§ 84-70 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-70
72:824
or reaffirm the validity of this chapter in order to cure the declared
invalidity of this chapter.
(3) Upon initiation of the procedures set forth in this subsection,
neither the Board of Supervisors nor the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative
amendment filed under MPC Section 609.1, 909.1 or 916.1272
subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the
grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in
the resolution required by Subsection E(1)(b)[1] of this § 84-70.
Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in Subsection E(1)
and (2) of this § 84-70, no rights to a cure pursuant to the
provisions of MPC Sections 609.1 and 916.1273 shall, from the date
of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the
basis of the substantive invalidity of this unamended chapter for
which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this
section.
(4) Following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment or
reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter pursuant to Subsection
E(1) and (2), the Township may not again utilize this procedure for
a thirty-six-month period; provided, however, that if after the date
of declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or
obligation imposed upon the Township by virtue of a change in
statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the
Township may utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a
curative amendment to this chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
F. Public hearing.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment to this chapter,
the Board of Supervisors shall fix the time and place of a public
hearing on the proposed amendment, which hearing shall be held
pursuant to public notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment
involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall
be conspicuously posted by the Zoning Officer at points along the
perimeter of the lot or tract sufficient to notify potentially
interested citizens. Such posting shall be accomplished at least one
week prior to the date of the hearing. In addition to the
requirement that notice be posted on the property, if the proposed
amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public
hearing shall be mailed by the Township at least 30 days prior to
the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which
real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the
area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the
possession of the Township. The notice shall include the location,
date and time of the public hearing. This public notice shall not be
required when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning
272. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1, 10909.1 or 10916.1, respectively.
273. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, respectively.
§ 84-70 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-70
72:825
of the Township. [Amended 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002;
8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
(2) Public notice of the proposed amendment shall include reference to
the place within the Township where copies of the proposed
amendatory ordinance may be examined and shall include either
the full text of the amendatory ordinance or the title and a brief
summary prepared by the Township Solicitor setting forth all of the
provisions in reasonable detail.
(3) If the full text of the amendatory ordinance is not included in the
public notice, a copy of the full text shall be supplied by the
Township Secretary or Township Solicitor to a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township, and an attested copy of the
proposed amendatory ordinance shall be filed by the Township
Secretary or Township Solicitor with the Chester County Law
Library.
(4) In the event that substantial amendments are made to the proposed
amendatory ordinance, the ordinance shall be readvertised no less
than 10 days prior to enactment.
§ 84-70 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-70
72:826
ARTICLE XVII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 84-71. Membership; organization. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
A. Membership.
(1) The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
residents of the Township appointed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. The terms of office of the individual Board members
shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies
which occur on the Zoning Hearing Board, and any such vacancy
shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors only for the unexpired
portion of the vacated member's term. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the Township.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but
no more than three residents of the Township to serve as
alternative members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of
office of an alternate member shall be three years. Whenever
seated as a Board member pursuant to Subsection B of this section,
such alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent
as provided by law for regular Board members, including
specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties of a Board
member provided in this chapter and by law. Any alternate may
participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall
not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be
compensated unless designated as a voting alternate member, as
aforesaid. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township,
including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning
Officer.
(3) Any Board member, including an alternate member, may be
removed for malfeasances, misfeasances or nonfeasances in office
or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
B. Organization.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any
action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of
the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
§ 84-71 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-71
72:827
§ 84-72. Appeals to the Board.
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties
may waive further action by the Board as provided in MPC Section
908.274
(2) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a Board member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate
as many alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may
be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until
the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority
among all alternates.
(3) Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors,
the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
Alternate members of the Zoning Board may receive compensation,
as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, for the performance of
their duties when designated as alternate members pursuant to
Subsection B(2), but in no case shall such compensation exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Board of Supervisors.
(4) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with the Township's ordinances and the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Board shall keep full
public records of its business, which records shall be property of
the Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to and as
requested by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters: [Amended
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
MPC Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2).275
(2) (Reserved)276
274. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
275. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
§ 84-71 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72
72:828
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or enforcement notice or the registration or refusal to
register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within this
chapter or any land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter, including
the floodplain regulations of Article XIX, pursuant to § 910.2 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.277 [Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 5-2017]
(6) Applications for special exceptions under the terms of this chapter,
including the floodplain regulations of Article XIX, pursuant to §
912.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.278 [Amended
7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under MPC
Section 916.2.279
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Township Engineer in the administration of this chapter or any land
use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management, insofar as the
same relates to development not involving subdivision and/or land
development applications under Chapter 72 of the West Goshen
Code.
(9) Any other application authorized by law to be taken to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
B. Zoning Hearing Board's functions; variances. Upon denial of a permit
by the Zoning Officer, the Board shall hear a request for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Board may grant a variance, provided
that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case: [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to
276. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which gave the Zoning Hearing Board exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications on challenges to the validity of a land
use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment
or adoption, was repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008.
277. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
278. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
279. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 84-72 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-72
72:829
the particular property, and the necessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, and the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
C. Zoning Hearing Board's functions. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
(1) Special exceptions. In those instances in which this chapter
provides for special exceptions to be granted or denied by the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express standards and criteria
established in this chapter, the Board shall hear and decide
requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such
standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the provisions of the
MPC.280
(2) Substantive challenge.
(a) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge
the validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map281 or any
provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit
the challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
§ 84-72A(1) hereof.
(b) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the
land of an owner by this chapter or the Zoning Map or any
provision hereof who desire to challenge its validity on
280. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
281. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 84-72 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72
72:830
substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to the
Hearing Board for a decision thereon pursuant to § 84-72A(1)
hereof.
(c) The submissions referred to in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b) of
this section shall be governed by the provisions of and
procedures established in MPC Section 916.1282 and § 84-72L
of this chapter; provided, however, that if, following hearing
thereon, the Zoning Hearing Board fails to act on the
landowner's request within 45 days after the conclusion of the
last hearing, a denial of the request is deemed to have
occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
D. Parties appellant before the Board. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
(1) Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board under § 84-72A(1), (2), (3),
(4), (7), (8) and (9) may be filed with the Board, in writing, by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any
person aggrieved. Requests for variances under § 84-72B and for
special exception under § 84-72C(1) may be filed with the Board by
any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.
(2) Upon filing an appeal under this section and during its pendency
before the Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged
ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency
or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the
Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to
the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the development or official
action shall not be stayed otherwise then by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by a court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the
applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition
to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
E. Appeals, applications or challenges shall be initiated before this Board
by filing with the Zoning Officer a petition which shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected
by the proposed relief.
282. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 84-72 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-72
72:831
(3) A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such proposed relief.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the date of acquisition thereof and the present use
thereof.
(5) A statement of the section of this chapter under which an exception
is requested or variance sought or to which challenge as to the
validity is made and a statement of the specific relief sought and
the provisions applicable thereto.
(6) A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements
and the additions intended to be made shall accompany the
application, indicating the size of such proposed improvements,
materials and general construction thereof and sufficient
information to display compliance with the area, bulk and setback
requirements and design standards of this chapter, together with
six copies of the plot plan of the real estate to be affected, prepared
by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, indicating the
location and size of the lot and size of the improvements now
erected and proposed to be erected showing all dimensions,
computations, areas, percentages and measurements necessary to
demonstrate compliance with all the applicable zoning regulations
and six copies of the application for building permit, showing the
Zoning Officer's action with respect thereto. [Amended
3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
F. Time limitation. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board
later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate
Township officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such
person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or
reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound
by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse
decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of this
chapter or the Zoning Map283 pursuant to MPC Section 916.2284
shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case
where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved preliminary approval.
283. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 84-72 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72
72:832
(2) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
G. Application deposits and charges against deposits. [Amended
8-22-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
(1) Upon submission of any application to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the applicant shall deposit as part of the application with the
Township Zoning Officer or other administrative officer receiving
the application the filing fee designated by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors then in effect.
(2) Additional deposits. If at any time the charges then made against
the applicant's deposit shall render the balance insufficient to
insure the payment of all costs, expenses, charges and fees that
may accrue in the disposition of the pending application, the
Zoning Hearing Board may require additional deposits to be made
from time to time to assure adequate funds to pay such charges,
costs, expenses and fees as they may accrue. The failure of the
Zoning Hearing Board to demand additional deposits from time to
time shall not relieve the applicant of liability for costs, charges,
fees and expenses in excess of deposits, hereinafter called
deficiencies.
(3) Upon failure of the applicant to pay the deposits, additional
deposits or deficiencies within 30 days or prior to the next
scheduled hearing (whichever be the earlier date), the Board may:
(a) Continue the matter generally until such deposits, additional
deposits or deficiencies are paid, in which case the record shall
remain open and the time within which a decision must be
rendered shall not commence to run;
(b) Dismiss applicant's appeal in which case no new appeal may be
filed if the time for filing an appeal as set forth in § 84-72F
above has expired;
(c) Determine the appeal upon the record as it then stands; or
(d) Take such other action as it deems proper under the
circumstances.
H. Representation before the Board. Any applicant may appear in propria
persona or may be represented by an attorney at law, duly admitted to
practice in the Courts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. No
persons not admitted to practice before the Courts of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as an attorney at law shall represent
any other person, firm or corporation before the Board; provided,
however, that representation of a corporate applicant by its responsible
officers shall be deemed for the purpose of this provision
§ 84-72 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-72
72:833
representation in propria persona. The Board shall have power in its
discretion to waive this rule.
I. Notice of public hearing. The Board shall give public notice of its
hearing as follows: [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
(1) By conspicuously posting written notice of the hearing on the
affected lot at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) Mailing of notice.
(a) By mailing notice thereof to the following;
[1] The applicant.
[2] All property owners within 500 feet of the subject
property.
[3] All persons or organizations who have filed their names
with the Township Zoning Officer within the last year
indicating their desire to receive such notices.
[4] The Township Secretary.
[5] The Township Engineer.
[6] The Township Solicitor.
[7] The Township Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
[8] Each Township Supervisor.
[9] Each member of the Zoning Hearing Board.
[10] Each member of the Township Planning Commission.
[11] The County Planning Commission.
[12] The Township Zoning Officer.
(b) The failure to send notice to any of the above-named or
designated persons shall not invalidate any action taken by the
Board.
J. Notices of decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be sent to all
persons designated in Subsection I(2)(a)[2], [3], [4], [5], [8], [10] and
[11]. The notices shall state the matter under consideration, the nature
of the decision rendered and the place within the Township where a
true and correct copy of the decision may be examined by any person
interested.
K. True and correct copies of the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be sent to those persons designated in Subsection I(2)(a)[1], [6],
[7], [9] and [12]. True and correct copies of the decision shall also be
sent to any person who has formally appeared as a party to such
§ 84-72 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72
72:834
proceedings and to the attorney of any such person who has appeared
as a party to such proceedings. The decision shall be rendered and
served upon the persons herein described and as required in
accordance with the provisions of MPC Section 908(9) and (10).285
[Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
L. Procedure before the Board. The Board shall conduct hearings and
make decisions in accordance with the provisions of MPC Section
908286 and in accordance with such rules of procedure as may be
adopted by the Zoning Hearing Board and in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
3-1990]
M. Expiration of special exceptions and variances. Unless otherwise
specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special exception or variance
shall expire if the applicant fails to file a subdivision application, a land
development application, a building permit or, if no building permit is
required, a use and occupancy permit, as applicable, within six months
from the date of authorization of the Board. [Amended 11-13-1979 by
Ord. No. 5-79; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
(1) Where such application is made within six months, the same shall
be prosecuted with due diligence by the applicant, and the sixmonth
time limitation shall be deemed extended only during the
pendency of such application.
(2) The applicant may apply to the Zoning Officer for a single extension
not to exceed six months from the date said special exception or
variance would have otherwise expired, provided that the
application is made within the six-month period after the grant by
the Zoning Hearing Board of the original variance or special
exception and not thereafter.
(3) If, upon such application to the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Officer
determines that there has been no change in the applicable
ordinances or the conditions existing at the time of the grant of the
original special exception and/or variance, he may grant such
extension to a date certain.
(4) Upon taking any action on such application, the Zoning Officer
shall send written notice to the applicant, the Township Engineer,
the Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors, the
Township Solicitor, the Zoning Hearing Board and any person who
appeared in the original proceeding as a party of record.
(5) Any person to whom such notice is required to be sent may appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board from the action of the Zoning Officer
in granting or denying such extension, provided that such appeal is
285. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(9) and (10).
286. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 84-72 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-72
72:835
duly filed with the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of such
action by the Zoning Officer.
N. Appeals to court. Land use appeals from decisions of the Board or from
any determination within the Board's jurisdiction shall be governed by
the provisions of Article X-A of the MPC.287 [Amended 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-1990]
O. Standards for review of proposed exception or variance.
(1) In any instance where the Board is required to consider a request
for a special exception or variance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Board shall, to the full extent
permitted by law, consider the following factors where appropriate:
(a) The statement of community objectives of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(b) The size, scope, extent and character of the exception or
variance desired and assure itself that such requests are
consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) The suitability of the property for the use desired and the
extent to which the new or expanded use is susceptible to
regulation by appropriate conditions and safeguards.
(d) The effect of the proposed use upon the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community.
(e) Where pertinent, the effects of the proposed change with
respect to conserving the value of buildings; safety from fire,
panic and other dangers; adequacy of light and air; the
overcrowding of land; and the congestion of population.
(f) The character and type of development in the area surrounding
the location for which the request is made and determine that
the proposed change or modification as permitted will
constitute an appropriate use in the area and will not
substantially injure or detract from the use of surrounding
property or from the character of the neighborhood.
(g) Guide the development of highway frontage insofar as possible
so as to limit the total number of access points, reduce the
need for on-street parking and encourage the frontage of
buildings on parallel marginal roads perpendicular to the
highway.
(h) Consider the probable effects of proposed development on
highway congestion and ensure that adequate access
287. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 84-72 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72
72:836
§ 84-72.1. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion. [Added
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that this chapter or the Zoning Map288 under which he proposes
to build is free from challenge, such landowner may advance the date from
which time any challenge to this chapter or the Zoning Map will run under
§ 84-72F(1) (MPC Section 914.1289) by the following procedure:
arrangements are provided in order to protect major highways
from undue congestion and hazard.
(2) In the case of a variance in addition to any applicable standards of
the subsections above, the more specific requirements or criteria
contained in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall
apply.
(3) In granting any variance or special exception, the Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those
expressed in this chapter as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Planning Code and Zoning Ordinance, which
conditions and safeguards may relate to but not be limited to
aesthetics, screening, lighting, noise, safety and the minimization
of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements. Each special exception
shall be clearly authorized by a provision of this chapter and shall
comply with any more specific standards relating to such exception
contained in this chapter.
(4) In the case of a request for a special exception or variance, it shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to present such evidence as is
necessary to demonstrate that the proposed use or modification
complies with the pertinent criteria or standards set forth in this
section or adoption by reference to the Municipalities Planning
Code. The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of
proof that his application falls within the provisions of this chapter
and that granting his application will not be contrary to the public
interest.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with this chapter. Such plans and other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for
preliminary or final approval or for the issuance of a building permit so
long as the Zoning Officer is satisfied that they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
288. Editor's Note: The Zoning map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
289. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
§ 84-72 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-72.1
72:837
B. If the Zoning Officer determines that the use or development complies
with this chapter, notice thereof shall be published once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. The notice shall include a general description of the
proposed use or development and its location and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under § 84-72F(1) and the time
therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board shall run from the time when the second notice thereof
has been published.
§ 84-72.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-72.1
72:838
ARTICLE XVIII
Jurisdiction of Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990290]
§ 84-73. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Supervisors shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
§ 84-74. Conditional uses. [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
A. Applications for conditional use as provided in this article.
B. Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or the Zoning
Map291 as provided in § 84-70D of this chapter.
C. Petition for amendments to this chapter or the Zoning Map, provided
that any action on such petition shall be deemed a legislative act.
D. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or the
provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control
and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to application
for land development under Chapter 72 of the West Goshen Code.
E. Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to MPC
Section 405 and applications for a permit pursuant to MPC Section
406.292
A. Statement of intent. This chapter provides for certain uses which are
conditionally permitted within the Township as conditional uses,
designated as such based upon the Supervisors' recognition that such
uses may or may not be appropriate within such specific zoning districts
where they are otherwise allowed. The Supervisors have therefore
determined that procedures, standards and criteria as established in
this section are appropriate to enable the Supervisors to evaluate and
decide upon conditional use applications. Conditional uses are so
classified because they have the potential for substantial impact upon
the West Goshen Township community as it has developed.
Consequently, these uses must comply with the minimum standards for
conditional uses herein described in addition to the area and bulk
regulations, design standards and general regulations stipulated as
controlling within the zoning district in which the proposed conditional
use is authorized. Failure of any proposed conditional use to comply
with any of these standards and criteria shall be grounds for denial of a
290. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. XVIII, Rules of Procedure of Board of
Supervisors.
291. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
292. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10405 and 10406, respectively.
§ 84-73 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-74
72:839
conditional use application. If there is a conflict between the standards
set forth in this section and the other applicable criteria and standards
elsewhere established in this chapter or other applicable Township
ordinances, it is the legislative intent of the Supervisors that the more
stringent standards shall always apply. It is not the intent of this section
to abrogate or impair any other such standards or requirements.
B. Application submission procedure.
(1) Content of application.
(a) An application for conditional use approval shall be submitted
on a form provided by the Township and shall be accompanied
by the application fee, the amount of which shall be established
by resolution of the Supervisors.
(b) Whenever a conditional use permit is required by this chapter
for any use proposed or inherent in any proposed subdivision
or land development, six copies of the conditional use
application, accompanied by six copies of the conditional use
plan, attachments and explanatory materials shall be filed with
the Township contemporaneously with the filing of a
preliminary plan for subdivision and/or land development, as
applicable, complying with the West Goshen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, codified in
Chapter 72 of the West Goshen Code. [Amended 3-10-2004
by Ord. No. 3-2004]
(c) Where a preliminary subdivision or land development plan is
not required because the conditional use does not occur within
the context of a development requiring subdivision or land
development approval, the application for conditional use shall
include a plan meeting the preliminary plan specifications
established in Chapter 72 of the West Goshen Code.
C. Administrative application review procedure. The Zoning Officer shall
review the application to determine if it is complete. If deficient in any
required component, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies in writing. If such identified deficiencies are not remedied
promptly by the applicant, they shall constitute sufficient grounds for
denial by the Supervisors of the application subsequent to public
hearing should the Board deem such deficiencies to be substantially at
variance with the requirements of this or other applicable Township
ordinances.
D. Review and decision process for conditional use applications.
(1) Notice of the hearing shall be provided by the Township in
accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.293 The Board shall schedule the first
293. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 84-74 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-74
72:840
hearing within 60 days from the date of the Township's receipt
of the applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing shall be
held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed
to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant should
complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of
the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
Hearing Officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least
seven hours of hearing within the 100 days, including the first
hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days
of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicants casein-
chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional
hearings to complete his case-in-chief, provided the persons
opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application, may, upon
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant
and municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted
an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal. [Amended
7-23-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97; 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003;
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
(2) The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Board. However, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Township, may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by
the Board and accept the decisions or findings of the hearing
officer as final. [Added 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002294]
(3) Any substantial revisions to the application or plan made by the
applicant subsequent to filing of the application or plan or its
review by the Planning Commission shall be subject to review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission as specified in
Subsection D(1) of this section prior to the Supervisors' public
hearing. In such event, the Zoning Officer shall secure from the
applicant a written extension of the date within which the
Supervisors must hold a public hearing pursuant to Subsection
D(1) of this section. If the applicant fails to execute the extension,
the Supervisors shall decide the conditional use application on the
basis of the plan and application as originally filed.
(4) A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made by a certified
court reporter, whose appearance fee shall be shared equally by
the applicant and the Township. The cost of the original transcript
shall be paid by the Supervisors only if they order it or by any party
294. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsections D(2) through (7) as
Subsections D(3) through (8), respectively.
§ 84-74 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-74
72:841
requesting an original transcript or by the person appealing from
the decision of the Supervisors in the event of an appeal. In either
case, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the party or
person requesting such copies.
(5) The Supervisors shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Supervisors. The date for the Supervisors' decision may be
extended by the applicant either on the record or in writing
addressed to the Supervisors. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based upon this chapter, the PaMPC or any rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found. A copy of the decision or, where no decision is
called for, of the findings, shall be delivered to the applicant
personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date.
If, after the conclusion of the public hearing(s), the application is
amended or revised, the Supervisors shall hold one or more public
hearings thereon as may be necessary and shall issue a new
decision thereon in conformance with the procedure established in
this section. In the event that the Supervisors fail to commence the
required hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing, or fail to complete the hearing no later than
100 days after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief,
unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of
Common Pleas, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed,
in writing or on the record, to an extension of time. [Amended
4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
(6) In granting or denying a conditional use or establishing conditions
will respect thereto, the Supervisors shall determine compliance
with the standards and criteria established in this section to be
mandatory. The burden shall be upon the applicant to prove his
case by a fair preponderance of the credible evidence unless any
rule of law shifts that burden to protestants. The standard required
by this subsection shall be deemed a part of the definitional aspect
under which a conditional use may be granted, and the failure of
the applicant to establish his compliance with all of the standards
shall constitute sufficient basis for denial of the application. In
allowing a conditional use, the Supervisors may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those
otherwise expressed in this section as they deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and any other applicable
Township ordinances.
§ 84-74 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-74
72:842
§ 84-75. General standards for conditional use approval. [Added
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994296; amended 9-25-2002 by Ord. No.
11-2002]
(7) Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Supervisors in the
conditional use decision, a conditional use approval shall expire if
the applicant fails to apply for a building permit or, if no building
permit is required, a use and occupancy permit within one year
from the date of the Board's decision approving the conditional use.
In instances where the development which requires conditional use
approval also requires subdivision or land development approval,
the conditional use approval shall be valid for as long as the
subdivision or land development plans are valid pursuant to
Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,295
provided that the subdivision or land development plans are filed
within one year after receiving conditional use approval. If the
subdivision or land development plans are not filed within one year
from the date of conditional use approval, the approval shall expire
one year from the date of the Board's decision. [Amended
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 02-2010]
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the applicant
for a conditional use approval from obtaining all other required
approvals mandated by this chapter and other applicable Township
ordinances or regulations and the laws and regulations of state and
federal regulatory authorities.
A. The following standards shall apply in every conditional use application,
and the burden of proof by a fair preponderance of the credible
evidence to demonstrate compliance with these standards shall be upon
the applicant. In reviewing and acting upon a conditional use
application, the Supervisors shall, in addition to requiring compliance
with the express standards and criteria established in the applicable
zoning district for the use proposed, require the applicant's compliance
with the following standards:
(1) No conditional use shall be approved unless the Supervisors find as
a fact from the evidence the following:
(a) That improvements to streets and highways contiguous to the
applicant's property as part of the improvements for the
proposed conditional use development, such as road widening,
acceleration/deceleration lanes, traffic control devices and
similar improvements, shall be sufficient to prevent adverse
traffic impacts caused by the proposed use.
(b) That buffer areas are provided within the applicant's property
to effectively screen the proposed conditional use from
295. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
296. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 84-75, Form of application.
§ 84-74 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-75
72:843
adjoining uses and properties whether similar or dissimilar in
type or character. Where, in the opinion of the Supervisors,
the proposed screening otherwise required by this chapter or
Chapter 72 of the West Goshen Code is insufficient to create a
visual barrier, additional screening consisting of a mixture of
plant materials and trees, both deciduous and coniferous, shall
be required.
(c) That building, structure, parking and street setbacks from
adjoining properties are sufficient to remove any potential
adverse impact or interference with adjoining uses, whether
similar or dissimilar. The Supervisors may require a reasonable
increase in setbacks and/or buffer areas otherwise mandated
by the applicable zoning district regulations.
(d) That the proposed conditional use shall be served by adequate
and effective public sewer facilities and public water for
domestic and fire supply.
(e) The applicant shall establish that the capacity of the road
network providing access to the premises in question shall not
lower the level of service of any intersections determined
critical to the proposed use below a level of service C when the
incremental increase in traffic attributable to the proposed use
is superimposed upon the existing use of the road. [Amended
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 02-2010]
(f) The applicant shall establish that the interior traffic circulation
for the proposed use at the proposed location, including but
not limited to acceleration and deceleration lanes where
required at the proposed entrances to the location, shall be
adequate to provide safe and convenient circulation for users
of the facility, visitors to the facility, employees of the facility
and all emergency vehicles that may require entrance thereon.
(g) The applicant shall establish that the facility provides safe and
convenient pedestrian access and internal circulation within
the grounds of the facility and particularly for points of access
from the facility to the parking areas.
(h) The applicant shall establish that adequate screening and
buffering is provided between the lands in question and
surrounding residential uses and residentially zoned districts
to screen the facility from view and preclude any glare from
lighting or noise from being ascertainable beyond the
boundaries of the property.
(i) The applicant shall establish that the fire company which will
provide fire protection services to the proposed use has
adequate equipment to reach the highest points of the
proposed building with ladders and hoses or, in the alternative,
§ 84-75 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-75
72:844
§ 84-76. (Reserved)
§ 84-77. (Reserved)
that the owner or operator of the facility will provide such
equipment. [Amended 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 02-2010]
(j) 297The applicant shall establish the adequacy and availability of
sanitary sewer facilities and the availability of capacity within
the public sanitary sewage system, if applicable, to service the
proposed facility or such other adequate provision for such
service as complies with the regulations of governmental or
quasigovernmental authorities having jurisdiction.
(k) The applicant shall establish that there will be no increase in
surface water runoff at the boundaries of the premises beyond
that runoff presently existing, as required by state law and
Township regulations.
(l) Public water availability and adequacy shall be demonstrated.
B. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors shall have the
power to attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
C. The standards required in this section and those applicable standards
established elsewhere within this chapter shall be deemed a part of the
definitional aspect under which a conditional use may be granted, and
the failure of the applicant to establish its compliance with all of the
standards shall, in the reasonable discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, be deemed either a basis for the establishing of conditions
or limitations on a conditional use approval or, where warranted, the
basis for a determination that the applicant has not brought himself
within the requirements for which a conditional use may be granted.
297. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(j), which required that the applicant establish that
adequate water storage was available at the facility for fire-fighting purposes, was
repealed 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 02-2010. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former Subsection A(1)(k) through (m) as Subsection A(1)(j) through (l),
respectively.
§ 84-75 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-77
72:845

ARTICLE XIX
Floodplain Regulations
[Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017298]
§ 84-78. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,299 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Pursuant to such authority and the authority granted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, the Board of Supervisors (the "Board")
of West Goshen Township (the "Township") does hereby adopt the within
floodplain regulations.
§ 84-79. Intent.
The intent of this article is to:
§ 84-80. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within any identified floodplain area in West Goshen Township
unless a permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
§ 84-81. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
298. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. XIX, Flood Hazard
District, adopted 5-17-1973 by Ord. No 2-1973, as amended.
299. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. AA 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-78 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-82
72:847
§ 84-82. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 84-83. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 84-84. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any identified floodplain area of West Goshen Township.
§ 84-85. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of West Goshen
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
article and is referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator." The
floodplain administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Engineer.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
§ 84-82 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-85
72:848
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);300 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);301 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);302 and the United
States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall
be issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the preimprovement
market value of the structure, so that a substantial improvement/
substantial damage determination can be made, in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this article.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
this article, including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation
data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
300. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
301. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
302. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 84-85 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-85
72:849
§ 84-86. Application procedures and requirements.
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the floodplain administrator/manager.
J. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof
as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by West Goshen Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this article and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
§ 84-85 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-86
72:850
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building,
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the effect of any proposed
§ 84-86 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-86
72:851
§ 84-87. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District may be
development within a Floodway Area will not increase the base
flood elevation at any point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point within the community.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
sections regarding § 84-90.12, storage and development which
may endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances which are intended to be used, produced,
stored or otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances during a base
flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 84-86 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-87
72:852
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 84-88. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 84-89. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 84-90. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during
the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number
of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the floodplain
administrator.
§ 84-90.1. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
§ 84-87 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.1
72:853
§ 84-90.2. Enforcement and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order of direction of the floodplain administrator or any other authorized
employee of the municipality shall be subject to the administrative and
enforcement provisions of Article XVI and Article XVII of this chapter.
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance
with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit
it to continue. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this article may be declared by the Board to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 84-90.3. Appeals.
§ 84-90.4. Identification of floodplain areas.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
article may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code and the
specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance303 governing actions before
the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.304
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of West Goshen Township classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 29, 2017, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
303. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
304. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-90.1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.4
72:854
§ 84-90.5. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by West Goshen Township and
declared to be a part of this article.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include Floodway Areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) The AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway
has been determined.
(a) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted in an
AE Zone without floodway, unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
§ 84-90.4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.5
72:855
§ 84-90.6. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, the Township shall
notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data.
proposed development, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, would not result in an increase in
flood levels of more than one foot within the entire community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional
office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
E. In lieu of any of the analysis or methods set forth above, the Township
may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others
of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality. In the
absence of any of the above data or documentation, the Township may
require elevation of the lowest floor to be at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
§ 84-90.5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.7
72:856
§ 84-90.7. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the floodplain administrator, with
input from the Township Engineer, and any party aggrieved by this decision
or determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 84-90.8. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the Township
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The Township shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 84-90.9. General technical provisions.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse:
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When West Goshen Township proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including, but not limited to, installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
§ 84-90.7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.9
72:857
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the applicant
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this article and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
E. Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted within the
identified floodplain area, provided that they are conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law of
Pennsylvania, Act 349 of 1937, as amended,305 the Rules and
Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, all other applicable provisions of this article and other local,
state and federal regulations:
(1) Agricultural uses, excluding structures, such as general farming,
truck farming, cultivation and harvesting of crops according to
recognized soil conservation practices, which shall in no case cause
alluvial deposits to build up in watercourses or cause undue
erosion of the identified floodplain area.
(2) Pasture and grazing land, excluding structures and cattle feed
pens.
(3) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard, excluding structures.
(4) Forestry, lumbering and reforestation, according to recognized soil
conservation practices, excluding storage and mill structures.
(5) Recreation uses, such as park, day camp, picnic grounds, golf
course, hiking and riding trails, hunting, fishing and swimming
areas, excluding structures with the exception of anchored picnic
tables and toilet facilities.
(6) Game farm and fish hatchery, excluding structures.
(7) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland or nature preserves and arboretum,
excluding structures.
F. Special exception uses. The following uses may be permitted upon the
issuance of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board as
305. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. AA 691.1 et seq.
§ 84-90.9 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.9
72:858
§ 84-90.10. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited unless otherwise provided for herein. If
a use is permitted by right, by special exception or by variance, then the
following provisions apply:
provided in this article, provided that they are conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania, Act 349
of 1937, as amended, the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, all other applicable
provisions of this article and other local, state and federal regulations.
In issuing any special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this article, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this article:
(1) Roads and permeable (nonpaved) parking areas to serve other
permitted uses in the identified floodplain area, or where required
by the regulations for any contiguous district.
(2) Utility transmission lines.
(3) Storm and sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations.
(4) Sealed water supply wells and water pipelines.
(5) Dams, culverts, bridges and impoundment basins approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection, the Natural Resource Conservation Service and any
other governmental agency having regulatory or advisory
jurisdiction over the watershed in question.
(6) Grading or fill, provided that the effect is not to substantially alter
the effective cross-sectional profile of the stream basin at the point
of the proposed use, provided that a detailed engineering study
shall accompany any application for a special exception on this
ground and must be approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, the
Natural Resource Conservation Service and any other
governmental agency having regulatory or advisory jurisdiction.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including the basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated up to, or
§ 84-90.9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.10
72:859
above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance
with this article.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including the basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE
24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including the basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 84-90.5C of this article.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards. There should be a statement
submitted with the permit application and a statement submitted
§ 84-90.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.10
72:860
with the as-built floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
(5) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit
the following to the floodplain administrator along with the
nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components ensuring that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions.
Components that must be inspected include, at a minimum:
[1] Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
[2] Flood shields and closures;
[3] Walls and wall penetrations; and
[4] Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) A flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to
be followed during a flooding event, and must include
information pertaining to how all components will operate
properly under all conditions, including power failures. The
design professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan
must include the following:
[1] An established chain of command and responsibility with
leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of
the plan.
[2] A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete their
assigned duties under the plan.
[3] A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The locations
of materials necessary to properly install all floodproofing
components must be included in the list.
[4] An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants, those
without duties for the flood emergency as well as those
with duties for implementing the plan. All possible ingress
and egress routes must be identified.
§ 84-90.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.10
72:861
[5] A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least once
a year and should be coordinated with community officials.
(6) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
installed on two separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this article, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
§ 84-90.10 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.10
72:862
§ 84-90.11. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(9) For accessory structures that exceed 200 square feet in area
(footprint) and are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required. If a variance is granted, a signed declaration of land
restriction (nonconversion agreement) shall be recorded on the
property deed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(10) Prohibit the storage of hazardous materials in accessory
structures.
§ 84-90.10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.11
72:863
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained, then the following provisions
apply:
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by, the floodplain administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gaslines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 84-90.11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.11
72:864
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 84-90.12, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
§ 84-90.11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.11
72:865
§ 84-90.12. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
below shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted due to the inherent
danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this article, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
article.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Sections
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,306
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
306. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-90.11 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.12
72:866
§ 84-90.13. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) and letter of map revision
(LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 84-90.14. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
prohibited. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 84-90.12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.14
72:867
§ 84-90.15. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the required
criteria, then the following provisions apply:
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the required
criteria, then the following provisions apply.
B. Where permitted by variance within any identified floodplain area, all
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
C. Equipment requirement:
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401-405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereto as adopted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended,
where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer's
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for
the proposed unit's(units') installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
§ 84-90.14 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.16
72:868
§ 84-90.16. Prohibited uses.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,307 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
§ 84-90.17. Existing structures.
The provisions of this article do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is
made to any existing structure, the following provisions shall apply to such
improvements.
§ 84-90.18. Improvements to existing structures.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
set forth in this article.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District, no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
307. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-90.16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.18
72:869
§ 84-90.19. General variance provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this article would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the West Goshen Township Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 84-90.20. Variance procedures and conditions.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the West Goshen
Township Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the applicable
sections of this chapter governing the Zoning Hearing Board process
and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/Districts, BFEs are
determined using the methodology as set forth in this article.
(2) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities or to
development which may endanger human life, as previously
described within this article.
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the West Goshen Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
article.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the West Goshen Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the West Goshen Township
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
§ 84-90.18 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.20
72:870
§ 84-90.21. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most reasonable application.
§ 84-90.22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percentgreater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the West Goshen Township Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year
shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 84-90.20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.22
72:871
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the property owner to agree not to
convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or lowland area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
§ 84-90.22 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.22
72:872
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including the basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 84-90.22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.22
72:873
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this article and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started
after November 2, 1977, and before the effective start date of this article
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided that the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November 2,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November 2,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also applies
to utilities and ductwork.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 84-90.22 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.22
72:874
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
§ 84-90.22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-90.22
72:875
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable to state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 84-90.22 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-90.22
72:876
ARTICLE XX
Planned Office Park District
[Added 6-13-1978 by Ord. No. 5-78]
§ 84-91. Purpose and definition.
A planned office park is a lot or tract of land, consisting of not less than
10 acres held in single and separate ownership, which has been platted
to provide for three or more permitted uses with special emphasis given
to aesthetics and compatibility of uses within the tract. A planned office
park shall be developed by a single person or body according to an overall
plan, subject to review and approval by the Board of Supervisors following
Planning Commission review pursuant to the provisions of the West Goshen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1976, as the
same may from time to time be amended. Where the developer elects to
develop an entire tract under this article, the area of an individual lot
(except for a nursing or convalescent home) may be reduced to one acre,
provided that the average of the area of the individual lots for the entire
tract, excluding the area for convalescent or nursing homes, but including
any lots remaining in open space, shall be not less than two acres. It is
the specific intent of this article to provide for selected, attractive, modern
office and compatible use development in areas where traditional business
or industrial development would be inappropriate.
§ 84-92. Use regulations.
A Planned Office Park District may be used for any one or more of the
following purposes and no others:
A. Nonprofit recreational use.
B. Office use, including professional offices, sales offices (excluding onsite
retail sales), management concerns, manufacturers'
representatives and similar uses.
C. Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory or
similar establishment for research or product development, provided
that there is no commercial or industrial production or storage of any
commodity or substance, except for storage necessary for scientific
research.
D. Forestry in accordance with the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001 308]
E. Accessory uses to the foregoing, which may include:
(1) A cafeteria or other service facility located within the building
which the facility serves and operated for the exclusive use of the
occupants of the building.
308. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as E
through G, respectively.
§ 84-91 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-92
72:877
(2) A recreational area for occupants.
(3) Living quarters for a watchman or a caretaker.
F. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations and design standards of § 84-95
of this article and general standards of § 84-40 of this article shall apply
to all uses permitted by special exception in the Planned Office Park
District.
(1) Nursing or convalescent home, not to include a retirement
community.
(2) Child day-care center and group day-care home. [Added
4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
G. The following principal uses, as defined and limited in § 84-8, and
accessory uses thereto shall be permitted as conditional uses when
developed as required by § 84-91 and when authorized by the Board of
Supervisors subject to the procedures and requirements and the
imposition of reasonable conditions as provided in § 84-74 of this
chapter, the area and bulk regulations of § 84-93 of this article, the
design standards of § 84-94 of this article, and compliance with the
conditions of § 84-75 of this chapter: [Added 11-11-1998 by Ord. No.
14-98]
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Out-patient medical services.
(b) Ambulatory care center.
(c) Medical office building.
(d) Assisted-living facility.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Common conference rooms.
(b) Patient reception areas and business offices.
(c) Cafeteria and coffee shop for patients and staff.
(d) Maintenance shop.
(e) Laundry.
(f) Pharmacy.
(g) Sale of physician-prescribed medical supplies or devices
directly to patients.
§ 84-92 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-92
72:878
§ 84-93. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all uses within the
district, with the exception of a nursing or convalescent home:
§ 84-94. Design standards.
The following design standard shall apply in a Planned Office Park District:
(h) Optical sales and service in a physician's office or in an
ambulatory care facility
A. Lot size. No lot within a Planned Office Park District shall be less than
two acres, except as provided in § 84-91.
B. Lot width at building line: 150 feet minimum.
C. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
D. Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
E. Building setback line: 50 feet minimum for any building or parking
area. All buildings shall front on a marginal street service road unless
otherwise positioned by the Township Engineer.
F. Side yards: 25 feet minimum.
G. Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
H. Green area (landscape): 20% minimum.
I. Maximum building height shall not exceed three stories or 35 feet.
J. Paved surface area shall not exceed 55% of the lot area.
K. Public water and public sewer facilities required.
A. Screening. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a
residential or apartment district in the Township or a similar district in
an adjoining municipality, a buffer planting strip of not less than 20 feet
in width shall be established and shall consist of a variety of shrubs and
trees not less than six feet in height at the time of planting and of
sufficient density not to be seen through so as to constitute an effective
screen and give maximum protection and immediate visual screening to
the abutting property or district. The required screen shall be
permanently maintained.
B. Storage. All storage shall be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way and any residential or apartment district which
abuts the Planned Office Park District. Storage shall be within a
completely enclosed building in conjunction with the permitted use.
Screening shall consist of evergreen planting or an architectural
screen. All organic rubbish or storage shall be contained in airtight,
§ 84-92 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-94
72:879
§ 84-95. Special regulations for nursing/convalescent homes and
assisted-living facilities. [Amended 11-11-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98]
verminproof containers. No products or goods shall be publicly
displayed on the exterior of the premises.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
G. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
H. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter. Additionally, no
parking, loading or service area shall be placed in any front yard
setback area.
I. Building design. Each building shall be so designed as to minimize its
commercial appearance and shall, insofar as practicable, afford
minimal external evidence of the nature of the operation conducted
therein.
A. Area and bulk regulations. The following area and bulk regulations shall
apply:
(1) Lot size: four acres minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 70 feet minimum for any building or parking
area.
(6) Green area (landscaped): 20% minimum.
(7) Side yards: 50 feet minimum for each.
(8) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(9) Maximum building height, three stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
(10) Paved surface area not to exceed 55% of the total lot.
(11) Distance between buildings: 50 feet minimum.
(12) Public water and public sewer facilities required.
(13) Attachment. No more than three buildings may be attached to each
other. All attachments shall be by means of an alcove or similar
architectural technique.
§ 84-94 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-95
72:880
(14) Assisted-living facilities. No more than one habitable unit or
dwelling unit shall be constructed for each 2,500 square feet of
minimum lot area. For purposes of density calculation, each bed
shall be equivalent to 1/2 dwelling unit. [Added 11-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 14-98]
B. Design standards. The following design standards shall apply in a
Planned Office Park District: as required by the regulations of § 84-94
hereof.
§ 84-95 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-95
72:881

ARTICLE XXI
Multipurpose District
[Added 12-26-1978 by Ord. No. 8-78]
§ 84-96. Use regulations. [Amended 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986;
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. All uses permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial District.
B. All uses permitted in the I-3 General Industrial District.
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations in § 84-97B of this article and
the design standards of § 84-98B shall apply to all uses permitted by
special exception in the Multipurpose District.
(1) Mobile home park.
(2) Dog day-care facility, subject to the criteria in § 84-57.14 of this
chapter. [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
F. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors, subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations in § 84-38B of this article and
the design standards of § 84-37C shall apply to all uses permitted by
conditional use in the Multipurpose District.
(1) Vehicular sales and service agency limited to the sale and/or
leasing of new and/or used automobiles, two-axle van-type or twoaxle
box-type trucks and the operation of an automobile repair shop
for such vehicles as an accessory use thereto.
(2) Motorcycle sales and the operation of a repair shop for the
motorcycles as an accessory use thereto.
(3) Sale of trucks larger than two-axle box-type trucks and the
operation of an automobile repair shop for such trucks as an
accessory use thereto.
(4) Sale of consumer fireworks, subject to the criteria in § 84-57.27.
[Added 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
§ 84-96 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-97
72:883
§ 84-97. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk requirements shall apply in the Multipurpose
District:
§ 84-98. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 84-99. General standards and general performance standards.
A. All uses permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial District as per § 84-38B of
this chapter.
B. All uses permitted in the I-3 General Industrial District as per § 84-39B
of this chapter.
C. (Reserved)309
D. Mobile home parks in accordance with the provisions of the West
Goshen Township Mobile Home Park Ordinance, Ordinance No.
7-1978.310
A. All uses permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial District, subject to
§ 84-38C of this chapter.
B. All uses permitted in the I-3 General Industrial District, subject to
§ 84-39C of this chapter.
C. (Reserved)311
D. Mobile home parks subject to the provisions of the West Goshen
Township Mobile Home Park Ordinance, Ordinance No. 7-1978.312
A. With respect to all uses permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial District and
I-3 General Industrial District, the design standards of § 84-37C of this
chapter shall apply and the general performance standards of Article
XIV of this chapter shall apply.
B. Mobile home parks shall be subject to the provisions of the West
Goshen Township Mobile Home Park Ordinance, Ordinance No.
7-1978.313
C. (Reserved)314
309. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which provided area and bulk regulations for new
automobile sales and service agencies, added 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986, was
repealed 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006.
310. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Mobile Home Parks.
311. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which provided design standards for new automobile
sales and service agencies, added 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986, was repealed 6-28-2006
by Ord. No. 6-2006.
312. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Mobile Home Parks.
313. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Mobile Home Parks.
§ 84-97 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-100
72:884
§ 84-100. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article XXI providing for mobile home parks, the
definitions contained in § 102 of the West Goshen Township Mobile Home
Park Ordinance, Ordinance No. 7-1978, shall apply.315
314. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which provided general standards and general
performance standards for new automobile sales and service agencies, added 8-12-1986
by Ord. No. 10-1986, was repealed 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006.
315. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Mobile Home Parks.
§ 84-100 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-100
72:885

ARTICLE XXII
M-S Medical Service District
[Added 9-23-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80]
§ 84-101. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to further the public health,
safety and welfare by making provision for a Medical Service District to
adequately provide for centralized medical facilities to serve the people in
the West Chester region, of which the Township is a part, to encourage
location of support of medical services uses within the district in
conjunction with existing medical facilities and to provide for the expansion
of existing medical facilities within the district to service the present and
future needs of the region.
§ 84-102. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. A general hospital for humans with the following designated accessory
uses when located and operated within the hospital facility or when
operated and located on a lot immediately adjoining and contiguous to
the lot on which the hospital facility is located: [Amended 4-5-1988 by
Ord. No. 3-1988]
(1) A medical education school.
(2) Residences for hospital staff.
(3) A cafeteria.
(4) An outpatient clinic.
(5) An emergency service.
(6) A maintenance shop.
(7) Power generation.
(8) A hospital- or clinic-related laundry.
(9) Nursery school, kindergarten or child day-care center and adult
day-care center, provided that: [Amended 4-18-1989 by Ord. No.
3-1989]
(a) A minimum of 75% of the number of individuals enrolled in any
such facility shall, at all times, be comprised of the children,
grandchildren, parents or grandparents or other members of
the immediate household of the hospital employees or of its
medical, surgical or nursing staffs.
§ 84-101 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-102
72:887
§ 84-103. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
(b) The enrollment at any such center shall not at any time exceed
120 people.
(c) The center shall annually, on or before December 1 of each
calendar year, verify and certify to the Township, by completion
of a questionnaire form provided by the Township, that the
center is in compliance with the percentage limitation imposed
by Subsection A(9)(a) of this section.
(d) In addition to the minimum area and bulk regulations and
design standards established in this article, any such facility
shall comply with the minimum site standards, design
standards and regulations established and promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, the Pennsylvania
Board of Private Schools or other state regulatory agency
having jurisdiction.
B. Medical office building or clinic.
C. Pharmacy.
D. Ambulance and emergency rescue services.
E. Forestry, iin accordance with the standards in § 84-57.8. [Added
5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001316]
F. Accessory uses to the aforementioned permitted uses, but excluding
drug and/or alcohol treatment centers.
A. Lot size: two acres minimum.
B. Lot width at building line: 200 feet minimum.
C. Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
D. Building ground area coverage: 30% maximum of lot area.
E. Building setback line: 40 feet minimum for any building or parking
area.
F. Side yard: 50 feet minimum for each, except that a building on any
corner lot must be set back 20 feet from the lot line on the side street.
G. Green area which must be landscaped: 20% minimum.
H. Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
I. Maximum building height:
316. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 84-102 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-103
72:888
§ 84-104. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
§ 84-105. General standards.
The following limitations shall be applied to any use permitted in this
district:
§ 84-106. Special design standards.
The following special design standards shall apply:
(1) Hospital: four stories, not to exceed 50 feet. (See § 84-106A for
special exception.)
(2) All other uses: three stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
J. Paved surface area not to exceed 60% of the total lot area.
K. Public water and public sewer facilities required.
A. Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
D. Access and traffic control: as required by § 84-55D of this chapter.
E. Interior circulation: as required by § 84-55E of this chapter.
F. Lighting: as required by § 84-55F of this chapter.
G. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
H. Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
A. No use shall be conducted in any open area.
B. No goods shall be displayed in any open area.
C. No odors shall be emitted which are perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
D. No glare shall be allowed which is perceptible at the lot line adjoining
another zoning district.
E. No loading shall be permitted in the area between the building and any
street line.
F. No noise emanating from a use in this district shall exceed the level of
ordinary conversation at the rear lot line. Short, intermittent noise
peaks may be permitted if they do not exceed normal traffic noise
peaks.
§ 84-103 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-106
72:889
§ 84-107. Special use regulations.
The following uses shall be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter. The area and bulk regulations, design standards and general
standards established by this article shall apply.
A. The height of the general hospital building may exceed the maximum
building height regulation of § 84-103I when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to Article XVII of this
chapter, provided that the applicant demonstrates by a clear
preponderance of the evidence that the proposed structure can be
serviced by existing fire-fighting equipment, and provided, further, that
the height of such building shall be limited in any event to no more than
eight stories or 80 feet, whichever is the lesser.
A. A helicopter pad, provided that it is a rooftop type, and provided,
further, that the applicant establishes by a clear preponderance of the
evidence that its use is intended for emergency services use only and
not for general transportation.
§ 84-106 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-107
72:890
ARTICLE XXIII
Airport Zoning Regulations
[Added 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 2-1983]
§ 84-108. Purpose and intent.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport
Zoning Act, Act of April 17, 1945, P.L. 237, as amended.317 It is hereby found
that obstructions have the potential for endangering the lives and property
of users of the existing airport located in the Township and property or
occupants of land in its vicinity; that obstructions may affect existing and
future instrument-approach minimums of the airport; and that obstructions
may reduce the size of areas available for landing, takeoff and maneuvering
of aircraft, thereby creating a danger to the health, safety and general
welfare of the users thereof and the property or occupants of land in the
vicinity thereof. Accordingly, it is declared that:
§ 84-109. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
AIRPORT — See "commercial airport" per § 84-8.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet from sea level, which is 465 feet.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 84-111 of this article. In plan, the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES —
These zones as set forth in § 84-110 of this article.
CONICAL SURFACED — A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
A. The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of
being a public danger or nuisance;
B. It is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a
hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
C. The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the
extent legally permissible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
317. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
§ 84-108 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-109
72:891
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument-approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or having area-type navigation equipment for which a
straight-in nonprecision-instrument-approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 84-111 of this article.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; when the runway has
no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary
surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface
is 500 feet. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area in an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — As defined in § 84-8, but also to include any object,
including a mobile or immobile object, constructed or installed by man,
including but without limitation buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at ninetydegree
angles to the runway center line and the runway center line
extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from
the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
§ 84-110. Airport zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath
the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces as they apply to the airport. Such zones shall be depicted on an
Airport Zoning Map to consist of one sheet and to be adopted as part of
and on the effective date of this article. Such map shall be attached to the
Township Zoning Map and become a part thereof. In addition, those areas
§ 84-109 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-110
72:892
designated as airport zones may also, in addition or substitution, be shown
on the Township Zoning Map. An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
§ 84-111. Height limitations.
A. Nonprecision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. The inner edge of
this Approach Zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 500 feet wide. The Approach Zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the
runway.
B. Transitional Zones. The Transitional Zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
C. Horizontal Zone. The Horizontal Zone is established by swinging arcs of
five-thousand-foot radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs. The Horizontal Zone does not include the
Approach and Transitional Zones.
D. Conical Zone. The Conical Zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be
erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in
any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable
height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height
limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as
follows:
(1) Nonprecision Instrument Runway Approach Zone: slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
(2) Transitional Zones: slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation, except that a building may be
constructed within the Transitional Zone to a maximum height of
up to 50 feet (subject to the height limitations imposed by other
provisions of this chapter with respect to the permitted height of
buildings in any zoning district, which provisions shall apply) as
provided in Subsection E of this section. In addition to the
foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet
§ 84-110 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-111
72:893
§ 84-112. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, no use may
be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in
such manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the
airport.
§ 84-113. Nonconforming uses.
outward for each foot upward beginning at the side of and at the
same elevation as the approach surface and extending to where
they intersect the conical surface, which is 465 feet above mean
sea level.
(3) Horizontal Zone: established at 150 feet above the airport elevation
or at a height of 615 feet above the mean sea level.
(4) Conical Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and at 150 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation.
B. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or
growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the
land, except within the primary surface area, where no permanent
structure or tree shall be permitted above the elevation of the primary
surface, subject to the other applicable height regulations of this
chapter for the applicable zoning district.
A. Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change
or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this article or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall
require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of
any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date of this article and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of such marker and lights as shall be deemed necessary the
Zoning Officer to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of
the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and
§ 84-111 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-113
72:894
§ 84-114. Permits.
lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of
West Goshen Township.
A. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1)(a), (b) and (c)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected, altered, extended or otherwise
established and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created
unless a permit there for shall have been applied for and granted.
Each application for a permit shall indicate is desired with
sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the
resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted, subject to the other requirements and
conditions of this chapter. No permit for a use inconsistent with the
provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has
been approved in accordance with Subsection D of this section.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Zone and
Conical Zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the Approach Zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when such tree or structure would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such Approach Zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the Transitional Zones
beyond the perimeter of the Horizontal Zone, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such Transitional Zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this article except as set forth in
§ 84-111B.
B. Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
§ 84-113 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-114
72:895
§ 84-115. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees or the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 84-116. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article should be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction for
any reason whatsoever, such declaration shall not affect the remaining
portions of this article which shall remain in full force and effect. To that
end, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable.
use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto or
than it is when the application for a permit is made.
C. Nonconforming uses. The extension, restoration, cessation or
abandonment of nonconforming trees or structures shall be governed
by the nonconforming use regulations set forth in Article XV of this
chapter; provided, however, that no permit shall be granted that would
permit such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations provided for in this
article.
D. Variances. Any person who desires to erect or increase the height of any
structure or permit the growth of any tree or use property in a manner
which is not in strict accordance with the regulations prescribed in this
article must apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance from such
regulations. The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a
determination made by the Federal Aviation Administration of the affect
of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable air space within the area affected by this
article. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a
literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that the relief granted will not jeopardize the
public health, safety and general welfare or create a hazard to air
navigation.
E. Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this
article, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure, tree
or other obstruction in question to install, operate and maintain, at the
owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If
deemed proper by the Zoning Hearing Board, this condition may be
modified to require the owner to permit the Township, at its expense, to
install, operate and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
§ 84-114 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-116
72:896
ARTICLE XXIV
RGC Residential Golf Course District
[Added 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 9-1988]
§ 84-117. Intent; purpose.
§ 84-118. Administration; applications to be treated as conditional
use applications.
It is not the intention of the Board of Supervisors by the adoption of
this article to provide for the establishment of a Planned Residential
Development controlled by Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.318 Rather, the Board shall hear and consider applications for
development within the RGC Residential Golf Course District as conditional
use applications, the approval of which shall be subject to such reasonable
conditions as the Board shall, in its discretion, determine necessary.
§ 84-119. Conditions for development.
The following are prerequisite conditions of a development plan within
the RGC Residential Golf Course District, and no development shall be
approved that does not strictly comply with the following requirements:
A. The intent of this district is to further the objectives of this chapter by
permitting the coordinated development of residential dwellings as an
integral part of a golf course community, which provides a high ratio of
open space to land development, while at the same time providing for a
variety of housing types, subject to the provision for public sewer and
public water.
B. This article establishes performance criteria to permit a residential golf
course development, and such development will result in a more
desirable environment, provide for the sufficient use of land, encourage
the reservation and intelligent use of open space, enhance recreation
opportunities and amenities and better the overall appearance of the
community.
C. Single-family detached residential cluster development pursuant to the
open space design option regulations of Article XXV is permitted when
property within the RGC District is not developed as part of a golf
course pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section, when
authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors. [Added
5-23-1995 by Ord. No. 4-1995]
A. Any tract of land, hereinafter known as the "development tract,"
proposed to be developed shall be in single and separate ownership or,
in the case of multiple tracts and separate ownership proposed to be
combined for such development, at the time the application is filed with
the Board, there shall be submitted therewith a written agreement in
318. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
§ 84-117 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-119
72:897
§ 84-120. Use regulations.
The following principal uses shall be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use, subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of this
article and the imposition of such reasonable conditions as the Board shall
determine necessary:
the form of a declaration of restrictions, covenants and easements, in
a form suitable for recordation, which imposes upon all such tracts
the condition that they be developed in accordance with a single plan,
with common authority and common responsibility, so that the tracts so
combined are developed as a single development tract in accordance
with the zoning regulations of this district and the subdivision and land
development regulations established in Chapter 72 of this Code.
B. The development tract shall be a contiguous minimum area of 115
acres, provided that, if the applicant proposes to develop a
championship golf course, as that term is defined by the Professional
Golfers Association, the minimum development tract area shall be 175
contiguous acres. If an existing golf course is proposed to be expanded
and will be utilized and integrated as a part of the expanded golf
course, that area of ground comprising the existing golf course may be
included as forming a part of the required minimum development tract
area; provided, however, within the area comprising the expanded golf
course area there shall be not less than 6.3 acres per hole for a
nonchampionship golf course and 9.7 acres per hole for a championship
golf course.
C. The tract shall be served by public sanitary sewers and by a public
water supply system.
A. A unified development of single-family detached dwellings, attached
single-family dwellings or any reasonable combination thereof, when
planned, designed and constructed in conjunction with and as part of a
golf course, with residential units located throughout the course, along
and integrated with the course's fairways.
B. Any of the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Customary residential accessory uses.
(2) Customary golf course accessory uses, including clubhouse,
maintenance buildings and structures, recreational uses, such as
tennis courts, swimming pool, multipurpose courts, sports field,
hiking, walking and bicycle paths, and other active and passive
recreational facilities.
C. A unified development of single-family detached dwellings and
customary residential accessory uses when designed and developed as
a cluster development pursuant to the open space design option
regulations of Article XXV of this chapter, when approved by the Board
of Supervisors as a conditional use pursuant to § 84-123 of this Article
§ 84-119 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-120
72:898
§ 84-121. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply and shall govern the
design, approval and implementation of any development permitted within
this district:
XXIV. The R-3 Residential District shall be considered an overlay
district on the RGC District for purposes of the applicability of the
Article XXV regulations to the use and development permitted by this
Subsection C; provided, however, that only the regulations of §§ 84-124
through 84-129 of Article XXV shall apply to the use and development
permitted in the RGC District by this Subsection C. No other uses
or development otherwise permitted by the R-3 Residential District
regulations shall be permitted in the RGC District. The provisions of
§§ 84-119, 84-121 and 84-122 of this article shall not apply to a use and
development permitted by this Subsection C in the RGC District.
D. Forestry shall be permitted by right, subject to the standards in
§ 84-57.8. [Added 5-9-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
A. Density. The following standards shall govern the density of dwelling
units permitted on the development tract:
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units allowable on the
development tract shall be calculated by multiplying the total
number of acres located wholly within West Goshen Township in
the development tract by 1.0.
(2) The Board, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, may, but
shall not be required to, increase the allowable density to not more
than 1.2 dwelling units per acre, calculated in accordance with
Subsection A(1), if the Board determines that:
(a) The objectives of this article can be achieved by permitting
such maximum density.
(b) The developer agrees to such development restrictions,
whether greater than and/or additional to the minimum
development standards imposed by this chapter, as the Board
shall require.
(c) The developer proves by clear and convincing evidence that a
greater density will preserve, rather than destroy, the
environmental features of the development tract.
(d) Compliance with the area and bulk regulations and the design
standards are demonstrated.
B. Maximum development tract coverage: 30%.
C. Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
§ 84-120 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-121
72:899
D. Minimum building setback line: 40 feet; provided, however, that where
the developer proposes that the streets throughout the development
tract not be dedicated to the Township as public streets but remain
under the ownership and control of the homeowners' association
proposed to be established for the development, the required right-ofway
width may be reduced to 40 feet and the required cartway width
may be reduced to 22 feet. No parking shall be permitted in the
cartway. In that latter instance, the minimum building setback may be
reduced to 15 feet from the cartway surface, except where a frontloading
garage fronts on the street, in which case the minimum setback
shall be 25 feet from the edge of the cartway.
E. Minimum development tract perimeter setback. All buildings and
structures shall be setback a minimum of 40 feet from the development
tract perimeter. The required setback shall be doubled along that part
of the development tract perimeter which abuts existing residential
uses, except when a single continuous common tract/residential
boundary does not exceed by five times the length of all building faces
proposed to be constructed along any such portion of the tract
perimeter. Thus, if the common tract/residential boundary length is 300
feet and the building faces proposed to be constructed along that
portion of the perimeter exceed a total of 60 feet, the required
minimum setback shall be 80 feet. For purposes of this provision, a
"building face" is defined as the front, side or rear of any building or
structure.
F. Maximum number of attached units: three.
G. Minimum building separation. No building or structure, except
landscape walls, shall be erected within 25 feet of any other building or
structure, provided that a building separation of not less than 10 feet
between buildings or structures shall be permitted if no more than 30%
of the buildings housing residential units are separated by not less than
a twenty-five-foot building separation on each side.
H. Required open space. At least 50% of the development tract shall be
designated as a golf course and shall be deed-restricted to that use. On
each development plan, the open space shall be identified and
designated as common open space, which shall include that portion of
the open space not dedicated and part of the golf course, and the golf
course area itself, which shall include all tees, greens, fairways,
pathways and other necessary and integral parts of the golf course. If
an existing golf course is to be expanded and no uses permitted by
§ 84-120A and B(1) are proposed to be constructed upon the ground
occupied by the existing golf course, only the expanded golf course area
shall be required to be deed-restricted. With respect to all such open
space, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) No such open space shall be accepted for dedication to the
Township, unless specifically so required by the Board.
§ 84-121 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-121
72:900
§ 84-122. Design standards.
The following design standards shall apply:
(2) The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for
the ownership and maintenance of both the non-golf course and
golf course open space, and such organization shall not be
dissolved nor shall it dispose of the common open space, by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization conceived and established to
own and maintain the common open space; provided, however, that
the golf course open space may be owned by a public or private
organization or entity separate and apart from the homeowners'
association for the residential development. In the case of the
expansion of an existing golf course, this requirement shall apply
only to that portion of the development tract constituting the
expanded golf course area and not to the ground occupied by the
existing golf course.
(3) Both the homeowners' association documents and the declaration
of restrictions, covenants and easements or other recordable
document by which the golf course is restricted to use as a golf
course and from further subdivision or land development shall give
the Township the powers provided for in Section 705(b)(2) and (3)
of the Municipalities Planning Code.319
(4) The developer shall be required to set aside and dedicate for park,
open space and recreation use generally accessible land based on a
formula of one acre for each 20 dwelling units or part thereof. This
land need not be located on the site but must be acceptable to the
Supervisors. In lieu of the requirements of this subsection, the
Township shall have the option of accepting a capital contribution
to the West Goshen Township Park, Open Space and Recreation
Reserve Fund in such amount as approved by the Board of
Supervisors. This requirement shall be in lieu of § 72-35A of this
Code, but the developer shall otherwise be required to comply with
§ 72-35C thereof.
(5) All open space created within the tract shall be deed-restricted
against any use, except as active and passive open space, a golf
course or any recreational use normally operated by a country club.
A. Parking: as required by § 84-55I and J, as applicable, of this chapter.
B. Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
C. Screening and tree preservation.
(1) The proposed development plan shall be conceived so as to
preserve or enhance the natural site features of the development
tract.
319. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(b)(2) and (3).
§ 84-121 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-122
72:901
(2) Existing trees that are eight inches or larger in caliper at a point
three feet above the ground level shall be marked and preserved,
unless their removal is authorized by the Board.
(3) The development plan shall identify and designate those areas
where construction of buildings and structures is anticipated, and
these shall be identified as construction pockets. A construction
pocket is any individual building site and/or construction area
reduced to its minimum required size for project implementation,
with no disturbance to areas outside of or between construction
pockets merely for ease of construction.
(4) To facilitate the processing of a landscape and screening plan, a
plant and tree schedule shall be prepared and submitted with the
final subdivision or land development plan, shall give the botanical
and common names of plants proposed to be used, the sizes to be
planted and the quantity of each, and spacing. The landscape and
screening plan shall be an integral part of the development plan,
and the Board is granted wide latitude in imposing minimum
planting requirements, including screening which shall be placed
in the tract perimeter setback areas. In the event of dispute,
however, the Board may require a minimum mixture of 10
deciduous and nondeciduous trees per gross acre of the
development tract, up to 50% of which may be required to be
planted around the perimeter of the development tract within the
required setback.
(5) The development tract perimeter setback area shall be landscaped
and shall be free of structures, materials and vehicular parking. No
driveways or streets, excepting golf cart paths, shall be permitted
in the setback areas, except at the points of ingress or egress to the
development or when existing site constraints make adherence
hereto less desirable and provided that any deviation from this
requirement is approved by the Board of Supervisors in the Board's
sole discretion.
D. Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
E. Stormwater management. In addition to the minimum requirements by
Chapters 69 and 72 of this Code, stormwater management controls
shall include development with construction pocket controls as
described hereinabove, including intermediate and prebasin control
and temporary basin with riser pipes during the course of construction,
maintained for such period as the Township Engineer shall require.
F. Streets. All streets shall meet the minimum requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance;320 provided, however,
that:
320. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 84-122 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-122
72:902
§ 84-123. Conditional use application requirements. [Amended
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]
An application for a conditional use within the RGC Residential Golf Course
District shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
application requirements of § 84-74 of this chapter.
(1) If streets are not proposed to be dedicated to the Township as
public streets but remain under the ownership and control of a
homeowner's association, the required minimum right-of-way width
may be reduced to 40 feet and the required minimum cartway
width may be reduced to 22 feet.
(2) No cul-de-sac street shall be greater than 850 feet in length, unless
serving less than 25 residential units, in which event the cul-de-sac
street length may be extended by an additional 250 feet if such
extension is approved by the Board of Supervisors. A cul-de-sac
street exceeding 850 feet and servicing more than 25 dwelling
units shall be permitted when an emergency accessway acceptable
to the Board of Supervisors is provided to connect the cul-de-sac
street to an adjoining street, thereby reducing the effective cul-desac
street length below 850 feet.
§ 84-122 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-123
72:903

ARTICLE XXV
Open Space Design Options
[Added 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 4-1993]
§ 84-124. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 84-125. Eligibility.
§ 84-126. General regulations.
A. To provide an opportunity for flexibility in lot designs and building
arrangement not afforded by conventional lot-by-lot development.
B. To provide for a more varied and efficient development pattern.
C. To retain and protect open space areas within residential development.
D. To preserve scenic views and unique or sensitive landscapes and site
features.
E. To support the specific objectives of the West Goshen Township Open
Space and Recreation Plan.
A. The open space design options of this article shall be permitted only in
the R-3 Residential District for single-family detached dwellings when
approved as a conditional use where the applicant, to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors, proves and demonstrates compliance with all
area and bulk regulations, design standards and criteria of this article.
B. The tract of land for which the open space design option is proposed
shall consist of a contiguous area of at least 15 acres.
C. Development under the open space design option shall be served by
public water service and public sewer service consistent with the West
Goshen Township Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537).321
D. The proposed development shall be consistent with the Chester County
Future Land Use Plan and the West Goshen Township Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
E. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in
multiple ownership, shall be developed according to a single plan with
common authority and responsibility.
A. The procedures and requirements for a conditional use application
established in § 84-74 of this chapter shall apply to an application for
conditional use approval for development utilizing the open space
design option provided for in this article. The applicant is strongly
encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the West Goshen Township
321. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 84-124 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-126
72:905
§ 84-127. Area and bulk regulations.
Planning Commission and to discuss community development and open
space resource conservation objective with that Commission prior to
filing a formal conditional use application. [Amended 10-25-1994 by
Ord. No. 3-1994]
B. In addition to otherwise fulfilling all applicable requirements of § 84-74
of this chapter and the Conservation Plan requirements of § 72-19 of
this Code, the required conservation plan and the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) shall be accompanied or supplemented by narrative
and additional plan or graphic information which either the Planning
Commission or the Board of Supervisors determines is needed to fulfill
the following specific purposes: [Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
(1) Provide a comprehensive inventory of open space resources.
(2) Indicated the proposed arrangement of dwelling units, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation systems and open spaces so as to
demonstrate how the tract warrants use of the open space design
option provided for in this article.
(3) Provide a narrative assessment of the potential impacts of the
proposed development upon open space resources.
(4) Suggest approaches to development design which mitigate the
impacts upon or change to open space resources.
C. The Board of Supervisors may retain such consultants as it deems
necessary to review and certify the accuracy of both the conservation
plan and the EIA. The reasonable and necessary charges incurred for
such consultants shall be paid for by the applicant.
A. For purposes of calculating the maximum permissible number of lots or
dwelling units authorized by the open space design option provisions of
this article, the net tract acreage shall be established by excluding the
following areas from the gross area within the title lines of the tract,
calculated in acres or parts thereof:
(1) Any land within the identified floodplain area. [Amended
7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
(2) The existing areas (prior to the proposed development under the
provisions of this article) within the tract perimeter set aside as
rights-of-way for streets, public or private utilities and all areas of
easements, including but not limited to storm drainage easements,
water easements, sewage easements, utility easements and
easements of access but excluding conservation easements.
(3) Any area of prohibitive steep slopes as defined in § 84-54B of this
chapter.
§ 84-126 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-127
72:906
§ 84-128. Conservation and development design standards.
(4) Any area of wetlands as defined for purposes of jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, whichever is more
extensive.
B. The maximum permissible number of lots or dwelling units on any tract
utilizing the open space design option shall be calculated by multiplying
the net tract acreage by two. The maximum number so calculated shall
be reduced to the extent necessary to strictly comply with all other
standards, criteria and regulations of this chapter and any other
applicable Township regulatory ordinances.
C. Not less than 45% of the gross acreage of the tract shall be designed as
contiguous open space and shall be restricted from further
development by deed restriction or by declaration of covenants,
restrictions and easements which shall be subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors and which shall be recorded contemporaneously
with the development plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County, Pennsylvania. Designated restricted open space shall
comply with all standards and criteria for restricted open space
established in § 84-128 of this article.
D. Not more than 25% of the gross tract area shall be covered with
impervious surfaces.
E. The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to individual singlefamily
detached residential lots created under this article:
(1) Lot size: 7,500 square feet minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 80 feet minimum.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 35% of lot area.
(4) Maximum total impervious coverage: 50% of lot area.
(5) Building setback line: 20 feet minimum.
(6) Side yard: 10 feet minimum.
(7) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(8) Maximum building height: 3 stories, not to exceed 30 feet.
A. General development standards.
(1) All applicable standards provided in § 84-55 of this chapter shall
apply to any development utilizing the open space design option.
(2) All proposed dwelling units in a development utilizing the open
space design option shall be situated so that they are set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the predevelopment tract perimeter.
§ 84-127 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-128
72:907
Existing dwellings and dwellings resulting from the conversion of
existing structures shall be exempt from this requirement.
(3) The development plan shall achieve safe and proper internal traffic
circulation, safe pedestrian movement and convenient ingress and
egress both within the development and to and from existing
Township streets. Proposed development streets shall be
connected to existing Township streets only at those locations
where the applicant can demonstrate safe and convenient access
without adverse impact. Regardless of the applicant's compliance
with the area and bulk regulations of § 84-127E of this article, no
building or structure shall be placed or constructed at any location
within the development which adversely affects clear sight
distances for vehicular traffic on any proposed development street
or existing Township street or otherwise adversely impedes safe
and convenient vehicular movement.
B. Historic resources. Historic resources, including historic structures,
ruins or sites, historic streets or roads or other transport traces, paths
and trails, shall be preserved through incorporation into development
plans and designs.
C. Open space resource protection standards. In utilizing the open space
design option, the proposed design shall limit disturbances of all open
space resources identified in the conservation plan and the
accompanying materials submitted in accordance with § 84-126 of this
article.
(1) Where applicable, the applicant shall comply with the specific
objectives of the West Goshen Township Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate maximum conservation of scenic
views from public streets and neighboring residential properties,
utilizing existing vegetation, structures or changes in topography
or providing landscaping to screen proposed development from
view. In considering conditional use approval, the Board of
Supervisors, in its sole discretion, may reduce screening
requirements when the applicants submit individual building
design plans with sufficient detail to demonstrate, in terms of how
such buildings will be viewed from public streets or neighboring
residential properties, reasonable replication of proportional
relationships of form and massing evident in existing historic
resources, including ratios of height to width, length of individual
facade segment, roof pitch, relative size and placement of windows,
doors and other facade details. The distance from point of public or
neighboring view may also be considered as a mitigating factor by
the Board of Supervisors in its review of plans for buildings within
such view.
§ 84-128 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-128
72:908
(3) Lands within the identified floodplain area shall comply with the
provisions of Article XIX of this chapter. [Amended 7-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 5-2017]
(4) Lands within precautionary steep slopes or prohibitive steep slopes
shall comply with the provision of § 84-54 of this chapter.
(5) Streams (both perennial and intermittent) and wetlands falling
under the jurisdiction of the United States Army Corp of Engineers
or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall
not be disturbed except for utility lines and permitted crossings
providing necessary pedestrian, equestrian or vehicular access.
(6) Mature trees and woodlands, including any existing trees greater
than four inches diameter at breast height (dbh), hedgerows, fence
lines, rock outcroppings and other noted landscape features shall
be preserved to the greatest degree feasible. Woodland removal
shall not exceed 40% of total woodland area on any tract.
D. Open space designation and management standards.
(1) Areas designated as restricted open space shall be consistent with
the West Goshen Township Open Space and Recreation Resources
Plan. The location and layout of restricted open space shall be
configured so as to promote adherence to the open space resource
protection standards of this section and shall further conform to
the following conditions:
(a) A portion of the designated restricted open space equal in area
to no less than 15% of the gross tract area shall exclude areas
comprised of identified floodplain areas, wetlands and slopes
in excess of 20%. [Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
(b) No portion of the designated restricted open space shall be
included within the minimum required restricted open space
area where:
[1] Occupied by existing or proposed impervious surfaces.
[2] Comprised of areas not less than 100 feet in width, except
when part of a trail system or pathway network.
[3] Occupied by stormwater management facilities, provided
that, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, areas
devoted to stormwater management facilities may be
included within the minimum required restricted open
space area where the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Board that such facilities are designed to:
[a] Promote recharge of the groundwater system.
[b] Be designed, appropriate and available as active or
passive recreational use or scenic enjoyment.
§ 84-128 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-128
72:909
[c] Otherwise conform to the purposes, standards and
criteria for open space set forth in this article.
(2) Areas designated for open space purposes may be used for any of
the following:
(a) Crop or pasture land.
(b) Cultivation of nursery stock or orchard trees.
(c) Woodland, meadow, wetland, wildlife habitat, game preserve
or similar conservation-oriented area.
(d) Public common or private park or outdoor recreation area.
(3) Subject to the provisions of measurement of minimum required
open space specified in this article, stormwater management
facilities, water well and subterranean water facilities and lines
which form a part of the public water system serving the
development and subterranean sanitary sewer lines forming a part
of the public sanitary sewer system serving the development may
be located within restricted open space areas; provided, however,
that no sanitary sewer plant or facilities of any kind shall be
permitted within the restricted open space areas. Where any of the
foregoing permitted facilities are so located, perpetual deeds of
easement containing metes and bounds descriptions of the
easements and provisions for access to and maintenance of those
facilities shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the
Township Engineer and Township Solicitor for their approvals and
shall be recorded contemporaneously with the development plan.
(4) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, a portion of the
required restricted open space may be utilized to meet the
requirements of the West Goshen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, specified in § 72-35 of the West Goshen
Code, where all of the criteria of this § 84-128 and § 72-35 are met.
(5) Except to provide for permitted open space uses specified in this
section, designated open space shall be restricted from further
subdivision or development by deed restriction, conservation
easements or other agreement in form and content acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors, approved by the Township Solicitor and
duly recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester
County, Pennsylvania, contemporaneously with the development
plan.
(6) The provisions of ownership and maintenance of common facilities
established in the West Goshen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, specifically § 72-40 of this Code, shall
apply to restricted open space created under this article.
§ 84-128 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-128
72:910
§ 84-129. Conditions to approval.
In allowing a conditional use utilizing the open space design option, the
Board of Supervisors may attach such additional reasonable conditions and
safeguards in addition to those expressed in this article, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this article.
(7) The development plan submitted with the conditional use
application shall be accompanied by a declaration of covenants,
easements, conditions and restrictions to which all areas
designated on the development plan as restricted open space shall
be subject, together with the bylaws of any legal entity or
organization by which such entity or organization is proposed to be
governed. In addition to the requirements specified in § 72-40B of
this Code, the proposed declaration shall be revised to add such
additional conditions and requirements as are specified as
conditions for approval of the conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors and required for inclusion in the declaration or as shall
otherwise be reasonably required by the Township Engineer or the
Township Solicitor. Continued maintenance and funding of the
restricted open space shall be as specified and provided for in
§ 72-40C of this Code and shall be required to be specified in the
recorded declaration.
§ 84-128 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-129
72:911

ARTICLE XXVI
MCX Municipal Complex District
[Added 8-11-2004 by Ord. No. 19-2004]
§ 84-130. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide a district in which shall
be located exclusively West Goshen Township's municipal offices, facilities,
and other uses described in this article, and wireless communications
facilities and equipment of entities holding a valid federal license when
approved and determined by the Supervisors to enhance
telecommunications in the public interest.
§ 84-131. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered and used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other.
§ 84-132. Area and bulk regulations and design standards.
A. The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) West Goshen Township administrative offices, equipment, garages,
radio towers and related facilities.
(2) West Goshen Township Public Works Department offices,
equipment, garages, materials and equipment storage, radio
towers and related facilities.
(3) West Goshen Township Police Department offices, equipment,
garages, radio towers and related facilities.
(4) West Goshen Township owned principal and ancillary buildings and
structures necessary to the maintenance and operation of the
Township and its commissions, boards and departments.
(5) West Goshen Township owned parks and ballfields for use by the
general public and organized sports activities of clubs and groups
approved by the Supervisors.
(6) Any West Goshen Township accessory use to any of the foregoing
uses.
B. The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. In allowing a conditional use,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this Zoning
Chapter.
(1) Wireless communications facilities, subject to compliance with the
applicable Supplementary Regulations of § 84-57.03 of this chapter.
§ 84-130 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-132
72:913
A. The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(2) Lot width at building line: 100 feet minimum.
(3) Lot width at street right-of-way line: 50 feet minimum.
(4) Lot coverage: 30% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each.
(7) Rear yards: 30 feet minimum. [Amended 8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
08-2009]
(8) Maximum building height: three stories, not to exceed 40 feet.
(9) Paved surface area: may not exceed 55% of total lot.
(10) Floor area ratio: 0.40 maximum.
(11) Green area, landscaped: 20% minimum. [Amended 8-19-2009 by
Ord. No. 08-2009]
B. The following design standards shall apply:
(1) Screening: as required by § 84-55A of this chapter, or as directed
by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Storage: as required by § 84-55B of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping: as required by § 84-55C of this chapter.
(4) Loading: as required by § 84-55H of this chapter.
(5) Parking: as required by § 84-55I of this chapter.
§ 84-132 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 84-132
72:914
Appendix
Chapter A87
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 84-132 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 84-132
72:915

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A87-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "West Goshen
Township Cable Communications Regulatory Ordinance."
§ A87-2. Purpose.
The Township of West Goshen finds that the development of cable television
and communication systems has substantial benefits and impacts upon
West Goshen Township and its residents. Rapidly changing and complex
technologies associated with cable television require that public
convenience and the general welfare be protected, which can best be served
by vesting the township and its designees with regulatory powers. It is
the intent of this ordinance to provide for and specify the means by which
the public interest and welfare will be protected, furthered and preserved.
As a consequence, any franchise issued pursuant to this ordinance shall
be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. Further, it
is recognized that cable television systems have the capacity to provide
not only entertainment and information services to the township and its
residents, but also to provide a variety of cable television and interactive
communication services to institutions and individuals by providing
governmental, educational and health-care communications. For these
purposes, the regulations contained herein are established upon the belief
and with the goals that:
A. Cable communication services should be provided to the maximum
number of township residents.
B. The cable system should be capable of accommodating the
communications needs of the township, both for the present and in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
C. The cable system shall be constructed and maintained during any
franchise term so that new components may be integrated into the
cable system to the maximum extent possible with existing facilities.
D. The cable system authorized by this ordinance shall be responsive to
the needs and interests of the local community.
E. The cable system operator shall be dedicated to the inherent philosophy
of providing quality public, educational and governmental access to the
township's residents.
§ A87-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-2
72:917

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ A87-3. Definitions and word usage.
Throughout this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number
include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the
singular number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
Undefined words shall be ascribed the meaning set forth in the Cable Act,
and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CHANNEL — Public, educational and governmental access
channels as defined herein.
BASIC SERVICE — A group or groups of cable service distributed over the
cable system consisting of the service tier which includes a retransmission
of local television broadcast signals, including all signals carried as required
by Sections 614 and 615 of the Act; any public, educational and
governmental access programming and any signal of any television
broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to a subscriber,
excepting a secondarily transmitted satellite carrier signal beyond the local
service area of such station.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of West Goshen Township.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, P. L. No.
98-549, (codified at 47 U.S.C.§ 521-61, together with its supplements and
amendments.), as supplemented by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, P.L. No. 102-385, as from time to
time amended and supplemented, and regulations promulgated by the FCC
(the Act).
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths with associated signal generation, reception and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable television service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the
township, but excluding a facility that serves only to retransmit television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves
only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities crosses
The one-way transmission to and/or the two-way transmission from
subscribers of video programming, or other programming services,
including data and audio service.
A.
Subscribers' interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
such video programming or other programming service.
B.
§ A87-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-3
72:919
or uses any public right-of-way, including streets or easements; a facility of
a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of
Title II of the Communications Policy Act of 1984, except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system to the extent that such facility is used
in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
system.
CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL — A band frequency in the
electromagnetic spectrum or other means of transmission (including,
without limitation, fiber optics or any other means now available or that
may become available) which is capable of carrying a video signal, an audio
signal, a voice signal or a data signal.
CLOSED CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such video, audio, data
or other service provided to institutional users on an individual application
basis. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way
video, audio or digital signals among institutions, and as may be specified
in the franchise.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBERS — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with the
business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
COMPLAINT — Any inquiry, allegation or assertion made by a resident
which raises an objection to the business practices of the franchisee.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not suitable for interference with the television receiver of a subscriber
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel that can be received only by a person
and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — The cable that connects a subscriber terminal at the point in a
subscriber's home, designated by subscriber, to the nearest feeder cable of
the system.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
noncommercial educational use.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee or any
successor thereto.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights, whether by initial authorization or
renewal thereof, granted pursuant to this ordinance to construct, operate
and maintain a cable system along the public rights-of-way within all or a
specified area of the township. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the township as
required by the ordinances and laws of the township.
§ A87-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-3
72:920
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance between the township and a franchisee that
sets forth, subject to this ordinance, the terms and conditions under which
the franchise will be exercised.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire township, or such portions thereof, for
which a franchise is granted under the authority of this or any prior
ordinance. If not otherwise stated in the franchise, the franchise area shall
be the corporate limits of the township, including all territories thereafter
annexed to the township.
FRANCHISE FEE — The maximum percentage allowed by law, as specified
by the township, of the franchisee's gross annual revenues derived from the
operation of the cable system to provide cable services.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic or foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s),
organization(s) or other legal entity and its/their lawful successor,
transferee or assignee which have been legally granted a franchise by the
township. The terms are used interchangeably throughout this ordinance.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on the cable system
specifically designated or dedicated for noncommercial government access
use.
GRANTOR — The Township of West Goshen, as represented by the
Township Board of Supervisors acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — Any and all compensation actually received
by the franchisee from its subscribers within the township, as well as any
indirect compensation as hereinafter set forth, arising from the operation of
the franchisee's cable system within the township, including but not limited
to all monthly basic service, cable service, equipment rental, premium cable
service and per program revenues, installation, disconnection, reconnection
and change in service fees, lease channel fees, late fees and administrative
fees; revenues from converter rental or sales, advertising revenues, revenue
from program guides, revenues from home shopping channels, revenues
from any such service or services that are deemed to be a cable service
and any and all compensation of any kind or nature received annually
from subscribers which is allocated by the franchisee to pay franchise
fees. Nonsubscriber-based revenue shall be calculated on a pro-rata basis
(revenue/subscribers times the number of subscribers in the township).
Except as otherwise enumerated above, "gross annual revenues" shall not
include any bad debts, converter deposits, refunds to subscribers by
franchisee or receipt from sales or use taxes or any other tax that franchisee
collects on behalf of the township or any other taxing authority or income
derived from the provision of any service not set forth in this Section 1.
INSTALLATION — The act of connecting the cable system from the feeder
cable to the subscriber terminals so that cable television service may be
received by the subscriber.
§ A87-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-3
72:921
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for the use of persons unaffiliated with the
franchisee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act.
NARROW CASTING — The ability to distribute cable programming to a
particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers.
PAY TELEVISION — The delivery over the cable system of per-channel or
per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or other legal entity and any lawful successor or transferee of
said individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation or legal
entity.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel on the cable system designated
or dedicated for noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial
organizations for which it is available for use without charge on a
nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with the rules and regulations
specified in the franchise.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once a week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days, the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park,
parkway, waterway, utility easement or other public right-of-way, now or
hereafter owned, dedicated to, held, approved or controlled by the township
which shall entitle the township and the franchisee to the use thereof for
the purpose of installing and maintaining the franchisee's cable system.
No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the public right-of-way shall
be deemed to be a representation of or guarantee by the township that
its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient
to permit the township's use for such purposes. The franchisee shall be
deemed to gain only such rights as the township may have the undisputed
right and power to authorize by its issuance of a franchise to the franchisee,
including such rights available pursuant to Section 621(a)(2) of the Cable
Act.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Where not elsewhere specified, it shall be written
notice addressed to the franchisee at its nearest principal office, which
notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than 15 business days
prior to the day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any
action which requires the giving of notice. In computing notice, Saturdays,
Sundays and all holidays on which the township's administrative offices are
closed shall be excluded.
SALE — Includes any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
§ A87-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-3
72:922
SCHOOL — Any locally funded public and private educational institution,
including elementary, middle and high schools. In the event the Cable Act
and the regulations promulgated thereunder require a franchisee to provide
cable service to colleges and universities, this definition shall be expanded
to include such entities, both public and private.
SERVICE — Any cable service, including basic service, and a service tier,
whether or not originated by the franchisee, or any other person, which is
distributed over the cable system.
SIGNALS — Any transmission of radio frequency energy or of optical
information.
STATE-OF-THE-ART — When 40% of other similar sized cable systems
owned by a franchisee in Chester County provide, or when 40% of like-sized
communities serviced by other cable operators in Pennsylvania have access
to, new services and the associated equipment and facilities necessary to
implement the new services, excluding experimental and pilot projects, the
level of service shall be described as "state-of-the-art."
STREET — The surface of and the space above or below any public street,
public roadway, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public way,
public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway,
public drive or any public easement or right-of-way now or hereafter owned,
dedicated to, held, approved or controlled by the township, which shall
entitle a franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or
transmitting cable service and facilities on or over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and
pertinent to the cable system.
SYSTEM FACILITIES — Cable system equipment used by the franchisee to
provide services in the franchise area.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity who lawfully subscribes to and
receives cable service pursuant to a franchise, whether or not a fee is paid
for such service.
SYSTEM UPGRADE — The process by which the cable system shall be
upgraded pursuant to Article IV, A87-19 herein.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Goshen and its authorized officials.
TRANSFER — The disposal, voluntarily or involuntarily, by a franchisee,
directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, of 5% or more at one time of the ownership
or controlling interest in the cable system, or 20% percent cumulatively
over the term of a franchise of such interest to a corporation, partnership,
limited partnership, trust or association, person or group of persons acting
in concert, or other legal entity. Internal reorganization in which ultimate
control of the franchisee does not change shall not constitute transfer for
purpose of this ordinance.
TWO-WAY SYSTEM — That the head-in, trunk cables, distribution plant,
amplifiers and other technical components of the cable system have the
§ A87-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-3
72:923
capability to pass video, audio, voice and/or data signals in both directions
simultaneously.
UPSTREAM SIGNAL — A signal originating from a terminal to another point
in the cable system, including video, audio, and digital signals, for either
programs or other uses, such as security alert and similar services.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for the purpose of production and/or transmission of material as
contrasted with the receipt thereof in the subscriber's capacity.
§ A87-3 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-3
72:924
ARTICLE III
Applications for Grant, Renewal or Modification of Franchises
§ A87-4. Written application.
§ A87-5. Application for grant of initial franchise.
A. A written application shall be filed with the township for grant of an
initial franchise; renewal of a franchise under either the formal, or
informal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Act,
47 U.S.C. § 546; or modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to
this ordinance or a franchise agreement. An applicant has the burden to
demonstrate in its application compliance with all requirements of this
ordinance and all applicable laws.
B. To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be
submitted together with five copies. The application must be
accompanied by the required application filing fee as established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, which fee shall not exceed
$1,000, including the township's attorneys' fees and consultants costs.
The application shall further conform to any applicable request for
proposals and all required information. All applications shall include
the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the
applicant with respect to the application.
C. All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the
township for public inspection.
A. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for
issuance of a Request for Proposals (RFP) and requesting an evaluation
of that proposal pursuant to Subsection D hereof. Upon receipt of a
request for an RFP from an applicant seeking a franchise to provide
cable service and/or telecommunications service, the township shall
commence a proceeding to identify the relevant future needs and
interest of the community and, upon completion of that proceeding,
shall promptly issue an RFP and proposed franchise agreement, which
shall be mailed to the person requesting its issuance and made
available to any other interested party. The applicant shall respond
within the time directed by the township, providing the information and
material set forth in Subsection C. hereof. The procedures, instructions
and requirements set forth in the RFP shall be followed by each
applicant as if set forth and required herein. The Township Manager, or
his/her designee, shall be authorized to seek additional information
from any applicant and to establish deadlines for the submission of that
information.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, a person may
apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited proposal and
requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection D
hereof.
§ A87-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-5
72:925
C. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and an
unsolicited proposal shall contain, at minimum, the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including the names and
addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the
applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with 5% or
more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the
persons who control the applicant and its affiliates; all officers and
directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any other business
affiliation and cable system ownership interest in each named
person.
(2) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification
of key personnel.
(3) Legal qualifications.
(a) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to
construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including
but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the
following criteria:
[1] The applicant must not have submitted an application for
an initial or renewal franchise to the township which was
denied on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a
cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community, or as to which any challenges
to such franchising decision were finally resolved
adversely to the applicant, within three years preceding
the submission of the application.
[2] The applicant must not have had any franchise validly
revoked by any franchising authority within three years
preceding the submission of the application.
[3] The applicant must have the necessary authority under
Pennsylvania law to provide cable service and/or
telecommunications service, as appropriate.
[4] A franchise will not be issued to an applicant that may not
hold the franchise as a matter of law. An applicant must
have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, the necessary
federal licenses or waivers required to operate the cable
system proposed.
[5] The township may, in its sole discretion, refuse to issue a
franchise if, at any time during the 10 years preceding the
submission of the application, the applicant was convicted
of any act or omission of such character that the applicant
§ A87-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-5
72:926
cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the township
and the subscribers of the cable system, or to substantially
comply with its lawful obligations under applicable law,
including obligations under consumer protection laws and
laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering
or other similar conduct.
[6] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in response to an RFP
issued by the township or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to
provide.
[7] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected
official of the township holds a controlling interest in the
applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the township shall provide an
opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection
C(3)(a)[2] or [5] by virtue of particular circumstances
surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to
cure all harms flowing therefrom, the lack of involvement of
the applicant's principals or the remoteness of the matter from
the operation of cable systems.
(4) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and
operation of the cable system proposed.
(5) A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system
ownership, construction and operation, and, if cable service is
proposed, identification of communities in which the applicant or
any of its principals have or have had a cable television franchise or
license or any interest therein.
(6) Identification of the area of the township to be served by the
proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed
franchise area's boundaries.
(7) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics,
head end and access facilities.
(8) Where applicable a description of the construction of the proposed
cable system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its
location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where
appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing
facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of
space in conduits, including, where appropriate, an estimate of the
cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
§ A87-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-5
72:927
(9) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each
service tier, installation, converters and other equipment or
services, as applicable.
(10) If cable service is proposed, demonstration of how the applicant's
proposal to provide cable service will reasonably meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community, including
descriptions of how the proposal will meet the needs described in
any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the
township, and how the proposal will provide adequate public,
educational and governmental access channel capacity, facilities or
financial support to meet the community's needs and interests.
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term,
including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules.
(12) If an applicant proposes to provide Cable Service to an area
already served by an existing cable service franchisee, the
identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the
potential subscriber density in the area that would encompass the
overbuild and the ability of the streets to accommodate an
additional cable system.
(13) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(14) Information that the township may request of the applicant that is
relevant to the township's consideration of the application.
(15) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and
state law requirements.
D. In evaluating an application for an initial franchise seeking authority to
provide cable service and/or telecommunications service, the township
shall consider, among other things, the following factors:
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing franchise
for the township.
(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing
franchise in West Goshen Township, including signal quality,
response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like,
has been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the
communities served.
§ A87-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-5
72:928
(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal
qualifications to provide cable service.
(4) Whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into
account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(5) Whether, to the extent not considered as part of § A87-5D(4) of this
article, the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial
support.
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property which would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services, the public rights-of-way; the
effect of granting a franchise on the ability of the cable system to
meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community; and
the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing proposals.
(7) Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other cable system in the township, or whether grant
of the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service or telecommunications service in the
township.
E. If the township finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise
considering the factors set forth above, it shall issue a franchise,
subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement. If the township denies a franchise, it shall issue a written
decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding
whether to issue or not to issue a franchise, the township may hold one
or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which
comments from the public on an applicant's proposal may be received.
The township also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on
its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject
any application which is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. This
ordinance is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any
applicant or existing franchisee standing to challenge the issuance of a
franchise to another.
F. If the township grants a franchise subject to the applicant's entry into a
franchise agreement, the township and the franchisee shall agree on
the terms of a franchise agreement within 30 calendar days from the
date of the township resolution granting the franchise. This period may
be extended for good cause by the township. If agreement is not
reached with the township within 30 calendar days from the date of the
township resolution granting the franchise, or if the period is not
extended by the township, the franchise will be null and void without
§ A87-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-5
72:929
§ A87-6. Application for grant of renewal franchise.
Renewal franchise authorizing the provision of the cable service shall be
conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 546. If neither the franchisee nor the township activates or can
activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(c) (including,
for example, if the provisions are repealed), the provisions of § A87-5 of
this article shall apply and a renewal request shall be treated the same
as a request for an initial franchise. The following additional requirements
shall apply to all applicants seeking renewal after the effective date of
this ordinance where the procedures set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(c) are
activated:
further action by the township. The township shall approve or
disapprove the proposed agreement by resolution, or may direct that it
be subject to further negotiation.
A. Within six months after receipt of notice from a franchisee that has
invoked the renewal procedures of Section 626 of the Cable Act, the
township shall undertake a proceeding, including notice to and
opportunity for participation by, the public, for the purpose of
identifying future cable-related community needs and interests,
including the costs of meeting such needs and interests, and reviewing
compliance by the franchisee with the then current franchise. Such
proceeding shall be completed within 12 months from the date begun.
The township shall submit a copy of its findings, if any, in writing to the
franchisee within said twelve-month period.
B. Upon the expiration of the twelve-month period set forth in Subsection
A above, the franchisee may submit to the township a proposal for
renewal.
C. Upon receipt of the renewal application, the township shall publish a
notice of its receipt once in a newspaper of general circulation within
the township and make copies available for review by the public.
D. Within four months of the date it receives the proposal for renewal, and
based on the standards set forth in § A87-5D of this article, the
township will either:
(1) Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to the
negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the township
and the franchisee; or
(2) Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the
franchise should not be renewed;
(3) Provided that, if the township and a franchisee cannot reach a
franchise agreement within four months after the proposal is
received, such passage of time shall constitute and be deemed a
preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed.
§ A87-5 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-6
72:930
§ A87-7. Application for modification of franchise.
An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at
minimum, the following information:
§ A87-8. Filing fees.
To be acceptable for filing, an application for the grant, modification or
renewal of a franchise submitted after the effective date of this ordinance
shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of Board
E. If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be
renewed, at the request of the franchisee, the township will commence
a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 546(c) to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)-
(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A)-(d).
F. If renewal of a franchise is denied, the township may acquire ownership
of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to
another person upon approval of the Board.
G. If renewal of a franchise is denied and the township does not purchase
the cable system or approve or effect a transfer of the cable system to
another person, the township may require the former franchisee to
remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense.
If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of
time, the township may have the removal done at the former
franchisee's and/or surety's expense.
H. To the extent that any of the substantive provisions of this ordinance
are inconsistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, they
shall not apply.
A. The specific modification requested.
B. The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of
the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial
impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved,
demonstrated through inter alia, submission of financial pro formas.
C. A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625
of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545 and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545.
D. Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the
township to make an informed determination on the application for
modification.
E. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application
and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and
state law requirements.
§ A87-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-8
72:931
of Supervisors, which fee shall not exceed $1,000, including the township's
attorneys' fees and consultants' costs.
§ A87-9. Grant of franchise.
A franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system and/or cable
service shall be granted only pursuant to and in compliance with the terms
and conditions of this ordinance. Such terms and conditions shall be
subordinate to all applicable provisions of state and federal laws, rules
and regulations. If the township approves the RFP and votes to enter into
a franchise agreement with the applicant, the applicant shall be bound
by all future ordinances and regulations of the township, including any
ordinances and regulations governing cable communications, except to the
extent that any such future ordinances or regulations increase or expand
the franchisee's obligations under the franchise agreement.
§ A87-10. Acceptance of franchise.
Upon acceptance of the franchise, a franchisee shall be bound by all of
the terms and conditions of this ordinance and all future revisions of this
ordinance and any other ordinances or regulations enacted subsequent
hereto pertaining to cable communications except to the extent that any
such future ordinances or regulations increase or expand the franchisee's
obligations under the franchise agreement. Franchisee shall provide all
services and offerings specifically set forth herein to provide cable service
within the franchisee's franchise area in the township.
§ A87-11. Authority for use of street.
§ A87-12. Nonexclusive franchise.
A. For the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a cable
system in the township, a franchisee may erect, install, construct,
repair, replace, relocate, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under,
upon, across and along the streets within the township such lines,
cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment
as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system.
B. The franchisee shall construct and maintain the cable system so as not
to interfere with other uses of the streets. The franchisee shall
endeavor to make use of existing poles and other facilities available to
the franchisee where feasible. The franchisee shall notify the township
in writing within at least 10 days and shall publicize proposed
construction work prior to commencement of that work.
C. Notwithstanding the above grant to use of streets, no streets shall be
used by any franchisee if the township determines that such use is
inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which such
street was created or dedicated or is presently used.
§ A87-8 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-12
72:932
§ A87-13. Franchise term.
A franchise shall commence upon written acceptance by the franchisee as
required by this ordinance and shall remain in full force and effect for a
period agreed to by the township and franchisee in a franchise agreement;
provided, however, that such term shall not be less than five years.
§ A87-14. Area covered.
A franchise granted under this ordinance shall include such portions within
the territorial borders of the township as the Board shall approve. In the
event of annexation by the township, the franchisee shall use every
reasonable effort in its best business judgment to provide service to the
new territory unless such territory is already being serviced by another
franchise.
A. A franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be nonexclusive.
By entering into a franchise agreement with the township under this
ordinance, the franchisee automatically acknowledges the Board's right
to grant additional franchises upon such terms and conditions as the
Board deems appropriate; provided, however, that if the township
grants an additional franchise for construction and operation of a cable
system or open video system (OVS) to another franchisee, the township
may not impose material obligations, as that term is defined herein,
which are more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing
franchise agreement, or impair any existing franchisee's ability to
perform its commitments under existing franchise agreements. For
purposes of this section, material obligations are limited to the
following:
(1) A franchisee's obligation to pay Annual Franchise Fees as set forth
in Article IX, § A87-48 herein;
(2) A franchisee's obligation to meet the customer service standards in
Article VIII herein;
(3) A franchisee's obligation to meet system requirements as set forth
in Article IV herein; and
(4) A franchisee's obligation to meet construction and installation
standards as set forth in Article VI herein.
B. In any renewal of an existing franchise, the township, should it seek to
impose increased obligations upon the franchisee, must take into
account any additional franchise(s) previously granted and find that the
proposed increased obligations in the renewal, if they are more
burdensome and less favorable than those contained in the additional
franchise(s), are reasonable under Section 626 of the Cable Act, taking
into account the costs and burdens of meeting such noncomparable
obligations.
§ A87-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-15
72:933
§ A87-15. Police power.
The franchisee's rights are subject to the police powers of the township to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of
the public. The franchisee shall comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the township pursuant to that power.
§ A87-16. Use of facilities.
The township has the right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon
the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of the franchisee,
any wires and fixtures required by the township to the extent that such
installation and maintenance does not interfere with the existing and future
operations of the franchisee and provided that such wires and fixtures
required by the township are not used to deliver cable service to
subscribers with the township.
§ A87-17. Written notice.
All notices, reports or demands required to be given by either the township
or a franchisee under this ordinance in connection with any franchise
granted by the Board pursuant hereto shall be deemed to be given when
delivered in writing either personally to the person designated by the
franchisee or when five days have elapsed after it is deposited in the United
States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage
prepaid thereon, or on the next business day if sent by express mail or
overnight air courier addressed to the parties to whom the notice is being
given, as follows:
If to Township: Township of West Goshen
Attention: Township Manager
1025 Paoli Pike
West Chester, Pennsylvania 19380
If the franchisee - Pursuant to franchise agreement.
Such addresses may be changed by the township or the franchisee upon
notice to the other party given as provided in this section.
§ A87-18. Board approval.
A transfer of franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall not be
voluntarily transferred to any other person, firm, company, corporation
or entity other than to the principal parents of the franchisee, a parent
corporation, a subsidiary or affiliate corporation of a parent company of
subsidiary or affiliate corporation of the franchise or any other firm or entity
owned by the franchisee without the prior approval of the township as to the
financial and technical ability of the transferee to operate the system. Such
permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. At least 60 days prior to
§ A87-15 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-18
72:934
the proposed transfer, the franchisee shall file with the township a request
for transfer and provide the information required by FCC Form 394. If the
township has not taken action on the franchisee's request for transfer within
120 days after receipt of such notice, consent by the township shall be
deemed to have been given.
§ A87-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-18
72:935

ARTICLE IV
System Designs and Upgrade
§ A87-19. Construction and upgrade.
§ A87-20. Interconnection.
§ A87-21. Provisions of service.
A. Throughout the term of the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall
construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the cable system to ensure
that it continuously conforms to the state-of-the-art in accordance with
the requirements set forth, as follows: new services, associated
equipment and facilities necessary to implement the state-of-the-art. A
state-of-the-art upgrade shall be added to the cable system within two
years of when they are provided in 40% of other similar-sized systems
owned by the franchisee in Chester County; or are provided in 40% of
like-sized systems owned by other operators in Pennsylvania, excluding
experimental and pilot projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
franchisee shall not be required to provide any new services unless and
until the township has approved a rate plan, where such approval is
required, that will allow full recovery of the cost of providing any such
new services over the then-remaining term of the franchise agreement.
B. The franchisee shall provide the township with a description of the
cable system proposed for construction pursuant to the grant by the
Board of a franchise, excluding any proprietary information. Upon
request by the township, and completion of the cable system, or any
upgrade thereof, the franchisee shall submit to the township "as built"
maps/plans of the entire cable system, and/or upgrade, to the extent
such maps/plans have not been previously provided to the township.
C. By acceptance of a franchise agreement, a franchisee agrees to comply
with each of the terms set forth in this Article IV, § A87-19 governing
the construction and the technical requirements of a cable system or
any upgrade of the cable system, and, in addition, to any other
requirements or procedures reasonably required by the township and
consistent with the franchise agreement.
A. The cable system shall be designed so that it may be interconnected
with other cable systems.
B. The franchisee shall, at the request of the township, and at its own
expense, interconnect with other cable and telecommunications
systems within such reasonable time as the Board shall require.
A. After cable service has been established by activating trunk distribution
cable for any area, the franchisee shall provide cable/
telecommunications service to any household requesting cable service
within that area.
§ A87-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-21
72:937
§ A87-22. Technical standards.
The cable system shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to
meet those standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems
contained in Subpart K of Part 76 (or subsequent Subparts) of the FCC's
promulgated Rules and Regulations as may, from time to time, be issued,
revised and updated.
B. The franchisee shall install and provide basic cable to all public
buildings designated below. Each of these installations shall include
signal drop, at least one outlet and one converter (or such other
terminal equipment as may be necessary to provide an electronic
interface with a television receive) provided that the franchisee shall
provide as many connections within the township's buildings as the
township shall require. The franchisee will provide internal building
wiring at its own cost for time and materials, and such wiring and other
equipment as may be necessary shall remain the property of the
franchisee. The public buildings to be provided with basic cable service
shall include, but not be limited to, the following within the franchisee's
franchise area within the township: all fire companies, all owned or
leased township buildings, the township's Public Works garages, the
township Police Department, all public and parochial schools and
colleges within the franchisee's franchise area.
§ A87-21 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-22
72:938
ARTICLE V
Service Provisions
§ A87-23. Programming and service consultation.
The franchisee shall consult the township regarding any and all
programming and service-related decisions. The franchisee shall give at
least 30 days' notice to subscribers as to any change in programming
decisions or channel realignment.
§ A87-24. Emergency alert system.
The franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain for the use by the
township an emergency alert system (EAS) in accordance with the
Emergency Alert System Procedures for the Philadelphia Extended
Operational Area, as approved by Chester County on December 2, 1997, and
as subsequently amended.
§ A87-25. Access channels.
§ A87-26. Studio and equipment.
If requested by the township and negotiated between the township and
franchisee, the franchisee shall provide sufficient funds to the township
for the purchase of audio/video and telecommunications equipment as are
reasonably necessary to allow the township's use of the cable system,
consistently with the requirements of this ordinance. This equipment shall
include, but not be limited to, cameras, tripods, microphones, lights,
recording decks, editing equipment, monitors, character generators,
computer hardware and software, modems and similar equipment in such
amounts as agreed to in the franchise agreement.
A. Upon request by the township, the franchisee shall provide one
activated access channel each for noncommercial governmental access,
noncommercial public access and noncommercial educational access
for use by the township, or its designee, without charge. Upon request
by the township, the franchisee shall provide additional access channels
to the township when all existing access channels simultaneously carry
nonduplicated, locally produced programming, none of which are
character generated, continuously during the hours of 5:00 a.m. until
10:00 a.m. for a period of 90 days.
B. The franchisee shall also provide all necessary equipment to enable all
channels in the cable system to have the capability of transmitting
audio channels in stereo, in accordance with the standards established
by the FCC.
C. The franchisee shall also transmit as many FM signals and other stereo
signals in the 88 to 108 mega-cycle band as possible, the number of
which shall be determined by practical engineering considerations.
§ A87-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-27
72:939
§ A87-27. Remote line telecasting.
A. Upon request by the township, the franchisee shall provide upstream
channel capacity for live telecasts from:
(1) The public meeting room of the Township Administration Building;
and
(2) The school district administration building or other public or
licensed parochial school.
B. The franchisee shall make available the devices necessary to
accomplish upstream telecasts through any and all of the above listed
buildings and facilities.
C. The franchisee shall make available at no cost the equipment and
devices necessary to accomplish two-way communications from any
such building or facility located within the franchise area.
§ A87-27 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-27
72:940
ARTICLE VI
Construction Provisions
§ A87-28. Construction standards.
A. All construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the cable system
shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, as well as all state and local
codes where applicable.
B. All installation of electronic equipment and appurtenant facilities shall
be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the
provisions of the National Electric Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code, as amended, the FCC, the Standard of Good
Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable Television Systems of
the National Cable Association, other applicable federal, state or local
laws, codes and regulations, as the same may be from time to time
amended or adopted.
C. Antennas and their supporting structures (tower) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
applicable state or township laws, ordinances, codes and regulations,
as the same may be from time to time amended or adopted.
D. The franchisee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited to,
antenna sites, distribution system, towers, house connections,
structures, poles, wire, cable, coax cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures and
apparatuses shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated
in accordance with good and accepted engineering practices,
performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel, so
as not to endanger or interfere with any improvement(s) the township
shall deem appropriate to make to its streets and rights-of-way, or to
hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to interfere in any
manner with the rights of any property owner.
E. The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
F. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, wires, lines and
equipment erected by the franchisee within the township shall be so
located as not to interfere with streets, legal rights-of-way or legal
rights of any individual property owner. The township shall retain sole
power and authority over the streets dedicated to or owned by it in
connection with the location of any cable system facilities therein or
thereon, including the right of oversight and the right to dictate the
manner and/or location in which cable system facilities shall be
installed.
§ A87-28 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-28
72:941
§ A87-29. Construction codes inspections.
§ A87-30. Construction upgrades.
If, at any time, during the period of a franchise, the township shall lawfully
construct, reconstruct or relocate any street or right-of-way, or alter or
change the grade of any street, or repair, modify or relocate any sanitary
or storm sewers, water lines or other public facilities, the franchisee, upon
reasonable notice by the township (not exceeding such time as determined
by the then existing circumstances) shall remove, relay, abandon or relocate
its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures
at its own expense.
§ A87-31. Use of existing poles.
The franchisee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any
street in an existing aerial utility system without advance written notice to
and approval of the township. The franchisee shall exercise its best efforts
to negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from existing pole owners
for all aerial construction.
§ A87-32. Undergrounding of cable.
Cable shall be installed underground at the franchisee's expense where
both the existing telephone and electrical utilities are underground. The
franchisee shall place cable underground in newly platted streets in concert
with both the telephone and electric utilities. In the event the telephone
or electric utilities are reimbursed by the township or any state or federal
agency for the placement of cable underground or the movement of cable,
the franchisee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as
the telephone or electric utilities are reimbursed.
§ A87-33. Installation procedure.
G. In the case of disturbance of any street or paved area, the franchisee
shall secure a street opening permit from the township prior to any
such disturbance, and shall, at its own cost and expense, in any manner
approved by the township or state, as applicable, replace, repair and
restore such street or pavement area in accordance with township or
state specifications, as applicable.
A. The franchisee shall strictly adhere to all building, highway and zoning
codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system in the township.
B. The township shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of a franchise
and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance
with the terms of any such franchise and the applicable provisions of
local, state and federal law.
§ A87-28 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-33
72:942
§ A87-34. Tree trimming.
The franchisee shall have the authority, at its sole cost and expense, to
trim overhanging limbs and branches of trees coming in contact with the
franchisee's wires and cables located within the right-of-way of a township
street, after providing reasonable notice of not less than 30 days to both
the affected property owners and the township. No tree shall be removed
without the permission of the township.
§ A87-35. Movement of facilities.
In the event that it is necessary to temporarily move or remove any of the
franchisee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities in order to accommodate
the movement of a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the
township's streets and rights-of-way, such removal shall be at the expense of
the person, other than the township, requesting the temporary removal of
such of these facilities. All such work shall be performed by the franchisee
or under its direction and control. The franchisee may first require the
deposit with it by the person, other than the township, requesting such
temporary removal of sufficient security to cover the costs of such removal
and replacement. At least 15 days' prior written notice shall be given by the
township to the franchisee of any such requested temporary removal. The
service disruption provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any such
temporary service disruptions occasioned thereby, unless the franchisee
fails and refuses to restore service within a commercially acceptable period
of time.
A. Construction upgrades or new construction of streets, utilities and
other public facilities, when done by the township, shall be undertaken
and completed to the extent feasible, in such a manner as to not
obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation by the franchisee
of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or apparatus forming a
part of its cable system.
B. If any of the franchisee's properties interfere with the construction,
reconstruction, relocation, maintenance or repair of any streets, rightsof-
way or other township public improvements, whether it be the
construction, repair, maintenance, removal or relocation of a sewer,
public sidewalk, or water main, street or any other improvement (the
"project"), the township shall give 30 days' prior written notice to the
franchisee, and all such poles, wires, conduits and other appliances and
facilities shall be secured, removed or replaced by the franchisee, at its
sole cost and expense, in such manner as shall be directed by the
township and shall not interfere with the township's project. Should,
however, any utility company be reimbursed for relocation of its
facilities as part of the same project, the franchisee shall be reimbursed
by the township upon the same terms and conditions as the utilities.
§ A87-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-35
72:943

ARTICLE VII
Operation and Reporting Provisions
§ A87-36. Open book and records.
The township shall have the right to inspect and copy upon 20 days' written
notice at any time during normal business hours at the cable system office
or at such location as the township and franchisee shall agree, all books,
receipts, maps, plans, financial statements, contracts, service complaint
logs, performance test results, records of requests for service, maps, plans
and other like material of franchisee (the "records") which are reasonably
necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this ordinance, a
franchise agreement, a Rate Regulation Filing or applicable law. The written
notice for inspection request shall include the purpose for the inspection
and a description of the records sought to be inspected to the extent known.
§ A87-37. Communication with regulatory agencies.
Franchisee shall provide to the township, on a semiannual basis, copies
of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted to the
FCC by franchisee on behalf of or relating to the franchise's compliance
with the franchise agreement. Copies of such documents shall be made
available to the general public by franchisee upon request.
§ A87-38. Maps.
Franchisee shall maintain with the township a current map or set of maps
drawn to scale showing the cable system and all equipment installed or in
place in streets and other public places.
§ A87-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-38
72:945

ARTICLE VIII
Consumer Protection Provisions
§ A87-39. Franchisee office hours and telephone availability.
§ A87-40. Installations, outages and service calls.
Under normal operating conditions, franchisee shall meet each of the
following standards no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly
basis:
A. Franchisee shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. Trained company representatives will be available
to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business
hours. After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by
a service or an automated response system, including an answering
machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be
responded to by a trained company representative on the next business
day.
B. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30
seconds when a connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred,
transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met
no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions,
measured on a quarterly basis.
C. Franchisee is not required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to
measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth
above unless a historical record of complaints indicated a clear failure
to comply.
D. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than 3% of the time.
E. Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least
during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
A. Standard installation will be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that
are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
B. Excluding conditions beyond the control of the franchisee, the
franchisee will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in
no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The
franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem.
C. The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at a
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The
§ A87-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-40
72:947
§ A87-41. Communications between cable operator and cable
subscribers.
§ A87-42. Billing.
franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation activities
outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the
customer.)
D. A franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
E. If a franchisee representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled,
the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled,
as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
F. Upon request, franchisee shall provide customers a refund in the form
of a credit for cable outages or interruptions in service which exceed six
hours. The amount of the credit shall be based on the length of time of
the cable interruption and the number of channels affected by the
outage.
A. The franchisee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(1) Products and services offered.
(2) Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services.
(3) Installation and service maintenance policies.
(4) Instructions on how to use the cable service.
(5) Channel positions of programming carried on the cable system.
(6) Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local franchise authority cable office.
B. Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible through
announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes
if the change is within the control of the franchisee. In addition, the
franchisee shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant
changes in the other information required by the preceding paragraph.
A. Franchisee bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
§ A87-40 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-42
72:948
§ A87-43. Definitions.
For purpose of this Article VIII, the following definitions apply:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are operating to service customers.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are
not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited
to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which
are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not
limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular
peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels.
§ A87-44. Parental control option.
Franchisee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers who
wish to be able to cut off any objectionable channel or channels of
programming or data service from the communications service entering the
subscriber's home. This control option shall be at no charge.
§ A87-45. Rate charge and rate schedule.
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional
charges, rebates and credits.
B. In case of a billing dispute, the franchisee must respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
C. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but not later than either:
(1) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request
or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or
(2) The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if
service is terminated.
D. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
A. Each franchisee shall state in its proposal to enter into an agreement
for the award of a franchise hereunder its initial monthly rates and
installation and all other charges for service. Such initial rates and
charges shall maintain in effect for at least one year following the
completion of construction as set forth in the franchisee's
comprehensive plan of cable television and or telecommunications
system.
§ A87-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-45
72:949
§ A87-46. Local regulatory framework.
Subject to compliance with federal law, if, at any time during the existence
of any franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance, the Board shall find
that it is in the public interest to regulate rates or services for the franchise,
the provisions of Article VIII, § A87-45 of this ordinance shall have no
further effect, and the rates and service of the franchise hereunder shall
thereafter be regulated by such one or more resolutions as may be adopted
from time to time by the Board establishing rates or services applicable to
the franchise.
B. Franchisee shall give at least 30 days' notice of its intention to change
monthly rates and installation charges for residential service by mailing
notices thereof to each of the current subscribers to whom such
charges will apply.
C. By acceptance of the franchise agreement, the franchisee agrees that
its rates and charges to subscribers shall be in compliance with the FCC
regulations governing rates and charges for cable services.
D. The franchisee shall not, as to rates, charges, service or service
facilities, make or grant any undue privilege or advantage to any party,
nor subject any party to undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided that
the franchisee may establish reasonable classifications of customers.
Nothing in this ordinance prohibits the reduction or waiving of charges
in connection with promotional campaigns or for the purpose of
attracting subscribers or users or providing a senior citizen discount.
§ A87-45 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-46
72:950
ARTICLE IX
General Financial and Insurance Provisions and Security Fund
§ A87-47. Finding.
The township finds that the streets and public rights-of-way of the county,
state and township to be used by a franchisee for the operation of a
cable system within the boundaries of the franchise area granted by the
township's issuance of a franchise are valuable public property acquired
and maintained by the county, state and township at great expense to the
taxpayers. The township further finds that the grant of a franchise to use
such streets and public rights-of-way is a valuable property right without
which a franchisee would be required to invest substantial capital.
§ A87-48. Payment to township.
The administration of this ordinance and the franchise imposes upon the
township substantial and additional regulatory responsibilities and expense.
Accordingly, each franchisee receiving the approval of the Board for the
grant of a franchise shall pay to the township a franchise fee in the amount
designated by the Board when the franchise is granted, which amount shall
in no event be less than 5% of its gross annual revenues, or the maximum
amount permitted under applicable federal law, state or local law. If such
maximum is greater than 5%, the franchisee shall pay the increased fee
allowed by law to the township within 60 days after the effective date of
a resolution or ordinance by the township authorizing the imposition of
the increased franchise fee. Immediately after its enactment, the township
shall provide the franchisee with a copy of the resolution or ordinance
authorizing the imposition of the increased franchise fee.
A. The franchise fee is in addition to taxes and payments that the
franchisee may be required to pay under any federal, state or local law
and to any tax, fee or assessment imposed by utilities and cable
operators for the use of their services, facilities and equipment.
B. Payment of the franchise fee made by franchisee to the township is not
and shall not be considered in the nature of a tax.
C. Acceptance by the township. No acceptance of any payment by the
township shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction
of any claim the township may have for further or additional sums
payable as a franchise fee under this ordinance or for the performance
of any other obligation of the franchisee.
D. Failure to make required payment. In the event any franchise payment
or recomputation amount is not made on or before the date specified
herein, franchisee shall pay additional compensation and interest
charges computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the township's primary depository
bank during the period such unpaid amount is owed.
§ A87-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-48
72:951
§ A87-49. Damages and defects.
E. Payments to be made quarterly. The franchise fee and any other costs
assessed by the township against the franchisee shall be paid quarterly
to the township and shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. The
township shall be furnished at the time of each payment with a
statement verified by a financial representative of the franchisee
reflecting the total amount of gross revenues for the payment period.
Said quarterly payments shall be made to the township no later than 45
days following the end of each calendar quarter, except for the payment
for the last quarter, which shall be paid within 60 days following the end
of the calendar quarter. Quarterly computation dates are the last days
of the months of March, June, September and December.
F. The township right of inspection. The township shall have the right to
inspect and copy, exclusive of proprietary information, the franchisee's
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable pursuant to this ordinance for a period of four
years from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of the
township unless the audit discloses an underpayment in excess of 5%,
in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by the franchisee as a
cost incidental to the enforcement of the franchise agreement. Any
additional amounts due to the township as a result of the audit shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the franchisee by the
township of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the
audit report, unless written notice of disagreement is filed by the
franchisee with the township within such time period. In the case of a
dispute, the issue shall be resolved through binding arbitration in
accordance with the procedures of the American Arbitration
Association.
G. Franchisee financial records. Upon request by the township, the
franchisee shall provide the township with a copy of its SEC Form 10-K
Annual Report within 30 days after it is submitted to the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC).
A. Township not liable. The township and the Board shall not be liable for
any injury, damage, costs, either direct or consequential, to any person
or property arising from the use, operation, condition or maintenance of
the franchisee's cable system, whether arising from the operation of the
cable system itself or its location within any street or public rights-ofway.
B. Franchisee's indemnification of township. The franchisee shall, at its
sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the
township, the Board and the township's other officials, boards,
commissions, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits,
causes of action, proceedings and judgments for damages to persons or
to property, or equitable relief arising out of the construction,
maintenance or operation of its cable system, the conduct of
§ A87-48 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-49
72:952
§ A87-50. Liability insurance.
franchisee's business in the township, or any claim, cause of action,
proceeding, suit or judgment arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment
or exercise of a franchise granted hereunder, regardless of whether
the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this ordinance or a franchise agreement. This provision includes,
but is not limited to, the township's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
in defending against any such claim, suit or proceeding; and claims
arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee
to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or
franchisees of programs to be delivered by the cable system.
C. Indemnification for Cable Act claims. A franchisee shall, at its sole cost
and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the township,
and the officers, agents and employees thereof, from and against any
and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages or
otherwise subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558,
arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation, construction,
operation or maintenance of the cable system, including but not limited
to any claim against the franchisee for invasion of the right to privacy,
defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or
patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the township from participating in the defense of
any litigation by its own counsel at its own cost and expense.
D. Notice of claim. The township shall promptly give the franchisee
written notice of any claim, suit or demand requiring the franchisee's
indemnification of the township under the foregoing paragraphs. The
township shall have the right, but not the obligation, to participate
through its attorney in any such claim, suit or proceeding falling within
the subject matter of the indemnification provisions of this ordinance.
A. A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise issued
pursuant to this ordinance, specifically agrees that it will maintain,
throughout the entire term of the franchise period, and any renewals
thereof, liability insurance protecting the franchisee and the township
with regard to damages and/or penalties mentioned in Article IX,
§ A87-49, in the following minimum amounts:
(1) One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person,
within the limit, however, of $2,000,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident, and $5,000,000 for all injuries or
deaths resulting from any one accident.
(2) Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from
any one accident.
(3) Worker's Compensation insurance on all employees engaged in
installation or service of its equipment.
§ A87-49 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-50
72:953
§ A87-51. Township's right to revoke.
B. Qualifications of insurers. All insurance policies shall be issued by
companies qualified to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. All insurance policies shall be available for review by the
township.
C. At the time of acceptance of a franchise, franchisee shall furnish to the
township a certificate of insurance evidencing compliance with the
foregoing requirements and proof that such coverages are in full force
and effect. Renewal certificates shall be delivered to the township prior
to the expiration of any periods of coverage.
D. Limit of liability. Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages
recovered by the township shall be construed to limit the liability of the
franchisee for damages under any franchise issued hereunder.
A. In addition to all other rights which the township has pursuant to law or
equity, the Board reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this
franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event
that:
(1) Franchisee breaches any material term or condition of the
franchise agreement or this ordinance and, after written notice and
an opportunity to cure, has failed to cure said breach within 90
days of receiving notice of breach. If the franchisee cannot cure
said breach within said ninety-day period, the Board shall not
revoke or cancel the franchise, provided that franchisee takes
reasonable steps to cure within the 90 days and fully cures said
breach as soon as reasonably practicable; or
(2) Franchisee shall apply for or consent to the appointment of a
receiver, trustee or liquidator of itself or any of its property, admit
in writing its inability to pay its debts as they mature, make a
general assignment for the benefit of creditors, be adjudicated a
bankrupt or insolvent, file a voluntary petition in bankruptcy or a
petition or an answer seeking reorganization or an arrangement
with creditors, or take advantage of any bankruptcy,
reorganization, insolvency, readjustment of debt, dissolution or
liquidation law or statute or an answer admitting the material
allegations of a petition filed against it in any proceeding under any
such law, or if an action shall be taken by franchisee for the
purposes of effecting any of the foregoing; or
(3) Any order, judgment or decree shall be entered by any court of
competent jurisdiction, approving a petition seeking reorganization
of franchisee or all or a substantial part of the assets of franchisee,
or appointing a receiver, sequestor, trustee or liquidator of
franchisee, or any of its property, and such order, judgment or
decree shall continue unstayed and in effect for any period of 90
days.
§ A87-50 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-51
72:954
§ A87-52. Revocation procedures.
In the event that the township determines that the franchisee has violated
any material provisions of the franchise, or any material applicable federal,
state or local law, the township may make written demand on the franchisee
that it remedy such violation and that continued violation may cause
revocation.
§ A87-53. Security fund.
Franchisee shall post a bond issued by a bonding company that is
authorized to conduct business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
with the township as security to ensure the franchisee's faithful
B. Provided, however, that if the township seeks to revoke the franchise
under Subsection A(2) and (3) above, it shall do so in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Article X herein.
A. A public hearing shall be held by the Board upon 14 days' prior written
notice to the franchisee. The notice to the franchisee shall specify with
particularity the time and place of the hearing and shall afford the
franchisee a full and complete opportunity to be heard in person and by
counsel. The grounds upon which the pending revocation is based shall
be alleged with particularity in the written notice to the franchisee.
B. If notice is given and, at franchisee's option, a full public proceeding is
held, the township determines that a violation, breach, failure, refusal
or neglect by franchisee exists, the township shall direct franchisee to
correct or remedy the same within such reasonable additional time, in
such a manner and upon such terms and conditions as the township
may direct.
C. If, after notice is given, and, at township's option, a full public
proceeding is held, the township determines there was a violation,
breach, failure, refusal or neglect, then the township may declare, by
resolution, the franchise revoked and canceled and of no further force
or effect. The township shall have the right in its discretion to take
ownership of the cable system and all associated equipment and
facilities under ownership of the franchisee pursuant to the township's
power of eminent domain.
D. The issue of revocation shall automatically be placed upon the
Township Board agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for
compliance. The township then may terminate the franchise forthwith
upon finding the franchisee has failed to achieve the plans or may
further extend the period, at its discretion.
E. If the township, after notice is given and, at franchisee's option, a full
public hearing is held and appeal is exhausted, declares the franchise
breached, the parties may pursue their remedies pursuant to the
franchise or any other remedies, legal or equitable.
§ A87-51 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-53
72:955
performance of this ordinance, the franchise agreement and other
applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the
township, and payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees or taxes
due the township which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system. The amount of the bond shall be $25,000.
The franchisee and the bonding company shall be required to execute the
township's standard form of performance bond. The township shall have the
right to proceed and collect under the bond for the purpose of curing the
franchisee's default of its obligations under this ordinance, the franchise
agreement or other applicable law.
§ A87-53 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-53
72:956
ARTICLE X
Foreclosure, Receivership and Abandonment
§ A87-54. Foreclosure.
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, franchisee
shall notify the township of such fact, and such notification shall be treated
as notification that a change in control of franchisee has taken place.
§ A87-55. Receivership.
The township shall have the right to cancel the franchise agreement subject
to any applicable provisions of state law, including the Bankruptcy Act, 120
days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the conduct
of the business of the franchisee, whether in receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days,
or unless:
§ A87-56. Abandonment.
Franchisee may not abandon any portion of the cable system thereof
without first having given three months' notice to the township.
A. Within 120 days after its election or appointment, such receiver or
trustee shall have complied with all material provisions of the franchise
and remedy all defaults thereunder; and
B. Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed an
agreement, duly approved by the court, having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be
bound by each and every provision of the franchise agreement, this
ordinance and any amendments of this ordinance and regulations
promulgated by the Board.
§ A87-54 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-56
72:957

ARTICLE XI
Removal, Transfer and Purchase
§ A87-57. Removal after relocation or expiration.
At the expiration of the present and all subsequent renewal terms for which
a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided for herein, the
franchisee shall have the right to remove, at its expense, all or any portion
of the cable system from all streets and public rights-of-way within its
franchise area. In doing so, the franchisee shall return all disturbed areas to
their condition existing prior to franchisee's installation of its cable system,
including but not limited to necessary refilling and compacting all disturbed
areas. All such work shall be done at the franchisee's sole cost and expense
and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the township, whose
inspection fees shall be paid by the franchisee.
§ A87-58. Sale and transfer of franchise.
A. Transfer. A franchise granted under this ordinance shall not be sold,
assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased or sublet in
any manner, nor shall title hereto, either legal or equitable, or any right,
interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without full
compliance with the procedures set forth in this section and the
expressed approval of the Board.
(1) Parties to the sale or transfer shall make written request to the
township for the approval of a sale or transfer. An application for a
transfer shall provide complete information on the proposed
transaction, including details of the legal, financial, technical and
other qualifications of the transferee.
(2) The township shall reply in writing within 60 days of the application
and shall indicate approval of the application or its determination
that a public hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effect on
the franchisee's subscribers.
(3) If a public hearing is deemed necessary, it shall commence within
60 days of such determination pursuant to public notice setting
forth the purpose of the hearing. Written notice shall be given to
the applicant and to any person who has registered his name and
address with the township requesting to be given notice of any such
proceedings.
(4) Within 45 days after the close of the record following the
conclusion of the public hearing(s), the township shall issue its
determination.
B. Determination by township. In making a determination as to whether to
grant, deny or grant subject to conditions an application for a transfer
of a franchise, the township shall consider the legal, financial and
technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system;
§ A87-57 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-58
72:959
whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise agreement and this ordinance and, if not, the proposed
transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; whether the
transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the township,
or whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the township; and
whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would
adversely affect subscribers, the township's interest under this
ordinance, the franchise agreement, or other applicable law, or make
it less likely that the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community would be satisfied at a reasonable cost.
C. Transferee's agreement. No application for a transfer of a franchise
shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will
abide by and accept all terms of this ordinance and the franchise
agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities known
and unknown of the previous franchisee under this ordinance and the
franchise agreement.
D. Approval does not constitute waiver. Approval by the township of a
transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of
the rights of the township under this ordinance or the franchise
agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer.
E. Processing fee. As a condition of considering a transfer, the township
may impose a fee upon the transferee to cover its estimated out-ofpocket
expenses in considering the application for transfer of a
franchise, provided that such fee does not exceed $1,000. Any amount
collected in excess of the estimated amount shall be returned to the
transferee.
F. Filing of transfer document. Within 30 days of any transfer, franchisee
shall file with the township a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage,
lease or other written instruments evidencing such sale, transfer of
ownership or control, or lease, certifying and sworn to be correct by the
franchisee.
§ A87-58 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-58
72:960
ARTICLE XII
Rights of Individuals Protected
§ A87-59. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
Franchisee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
franchisee may offer price discounts to senior citizens. Franchisee shall
comply at all times with all applicable federal and state laws, FCC
regulations, applicable township ordinances and all executive and
administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
§ A87-60. Subscriber privacy.
Franchisee shall comply with all privacy provisions of Section 631 of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, as amended.
§ A87-59 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-60
72:961

ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ A87-61. Compliance with law.
Franchisee shall comply with all state and federal laws and rules regarding
cable television and its operation, as they become effective, unless
otherwise stated. Franchisee shall conform during the entire term of the
franchise with this ordinance and all applicable township ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted except
to the extent that any future ordinance or regulation increases or expands
the franchisee's obligations under the franchise agreement.
§ A87-62. Emergency use.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, a franchisee shall, upon request
of the township, make available the cable system and its related facilities to
the township for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.
§ A87-63. Captions.
The paragraph captions and headings of this ordinance are for convenience
and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning
and interpretation of this ordinance or any franchise issued hereunder.
§ A87-64. Calculation of time.
When the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment or thing
is required hereunder and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of
doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed
as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed
period of duration time. When the last day of the period falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation.
§ A87-61 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-64
72:963

ARTICLE XIV
Violations and Enforcement
§ A87-65. Unlawful operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or engage in the business
of constructing or operating a cable system in the township without being
awarded a cable franchise and executing a franchise agreement with the
township. The township reserves the right to build its own Cable Television
Communications System without granting itself a franchise.
§ A87-66. Unlawful connection.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electronically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of the franchisee's cable television
or telecommunications system within the township for the purposes of
enabling himself or others to receive any television or radio signals, picture,
program, or sound, without payment to the operator of said system in
accordance with the then current rate schedule.
§ A87-67. Theft of service.
The township will cooperate with the franchisee to prevent theft of service
wherever possible.
§ A87-68. Unlawful tampering.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the subscriber
(residential/commercial) or the franchisee, as applicable, to unlawfully
tamper, remove or injure any cable, wires or equipment used for
distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sound or
data connection.
§ A87-65 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-68
72:965

ARTICLE XV
Severability, Repealer and Effective Date
§ A87-69. Severability.
If any term, condition, or provision of this ordinance shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable the remainder hereof shall be valid in
all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent
change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid
is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and
effect without further action by the township and shall thereafter be binding
on franchisee and the township.
§ A87-70. Repealer.
Upon the effective date of this ordinance, Ordinance No. 50-80 is hereby
repealed.
§ A87-71. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective five days following enactment as by
law provided.
§ A87-69 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A87-71
72:967
Chapter A88
SEWER DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 66.
§ A87-71 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § A87-71
72:968
ARTICLE I
Sewer District Nos. 2 and 3
[Adopted 7-6-1960]
§ A88-1. Districts established.
There are hereby created in the Township of West Goshen two additional
sewer districts,322 to be known, respectively, as Sewer District No. 2 and
Sewer District No. 3, to be bounded according to a plan dated June 16,
1960, prepared by Glace & Glace, Inc., consulting engineers, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania, copies of which plan and description of the real estate
encompassed in said sewer districts are on file and may be examined at
the office of the township, 1025 Paoli Pike, West Chester, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
§ A88-2. Construction authorized.
Said Sewer Districts Nos. 2 and 3 are hereby designated as additional sewer
service areas of the West Goshen Sewer Authority, and the construction of
sewers for and in said sewer districts is hereby authorized.
322. Editor's Note: Sewer District No. 1 was established by resolution adopted 3-5-1958.
§ A88-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A88-2
72:969

ARTICLE II
Sewer District No. 4
[Adopted 10-14-1970 by Ord. No. 8-1970]
§ A88-3. District established.
There is hereby created in the Township of West Goshen a sewer district
to be known as "Sewer District No. 4," whose boundaries are as set forth
on a plan dated February 8, 1970, File Code 6948, prepared by Glace,
consulting engineers, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, copies of which plan are on
file and may be examined at the office of the township, 1025 Paoli Pike, West
Chester, Chester County, Pennsylvania. Sewer District No. 4 shall include all
the area in West Goshen Township located in the Taylor Run Drainage Basin
and not previously included in any previously authorized sewer districts.
§ A88-4. Construction authorized.
Said Sewer District No. 4 is hereby designated as an additional sewer
service area of West Goshen Sewer Authority, and the construction of
sewers for and in said districts is hereby authorized; also the Authority may
take over, operate and maintain any sewer facilities now existing in this
area.
§ A88-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A88-4
72:971
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-1997 4-9-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
8-1997 5-14-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
9-1997 5-28-1997 Sewer charges amendment Ch. 66, Art. IV
10-1997 7-23-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-1997 7-23-1997 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 72
12-1997 7-23-1997 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 45
13-1997 7-23-1997 Sewer charges amendment Ch. 66, Art. IV
14-1997 11-12-1997 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
1-1998 1-14-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-1998 2-25-1998 Local government
investment trust
Ch. 4, Art. I
3-1998 3-25-1998 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 31
4-1998 3-25-1998 General obligation note NCM
5-1998 4-22-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
6-1998 5-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
7-1998 5-13-1998 Building construction,
electrical standards, fire
prevention, plumbing and
property maintenance
amendments
Chs. 28, 39, 41, 62
and 63
8-1998 5-13-1998 Pretreatment standards
and regulations for
industrial wastewater
discharges
Ch. 66, Art. V
9-1998 5-13-1998 On-lot sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 66, Art. VI
§ A88-4 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:972
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-1998 6-10-1998 Bond NCM
11-1998 8-26-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-1998 8-26-1998 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 54
13-1998 8-26-1998 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 60
14-1998 11-11-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
15-1998 11-25-1998 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
1-1999 1-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-1999 3-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
3-1999 4-14-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-1999 5-26-1999 Earned income tax
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
06-2010
5-1999 6-9-1999 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A87
6-1999 12-8-1999 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 72
1-2000 2-23-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-2000 2-23-2000 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 45
3-2000 9-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2000 9-27-2000 Earned income tax
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
06-2010
5-2000 9-27-2000 Cable television franchise Ch. A87
1-2001 Void
2-2001 2-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
3-2001 2-14-2001 Public water supply Ch. 64
4-2001 3-28-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
5-2001 3-28-2001 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 60
6-2001 5-9-2001 Soil erosion and sediment
control amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 69; Ch. 85
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:973
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2001 5-9-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 72
8-2001 7-11-2001 Street vacation NCM
9-2001 7-25-2001 Township Manager
amendment
Ch. 7
10-2001 9-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-2001 9-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-2001 9-26-2001 Weeds amendment Ch. 81
13-2001 9-26-2001 Authorizing
intergovernmental
agreement (insurance
cooperative)
NCM
14-2001 11-14-2001 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
1-2002 2-27-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-2002 2-27-2002 Delinquent Tax Collector Ch. 74, Art. I
3-2002 4-10-2002 Intergovernmental
agreement for GIS system
NCM
4-2002 4-24-2002 Zoning amendment;
Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 84, Ch. 12
5-2002 5-8-2002 Police: Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
6-2002 5-8-2002 Amended sewer pension
plan
NCM
7-2002 5-8-2002 Amended administrative
and road employees'
pension plan
NCM
8-2002 5-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
9-2002 9-11-2002 Police: Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
10-2002 9-11-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-2002 9-25-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-2002 11-20-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
13-2002 12-11-2002 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
1-2003 1-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:974
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2003 2-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
3-2003 2-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2003 3-12-2003 West Chester Area Council
of Governments
Ch. 4, Art. II
5-2003 4-9-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
6-2003 4-9-2003 Nudity or sexual conduct in
establishments dealing in
alcoholic beverages
Ch. 26, Art. I
7-2003 4-23-2003 Sewer authority bonds NCM
8-2003 5-14-2003 Adult entertainment
businesses
Ch. 22
9-2003 5-14-2003 Obscene and other sexual
material
Ch. 59, Art. III
10-2003 6-11-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-2003 11-12-2003 Stormwater management Repealed by Ord. No.
12-2013
12-2003 11-12-2003 Subdivision amendment Ch. 72
13-2003 12-10-2003 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
14-2003 12-10-2003 Administrative and road
employees pension plan
amendment
NCM
15-2003 12-10-2003 Sewer employees pension
plan amendment
NCM
1-2004 1-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-2004 1-28-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3-2004 3-10-2004 Soil erosion and sediment
control amendment;
subdivision of land; zoning
amendment
Chs. 69; 72; 84
4-2004 3-10-2004 Stormwater management
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
12-2013
5-2004 4-14-2004 Alarm devices amendment Ch. 25
6-2004 5-26-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2004 5-26-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 32
8-2004 5-26-2004 Existing buildings Ch. 29
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:975
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2004 5-26-2004 One- and two-family
dwellings
Ch. 28, Art. II
10-2004 5-26-2004 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 39
11-2004 5-26-2004 Mechanical standards Ch. 49
12-2004 5-26-2004 Plumbing Ch. 62
13-2004 5-26-2004 Fuel gas Ch. 43
14-2004 5-26-2004 Energy conservation Ch. 38
15-2004 5-26-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 41
16-2004 5-26-2004 Property maintenance Ch. 63
17-2004 6-9-2004 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 45
18-2004 7-14-2004 Attorney's fees Ch. 52, Art. I
19-2004 8-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
20-2004 9-8-2004 Pretreatment standards
and regulations for
industrial wastewater
discharges amendment
Ch. 66, Art. V
21-2004 9-22-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 32
22-2004 10-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
23-2004 11-17-2004 Authorizing
intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
24-2004 12-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2005 1-26-2005 Emergency
communications systems
Ch. 37
2-2005 1-26-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
3-2005 2-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2005 2-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
5-2005 7-13-2005 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 72
6-2005 7-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
7-2005 8-10-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
8-2005 9-28-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:976
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2005 8-24-2005 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 72 and 85
10-2005 9-14-2005 Garbage and recycling
amendment; sewer charges
amendment
Chs. 45 and 66, Art.
IV
11-2005 9-14-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2005 9-28-2005 Nuisances amendment Ch. 53
13-2005 10-26-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Ch. 74, Art. IV
1-2006 1-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-2006 5-24-2006 Attorney fees amendment Ch. 52, Art. I
3-2006 5-24-2006 Administrative and road
employees pension plan
amendment
NCM
4-2006 5-24-2006 Sewer employees pension
plan amendment
NCM
5-2006 5-24-2006 Dogs amendment;
disturbing the peace
amendment
Chs. 36; 59, Art. II
6-2006 6-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
7-2006 6-28-2006 Cable franchise agreement NCM
8-2006 6-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
9-2006 6-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
10-2006 8-9-2006 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 57
11-2006 9-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-2006 9-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2007 1-24-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
2-2007 1-24-2007 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 74, Art. III
3-2007 1-24-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2007 1-24-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
5-2007 2-14-2007 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:977
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2007 2-14-2007 Administrative and road
employees pension plan
amendment
NCM
7-2007 2-14-2007 Sewer employees pension
plan amendment
NCM
8-2007 2-14-2007 Intergovernmental
agreement (health
insurance trust)
NCM
9-2007 3-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
10-2007 5-9-2007 Sidewalk maintenance Ch. 70, Art. II
11-2007 10-24-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-2007 10-24-2007 Local services tax Ch. 74, Art. IV
13-2007 12-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2008 1-7-2008 Intergovernmental
agreement (street
maintenance)
NCM
2-2008 1-23-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
3-2008 1-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2008 5-21-2008 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 12
5-2008 5-21-2008 Street obstructions and
openings amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I
6-2008 7-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
7-2008 10-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
8-2008 11-12-2008 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 45
9-2008 12-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
10-2008 12-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-2008 12-10-2008 Sewers and sewage
disposal: pretreatment
standards and regulations
for industrial wastewater
discharges amendment
Ch. 66, Art. V
12-2008 12-10-2008 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
13-2008 12-10-2008 Amended administrative
and road employees'
pension plan
NCM
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:978
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-2008 12-10-2008 Amended sewer employees'
pension plan
NCM
01-2009 2-18-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
02-2009 3-18-2009 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 45
03-2009 4-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
04-2009 4-15-2009 Fireworks amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 7-2019
05-2009 6-17-2009 Sewer charges amendment Ch. 66, Art. IV
06-2009 7-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
07-2009 7-15-2009 Street vacation NCM
08-2009 8-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
09-2009 11-18-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2009 12-16-2009 Amended administrative
and road employees'
pension plan
NCM
11-2009 12-16-2009 Amended sewer employees'
pension plan
NCM
Res.
6-2010
1-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2011
01-2010 4-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
02-2010 4-14-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
03-2010 4-28-2010 General obligation note NCM
Res.
16-2010
4-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2011
04-2010 5-12-2010 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 31
Res.
18-2010
5-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2011
Res.
24-2010
9-8-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
05-2010 Not adopted
06-2010 11-10-2010 Earned income tax Ch. 74, Art. II
01-2011 2-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:979
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res.
5-2011
3-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2012
02-2011 6-8-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
03-2011 7-6-2011 Sewer charges amendment Ch. 66, Art. IV
04-2011 8-10-2011 Insurance claims Ch. 46
05-2011 9-14-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
06-2011 9-14-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
07-2011 9-14-2011 Administrative and Road
Employees Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
08-2011 9-14-2011 Sewer Employees Pension
Plan amendment
NCM
Res.
11-2011
9-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2012
09-2011 10-12-2011 Sewer Employees Pension
Plan amendment
NCM
10-2011 10-12-2011 Administrative and Road
Employees Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
11-2011 10-12-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
12-2011 12-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res.
18-2011
12-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 01-2012
13-2011 8-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
01-2012 2-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
Res.
4-2012
2-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 06-2012
02-2012 4-11-2012 Dogs amendment Ch. 36
Res.
5-2012
4-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 06-2012
03-2012 4-25-2012 Noise; disturbing the peace
repealer; zoning
amendment
Ch. 52A; Ch. 59, Art.
II (reference only);
Ch. 84
04-2012 4-25-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:980
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-2012 7-2-2012 Building and construction
codes amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
5-2015
Res.
9-2012
7-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 06-2012
Res.
10-2012
7-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 06-2012
Res.
11-2012
7-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
See also Ord. No.
06-2012
Res.
12-2012
8-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ord. No. 06-2012
06-2012 8-22-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
07-2012 10-10-2012 Noise amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 52A; Ch. 84
Res.
18-2012
10-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
08-2012 11-14-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
01-2013 2-13-2013 Municipal claims: attorney
fees amendment
Ch. 52, Art. I
02-2013 6-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
03-2013 6-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
04-2013 6-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
05-2013 6-12-2013 Weeds amendment Ch. 81
06-2013 6-12-2013 Soil erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 69
07-2013 6-12-2013 Sewer charges amendment Ch. 66, Art. IV
08-2013 6-12-2013 Sidewalk maintenance
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
09-2013 7-31-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
10-2013 9-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
11-2013 9-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
12-2013 11-13-2013 Stormwater management Ch. 71
1-2014 4-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
2-2014 6-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res.
14-2014
8-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:981
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2014 9-2-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
4-2014 10-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
5-2014 11-12-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
6-2014 11-12-2014 Administrative and Road
Employees Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
7-2014 11-12-2014 Sewer Employees Pension
Plan amendment
NCM
Res.
20-2014
11-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
8-2014 12-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2015 2-11-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
2-2015 Tabled
3-2015 3-11-2015 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 57
Res.
6-2015
5-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
Res.
8-2015
6-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
4-2015 7-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res.
9-2015
7-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
5-2015 8-12-2015 Board of Appeals
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II; Ch.
29; Ch. 32; Ch. 37;
Ch. 39; Ch. 41; Ch.
43; Ch. 49; Ch. 62;
Ch. 63
6-2015 9-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
7-2015 9-23-2015 Cable television franchise NCM
8-2015 12-9-2015 Board of Appeals
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II; Ch.
29; Ch. 32; Ch. 37;
Ch. 39; Ch. 41; Ch.
43; Ch. 49; Ch. 62;
Ch. 63
9-2015 12-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2016 4-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:982
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2016 4-13-2016 Garbage and recycling
amendment; sewers and
sewage disposal: sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 45; Ch. 66, Art.
IV
3-2016 6-11-2016 Model aircraft and amateur
rockets
Ch. 51A
4-2016 10-19-2016 Historical Commission Ch. 3
5-2016 12-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
1-2017 4-12-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
2-2017 4-12-2017 Sewer revenue bond NCM
3-2017 Not adopted
4-2017 6-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
5-2017 7-19-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
6-2017 8-6-2017 Waste and recycling Ch. 45
7-2017 9-13-2017 Weeds, bamboo and
dangerous trees
Ch. 81
8-2017 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 78
9-2017 10-11-2017 All-terrain vehicles and dirt
bikes
Ch. 78A
10-2017 12-13-2017 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
1-2018 1-16-2018 Neighborhood
improvement districts:
Woodlands at Greystone
Ch. 52B
2-2018 2-20-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 14, Art. I
3-2018 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84
4-2018 5-21-2018 Nuisances Amendment;
Vibration
Ch. 53; Ch. 78B
5-2018 8-21-2018 Rental Property:
Registration and Inspection
of Rental Units
Ch. 75, Art. II
6-2018 10-16-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Charges
Amendment
Ch. 66, Art. IV
7-2018 11-26-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Charges
Amendment
Ch. 66, Art. IV
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
72:983
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2018 11-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84
9-2018 11-26-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement (Fire Protection
Services)
NCM
1-2019 2-19-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84
2-2019 2-19-2019 Employees Pension Plan NCM
3-2019 2-19-2019 Sewer Employees Pension
Plan
NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 3-19-2019 Nuisances
Amendment
Ch. 53 42
5-2019 Tabled 42
6-2019 6-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84 42
7-2019 7-22-2019 Fireworks
Amendment
Ch. 42 42
8-2019 10-15-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 42
9-2019 11-19-2019 Stormwater
Management
Amendment
Ch. 71 42
10-2019 11-19-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84 42
11-2019 12-17-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 84 42
12-2019 12-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 78 42
§ DL-1 WEST GOSHEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
72:984