Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-10]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) of the Second Class Township Code [53 P.S.
§ 66601(d)], the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Warrington, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 370, together with an
Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Township of Warrington, which shall be known and is
hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Warrington," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warrington, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Township of Warrington which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Warrington has determined that the following ordinances are no
longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following elements
of the 1995 Code:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(1) Chapter 1, Part 8, Subpart I, Permanent Finance Committee.
(2) Chapter 5, Part 2, Water-Conserving Plumbing Fixtures.
(3) Chapter 6, Part 3, Loitering.
(4) Chapter 11, Part 1, Sex Offenders Residency Restrictions.
(5) Chapter 24, Part 6, Mercantile and Business Privilege Tax.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 13, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
§ 1-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes and revisions.
(1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(4) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
(5) "Warrington Township Municipal Authority" is changed to "Water
and Sewer Department."
(6) Instances of "Chairman" and "Chair" are changed to "Chairperson."
(7) Chapter 97, Article I, is amended to change instances of "Dog
Warden" to "Animal Control Officer."
(8) Chapter 181 is amended to change instances of "municipality" to
"Township."
(9) Chapter 370 is amended to delete the "R/" preceding the district
abbreviations for the Planned Residential Development District and
the Planned Residential Development - Mobile Home Parks District.
(10) Chapter 370 is amended to change instances of BOCA Basic
Building Code to Uniform Construction Code.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 10-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-O-10." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 1-7
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 1-15
1:8
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
five days after adoption of this ordinance.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 9
BOARDS, COUNCILS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 20. Police Department — See Ch. 57.
§ 1-15 WARRINGTON CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
[Adopted 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-6 (Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-1. Planning Commission created. [Amended 3-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-2]
A Township Planning Commission to be composed of seven members is
hereby created and established in the Township of Warrington, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with Act No. 247 of 1968, known as the
"Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," 53 P.S. § 10101, as amended.
§ 9-2. Term of members.
The term of each member of the Planning Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified, provided that the
members of the Planning Commission as it exists at the time of the adoption
of this article shall continue as the members of the Planning Commission
established by this article. Subsequent terms of the office shall be arranged
so that no more than two members shall be reappointed or replaced during
any future calendar year.
§ 9-3. Alternate members. [Added 4-12-2016 by Res. No. 2016-R-27;
amended 5-24-2016 by Res. No. 2016-R-37]
§ 9-4. Activities of the Planning Commission.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson and Vice Chairperson and
shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may
make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures,
consistent with the ordinances of Warrington Township and the laws of
Pennsylvania. The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually make a written report, by March 1 of each year, of its
activities to the Board of Supervisors. Interim reports may be made as often
as may be necessary or as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township may appoint by
resolution at least one but not more than three residents of the
municipality to serve as alternate members of the Warrington Township
Planning Commission.
B. Alternate members shall perform those duties provided pursuant to
Section 203(e) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code [53
P.S. § 10203(e)].2
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the first appointed alternate member,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:11
§ 9-5. Powers and duties. [Added 10-22-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-13; amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-07]
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality and present it for the consideration of the governing body.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of
the planning agency shall be in the possession of the governing body.
C. Make recommendations to the governing body concerning the adoption
or amendment of an official map.
D. Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a zoning
ordinance, and make recommendations to the governing body on
proposed amendments to it as set forth in this act.
E. Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development
and planned residential development regulations.
F. Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a
building code and a housing code and make recommendations
concerning proposed amendments thereto.
G. Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the duties and obligations imposed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.3
H. Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality an
environmental study.
I. Submit to the governing body of a municipality a recommended capital
improvements program.
J. Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a water
survey, which shall be consistent with the State Water Plan and any
applicable water resources plan adopted by a river basin commission.
The water survey shall be conducted in consultation with any public
water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
K. Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
L. Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies
and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies
and individuals.
M. Hold public hearings and meetings.
N. Present testimony before any board.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 9-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-5
1:12
§ 9-6. Governing act. [Added 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-6; amended
10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-13; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-07]
The functions and operations of the Planning Commission as herein
described shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.4
O. Require from other departments and agencies of the municipality such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
P. In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
Q. Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a study
regarding the feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy
sources in specific areas within the municipality.
R. Review the zoning ordinance, subdivision and land development
ordinance, official map, provisions for planned residential development,
and such other ordinances and regulations governing the development
of land no less frequently than it reviews the Comprehensive Plan.
4. Editor's Note: Former §§ 205, Planning Commission Powers and Duties; 206, Planning
Department Powers and Duties; and 207, Planning Department Director, added
10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-13, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-07.
§ 9-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:13

ARTICLE II
Park and Recreation Board
[Adopted 4-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7 (Ch. 1, Part 6, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Parks and Recreation.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
PARKS — All lands and waters under the control of the Department of Park
and Recreation or that may come under its control while this article is in
effect.
PERSON — Individual persons, groups or organizations who shall request
use of the facilities as indicated in this article or who shall use such
facilities.
§ 9-8. Board established.
§ 9-9. Composition of the Board. [Amended 3-3-1992 by Ord. No.
92-2; 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 03-3]
A. As part of the Warrington Township Park and Recreation Department, a
Park and Recreation Board is hereby established with all those powers
enumerated in the Second Class Township Code,5 Article XXII, and
particularly the power to equip, operate and maintain parks, recreation
areas and facilities.
B. The Board's jurisdiction shall include, though not be limited to, the
swim club, facilities development, budgeting, and field coordination.
A. The Board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the
Supervisors and shall serve a term of five years or until their successor
is appointed, except that the members first appointed shall be
appointed for such terms that the terms of not more than two shall
expire annually thereafter. Members shall serve without pay. One of the
five members appointed to the Board by the Supervisors shall be a
current elected or appointed representative from Warrington to the
Central Bucks School Board. Should all eligible school board
representatives from Warrington decline to serve as a member of the
Park and Recreation Board, this vacancy may be filled by any other
qualified person in the Township. Termination or expiration of the
school director's term shall not be reason for disqualification of that
member to serve the remainder of the term on the Board of the Park
and Recreation Department. All persons appointed shall serve their full
terms unless voluntarily resigned, or removed from the office by the
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 9-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9
1:15
§ 9-10. Director of Parks and Recreation. [Amended 3-3-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-2]
Supervisors for dereliction or neglect of duty. Vacancies occurring for
other than expired terms shall be filled in the manner of original
appointments for the unexpired portion of the term.
B. The Board shall be responsible to develop and maintain a
comprehensive recreation program for young adults and senior
citizens.
C. The Board shall prepare and present to the Supervisors an annual
operating budget prepared with the assistance of the Director of Parks
and Recreation, and the Supervisors shall review and appropriate funds
for that portion of the proposed budget as it deems appropriate. The
Director shall thereafter administer those programs and activities as
approved and funded by the Supervisors.
D. The Board may utilize volunteers to assist Board members in
developing and maintaining recreation programs and any other
activities that the Board undertakes. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-O-07]
A. The Board of Supervisors does hereby create the position of Director of
Parks and Recreation with the authority to enforce this article, and to
recommend for adoption such rules and regulations as are deemed
necessary to exercise general supervision over persons occupying or
using the parks and recreation areas within the Township.
B. The Director shall supervise the office management of the Recreation
Department including financial accountability of the Department's
expenditures, inventory control of supplies and equipment, and
supervision of staff and programs.
C. The Director shall be a nonvoting member of the Park and Recreation
Board. The Director shall report on a regular basis to the Board of
Supervisors recommendations and the business of the Warrington
Township Park and Recreation Department.
§ 9-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-10
1:16
ARTICLE III
Pension Committee
[Adopted 10-6-1992 by Res. No. 92-R-79 (Ch. 1, Part 8B, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-11. Committee established. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warrington hereby establishes
a Pension Committee of eight members to review, consider and advise the
Board of Supervisors on all matters which shall come before it regarding
the Township's pension plan for nonuniformed employees including, but
not limited to, provisions and benefits, the funding thereof, investment and
reinvestment of the pension fund, issues of administration and payment
of benefits, and shall report to the Board of Supervisors its findings and
recommendations. The Pension Committee representatives shall be
appointed annually by the Board of Supervisors and from time to time as
necessary to fill any vacancy which shall arise. The Pension Committee shall
consist of the following eight individuals:
A. Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors.
B. One member from the Board of Supervisors.
C. Warrington Township Manager.
D. One member and one alternate member of the Warrington Township
Police Benevolent Association.
E. One nonuniformed Township employee.
F. Three citizens of the Township.
§ 9-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-11
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Historic Commission
[Adopted 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8 (Ch. 1, Part 8G, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-12. Creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established the Warrington Township Historic
Commission.
§ 9-13. Membership.
The Warrington Township Historic Commission shall consist of seven
members who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township for terms of three years. The original members of the Commission
shall serve terms as follows, as determined by the Board of Supervisors:
Three of the original Commission members shall be appointed to serve
for terms of three years; two of the original Commission members shall
be appointed to serve for terms of two years; and two of the original
Commission members shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year, or
until their successors are appointed.
§ 9-14. Residency and compensation.
All members of the Warrington Township Historic Commission shall be
residents of Warrington Township and shall serve without compensation
other than for such expenses in connection with their duties on said
Commission as the governing bodies of Warrington Township shall approve
in advance.
§ 9-15. Quorum; taking action. [Amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-09]
A quorum shall consist of a number of members as determined by the
Historical Commission. Action may only be taken by affirmative vote of a
majority of a quorum of the Commission.
§ 9-16. Election of officers.
The Warrington Township Historic Commission shall elect from its
members, at the first meeting thereof, and at the annual meeting in January
of each and every year thereafter, a Chairperson, Secretary and such other
officers as the said Commission may deem necessary, by a majority vote of
the members present at such meeting. Written notice of the annual meeting
shall be mailed to each member by the Secretary at least five days prior to
said meeting. Regular or special meetings shall convene at the call of the
Chairperson, or in such other manner as the members may, by a majority
vote, designate.
§ 9-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-17
1:19
§ 9-17. Functions and responsibilities.
The Warrington Township Historic Commission shall undertake the
following functions and responsibilities in connection with advising the
Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township in identifying and preserving
historical sites, buildings, papers, documents and relics of historical
significance to Warrington Township.
§ 9-18. Reports.
The Warrington Township Historic Commission, by its Chairperson or by
other members appointed for such purpose by the Chairperson, shall make
such reports from time to time to the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township as requested by the Board of Supervisors or as the said
Chairperson shall deem advisable.
A. Conduct investigations on historical matters relating to Warrington
Township, and report the same for public information.
B. Collect and disseminate data and information on matters of historical
significance to Warrington Township.
C. Publish pamphlets or reports designating the historical sites or
buildings of significant value to the history of Warrington Township.
D. Make recommendations for suitable plaques or markers to distinguish
historical sites and buildings of Warrington Township.
E. Cooperate with any qualified historical society in investigations of
historical matters relating to Warrington Township.
F. Recommend to the Board of Supervisors a suitable depositary and
display of historical papers, documents and relics.
G. Cooperate with and encourage the activities of interested citizens to the
end that such activities will serve the historical interest of Warrington
Township.
H. When requested by the Board of Supervisors, conduct investigations
into the historical significance of any structures or historically
significant features shown or affected by any plan of subdivision or land
development filed with the Township.
I. The Commission may utilize volunteers to assist the Commission
members in accomplishing the activities listed above and any other
activities that the Commission undertakes. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-O-07]
§ 9-17 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-18
1:20
ARTICLE V
Veterans Affairs Committee
[Adopted 8-14-2007 by Res. No. 07-R-51 (Ch. 1, Part 8J, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-19. Establishment; membership. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Res.
No. 2008-R-13; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
§ 9-20. Purpose. [Amended 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
A. Committee establishment. The Board of Supervisors herein establishes
a Veterans Affairs Committee ("VAC"), which shall consist of seven
members who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to serve
three-year terms. Three members shall be appointed to three-year
terms and four members shall be appointed to two-year terms. One
Supervisor shall serve as a nonvoting liaison to the Committee.
B. Upon expiration of initial terms, all prospective members shall be
subject to reappointment to a three-year term by the Board of
Supervisors, unless said member requests not to be reappointed.
C. Alternate membership. The Board of Supervisors may also appoint up to
five alternate members, at its discretion, to assist the Veterans Affairs
Committee in fulfilling its stated purpose and mission. The term of
membership for any alternate members will be one year, which can be
extended at the alternate member's request upon approval by the
Committee Chair and the Board of Supervisors.
A. The Committee shall be authorized to:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors related to
matters associated with veterans' affairs and the Warrington War
Monument in IPW Park;
(2) Organize and hold the annual Memorial and Veterans Day
Ceremonies;
(3) Promote and sell brick pavers for the memorial at IPW Park;
(4) Review and approve applications submitted for deserving veterans
to have their names inscribed on the Memorial Wall at IPW Park;
(5) Participate in Warrington Day;
(6) Establish and operate the Helping Hands Program to assist
veterans and their families that reside within the Township;
(7) Utilize volunteers to assist Committee members to accomplish the
activities listed above and any other activities that the Committee
undertakes;
(8) The Committee may perform such other functions as requested by
the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
§ 9-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-21
1:21
§ 9-21. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet as need be, but at least quarterly, at a time and
date to be published in the public meeting notices of Township meetings.
The Committee, however, by a majority vote, may cancel meetings.
§ 9-22. Compensation and expenses.
Committee members shall not receive any compensation for their services.
Appointed Supervisors on the Committee shall continue to receive their
Supervisor stipend, but no additional compensation shall be paid to a
member of the Board of Supervisors or any other person serving on the
Committee. However, members shall be reimbursed for expenses actually
and necessarily incurred by him/her in the performance of his/her duties,
provided said expenses are approved in advance by the Township Manager.
§ 9-23. Officers.
The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary at the first meeting
of each calendar year. The Chairperson shall be responsible to set the
agenda in coordination with the Township Manager, coordinate information
requests from Township staff, preside over the meetings and call for
motions and recommendations. The Secretary shall be responsible for
assisting in the preparation of the minutes of each meeting.
§ 9-24. Minutes.
The Committee shall keep minutes of its meetings and activities and shall
make reports and recommendations to the Board of Supervisors and
Township Manager as necessary. At a minimum, minutes shall include those
persons in attendance at the meeting, Committee motions, votes as well as
recommendations.
§ 9-25. Scope.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as an abolishment of any
existing Township agency, board, authority or commission even though such
agency, board, authority or commission may have responsibilities related
to the responsibilities delegated to this Committee. Neither the Committee
nor its members shall have authority to enter into contracts without the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 9-21 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-25
1:22
ARTICLE VI
Communications Advisory Board
[Adopted 4-24-2008 by Res. No. 2008-R-25 (Ch. 1, Part 8K, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-26. Establishment.
The Board of Supervisors herein establishes a Communications Advisory
Board (CAB), which shall consist of five members who shall be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors to serve three-year terms. At the outset, two
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, two members shall be
appointed to two-year terms and one member shall be appointed to a oneyear
term. The terms shall commence on April 24, 2008. Upon expiration
of terms, all prospective members shall be subject for reappointment to
a three-year term. One Supervisor shall serve as liaison to the Advisory
Board.
§ 9-27. Purpose. [Amended 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
CAB members shall be authorized to make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors related to matters associated with communications, including
but not limited to short-term and long-range planning related to the timely
and relevant dissemination of information. The CAB may perform such other
functions as requested by the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
The CAB may utilize volunteers to assist the CAB in accomplishing these
activities and any other activities that the CAB undertakes.
§ 9-28. Meetings.
CAB members shall meet as need be, but at least quarterly, at a time and
date to be published in the public meeting notices of Township meetings.
The Board, however, by a majority vote, may cancel meetings.
§ 9-29. Compensation and expenses.
CAB members shall not receive any compensation for their services.
Appointed Supervisors on the Board shall continue to receive their
Supervisor stipend, but no additional compensation shall be paid to a
member of the Board of Supervisors or any other person serving on the
Board. However, members shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and
necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties, provided
that said expenses are approved in advance by the Township Manager.
§ 9-30. Officers.
CAB members shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson at the first
meeting of each calendar year. The Communications Officer shall be
responsible to set the agenda in coordination with the Township Manager
and coordinate information requests from Township staff, as well as be
responsible for assisting in the preparation of the minutes of each meeting.
§ 9-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-30
1:23
The Chairperson will preside over the meetings and call for motions and
recommendations.
§ 9-31. Minutes.
CAB shall keep minutes of its meetings and activities and shall make reports
and recommendations to the Board of Supervisors and Township Manager
as necessary. At a minimum, minutes shall include those persons in
attendance at the meeting, Board motions, votes, as well as
recommendations.
§ 9-32. Miscellaneous.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as an abolishment of any
existing Township agency, board, authority or commission, even though
such agency, board, authority or commission may have responsibilities
related to the responsibilities delegated to this Board. Neither the Board
nor its members shall have authority to enter into contracts without the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 9-30 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-32
1:24
ARTICLE VII
Environmental Advisory Council
[Adopted 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-11 (Ch. 1, Part 8H, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 9-33. Creation.
An advisory council to be known as the "Warrington Township
Environmental Advisory Council" is hereby created and shall continue to
function until this article is repealed.
§ 9-34. Membership. [Amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-03]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall be comprised of seven members,
residents of Warrington Township, two members to be appointed from
among the membership of the Warrington Township Planning Commission,
the Park and Recreation Board and/or the Bike and Hike Committee, and
the balance from the general population. No more than eight alternate
members shall be appointed from the general population.
§ 9-35. Appointment; terms.
Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 9-36. Reimbursement for expenses.
Council members shall receive no compensation for their services but may
be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them
in the performance of their duties.
§ 9-37. Council advisory to Board of Supervisors.
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to the Board of
Supervisors and shall coordinate its activities with other Township
agencies.
A. Council members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of
Warrington Township.
B. There shall be nine regular members of the Environmental Advisory
Council who shall serve a term of five years. Alternate members shall
serve a term of five years. Terms of office shall expire on the first
Monday in January following the last year of their term of office, or until
a successor is appointed. Initial appointments shall be so staggered that
the term of one resident member shall expire each year. [Amended
2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-03; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 9-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-38
1:25
§ 9-38. Appointment of officers.
The Council shall appoint officers from among its membership, including a
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary. Appointments shall be made
during the first meeting in January of each year.
§ 9-39. Duties and responsibilities.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 9-40. Minutes; reports to Board of Supervisors.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Board of Supervisors.
Minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the governing body.
§ 9-41. Appropriation of funds for expenses.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the Council.
A. Identify environmental problems and submit to the Board of
Supervisors an action plan to correct the problem.
B. Prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors, by the end of February
of each year, an annual report, highlighting the accomplishments of the
Council during the past year and proposed community environmental
program for the coming year.
C. Provide liaison support to environmental advisory councils of nearby
municipalities.
D. Undertake such environmental tasks as requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
E. The Council may utilize volunteers to assist the Council members in
accomplishing the activities listed above and any other activities that
the Council undertakes. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
§ 9-38 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-41
1:26
ARTICLE VIII
Open Space and Land Preservation Committee6
[Adopted 10-12-2010 by Res. No. 2010-R-36; amended in its entirety
11-22-2016 by Res. No. 2016-R-59 (Ch. 1, Part 8E, of the 1995 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 9-42. Establishment.
The Board of Supervisors herein establishes a permanent Open Space and
Land Preservation Committee.
§ 9-43. Members.
§ 9-44. Terms; composition.
A. The task force shall consist of seven members as enumerated below:
(1) Warrington Township resident-at-large (2).
(2) Warrington Township Planning Commission member (1).
(3) Warrington Township Environmental Advisory Council member (1).
(4) Warrington Township Park and Recreation Board member (1).
(5) Warrington Township Bike and Hike Committee member (1).
(6) Warrington Township Historic Commission member (1).
B. One member of the Board of Supervisors shall serve as Committee
liaison, and the Township Manager may appoint a member of Township
staff as staff liaison.
A. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for threeyear
terms or until their successor shall be duly qualified and
appointed. If a member's term of office on a board, commission or
council shall expire and they shall leave said board, commission or
council, then their term of office on this Committee shall automatically
terminate.
B. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
entitled to be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in
furtherance of business on behalf of the Township. However, members
shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by
them in the performance of their duties, provided said expenses are
approved in advance by the Township Manager.
6. Editor's Note: Former Subpart 8E, Cable Television Advisory Board, adopted 4-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-2, was repealed 4-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-08.
§ 9-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-45
1:27
§ 9-45. Appointments.
The advisory boards shall each submit a nomination to the Board of
Supervisors of a current member for appointment to the Open Space and
Land Preservation Committee prior to December 31, 2016. Applications for
at-large members will be solicited. Initial appointments shall be as follows:
§ 9-46. Activities.
The Open Space and Land Preservation Committee shall be charged with
the following activities:
A. Three members appointed to a three-year term.
B. Two members appointed to a two-year term.
C. Two members appointed to a one-year term.
A. Updating the inventory of all remaining Township open-space parcels
and keeping an index of such areas, whether publicly or privately
owned, including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps, and
other unique natural areas, for the purpose of obtaining information on
and making recommendations regarding the proper use of such open
space areas.
B. Developing and recommending programs for open space preservation
and environmental protection.
C. Serving as an advisory body to the Board of Supervisors on all matters
associated with open space preservation within the Township.
D. Performing such other services as shall be requested, from time to time,
by the Board of Supervisors.
E. The Committee may utilize volunteers to assist Committee members in
accomplishing the activities listed above and any other activities that
the Committee undertakes. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-O-07]
§ 9-45 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-46
1:28
ARTICLE IX
Bike and Hike Trails Committee
[Adopted 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-02]
§ 9-47. Establishment.
An advisory committee to be known as the Warrington Township Bike and
Hike Committee is hereby created and shall continue to function until this
article is repealed. The Board of Supervisors hereby acknowledges and
ratifies the previous work performed by the Township's existing informally
organized Bike and Hike Committee.
§ 9-48. Composition and appointment.
The Bike and Hike Committee shall be comprised of seven members, all
of whom shall be residents of Warrington Township, to be appointed by
the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township. Resident committee
members shall serve a term of five years. Terms of office shall expire on the
first Monday in January following the last year of their term of office, or until
a successor is appointed. Initial appointments shall be staggered so that the
term of at least one, but not more than two, resident members shall expire
each year.
§ 9-49. Duties.
The purpose of the Bike and Hike Committee shall be to:
A. Advise the Board of Supervisors regarding issues concerning bicyclists
and pedestrians within Warrington Township;
B. Investigate and analyze appropriate routes of travel for bicyclists and
pedestrians;
C. Coordinate the potential extension of bicycle and pedestrian routes
from adjoining municipalities into Warrington Township;
D. Evaluate and make recommendations for any proposed biking or
walking facilities, including but not limited to, delineated bicycle lanes,
bicycle racks, signage and signalization; and
E. Undertake such tasks associated with bicycling, hiking and walking as
directed by the Board of Supervisors.
F. Establish programs and events to encourage the use of the trails and
outdoor activities in Warrington Township;
G. Evaluate the availability of grants and assist in the preparation of
grants with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
H. Utilize volunteers to assist Committee members in accomplishing the
purposes listed above and any other activities that the Committee
undertakes. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
§ 9-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-50
1:29
§ 9-50. Compensation.
Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services, but
may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by
them in the performance of their duties, at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 9-51. Minutes; reports to Board of Supervisors.
The Bike and Hike Committee shall keep records of its meetings and provide
reports to the Board of Supervisors upon request. Minutes of each meeting
shall be made available to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 9-52. Expenses.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the committee.
§ 9-50 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-52
1:30
ARTICLE X
Tennis and Swim Club Advisory Council
[Adopted 1-22-2019 by Res. No. 2019-R-10]
§ 9-53. Establishment.
The Board of Supervisors herein establishes the Barness Tennis and Swim
Club Advisory Council.
§ 9-54. Membership. [Amended 7-9-2019 by Res. No. 2019-R-38]
§ 9-55. Appointment; compensation.
The members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board. Members may be removed at any
time, for any reason or for no reason. If a member's term of office on a
board, commission or council shall expire and the term of office on this
Committee shall automatically terminate. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation but shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any outof-
pocket expenses incurred in furtherance of business on behalf of the
Township. However, members shall be reimbursed for expenses actually
and necessarily incurred by him/her in the performance of his/her duties,
provided said expenses are approved in advance by the Township Manager.
§ 9-56. Duties.
The Barness Tennis and Swim Club Advisory Council shall be charged with
the following tasks:
A. The Committee shall consist of nine members as enumerated below:
(1) Warrington Township Park and Recreation Board Members: two,
until a Park and Recreation Director is hired and then there will be
one Park and Recreation Board member and the Park and
Recreation Manager.
(2) Barness Swim Club members or township residents: seven.
B. One member of the Board of Supervisors shall serve as Committee
liaison, and the Township Manager may appoint a member of Township
staff as staff liaison.
A. Establish an effective marketing strategy;
B. Outreach to other organizations for revenue enhancement;
C. Consider possible name change (Mary Barness must be included in
name);
D. Evaluate fee structure for membership;
E. Recommend new programming to attract more revenue;
§ 9-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-56
1:31
§ 9-57. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet at minimum, once per month and shall provide a
written report to the Park and Recreation Board following the meeting.
F. Consider and recommend facility improvements;
G. Review existing policies and procedurals;
H. Consider and recommend new amenities to attract new members;
I. Perform such other services as shall be requested, from time to time, by
the Board of Supervisors.
J. Other items that the Steering Committee determines are necessary.
§ 9-56 WARRINGTON CODE § 9-57
1:32
ARTICLE XI
Ad Hoc and Special Committees
[Adopted 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-07]
§ 9-58. Board to establish committees.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, establish special purpose
ad hoc and/or special committees to advise them on particular projects. The
Board shall establish such committees by resolution which shall establish
the committee; set forth the members of the committee; the purposes of
the committee; the terms of the committee; and any additional information
deemed necessary by the Board. All ad hoc and special committees may
utilize volunteers to assist the committee in accomplishing the activities of
the committee.
§ 9-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-58
1:33
Chapter 20
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 20-1. Recognition.
§ 20-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Board of Supervisors shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Township. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 20-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Township Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act
of December 18, 1984, No. 205, § 701 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Township Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s)
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 31
MANAGER
A. The following association(s) is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township of
Warrington: Warrington Township Fire Company, Number 1, Firemen's
Relief Association.
B. The above named association(s) have been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above named association(s) of the Township of Warrington is
designated the proper association(s) to receive such funds as are due
and payable to the Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of
Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
§ 9-58 WARRINGTON CODE § 31-1
1:34
§ 31-1. Office of Township Manager.
The office of Township Manager is hereby continued subject to the right of
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warrington, by ordinance, to
abolish said office at any time.
§ 31-2. Election by Board; removal.
The Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time and wherever there is a
vacancy, by majority vote of all its members, elect one person to fill said
office, who shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. Any such
Township Manager shall be subject to removal by the Board of Supervisors
by majority vote of all its members subject to any employment agreement
between the Township and Manager in effect at such time.
§ 31-3. Qualifications. [Amended 6-16-1987 by Ord. No. 87-8]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in
or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Township of
Warrington.
§ 31-4. Bond.
Before entering his duties, the Township Manager shall give a bond to the
Township of Warrington, with a bonding company as surety, in the sum
of $5,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, premium
for the said bond to be paid for by the Township of Warrington. The bond
of the Township Manager may be included in, and the Manager may be
bonded under and covered by the blanket bond now in force and effect for
all Township employees in the aforesaid amount of $5,000.
§ 31-5. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Manager shall be set by resolution,
which may encompass employment agreement provisions.
§ 31-6. Administration of the Township.
A. The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors of
Warrington Township as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Township of Warrington. His powers
and duties shall relate to the general management of all Township
business not expressly imposed or conferred upon other Township
officers.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township hereby authorizes
the Township Manager or any duly appointed interim Township
Manager to execute on behalf of the Board of Supervisors contracts,
§ 31-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-6
1:35
§ 31-7. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-14-1982 by Ord. No. 82-9]
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Township
Manager shall include the following:
deeds, easements, plans, or other documents which have been
reviewed and approved by the Board of Supervisors at a public meeting.
[Added 7-12-2016 by Res. No. 2016-R-42]
A. The supervision and responsibility for the activities of those municipal
departments as determined from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors by formal resolution.
B. Responsibility for hiring, and when necessary for the good of the
Township, discharging or disciplining employees of the Township under
his supervision; provided, that any employee covered by civil service
status or covered by the tenure acts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall be hired, disciplined, or discharged in accordance
with such statutes. The Manager shall report, at the next regularly
meeting thereafter of the Board of Supervisors, any action taken by the
authority of this section. No person shall be discharged or disciplined
without cause.
C. Preparation and submission to the Board of Supervisors an annual
budget together with an explanatory budget message in conformity
with the applicable provisions of the Second Class Township Code.7
D. Responsibility for the administration of the budget after it is adopted by
the Board of Supervisors.
E. Responsibility for attending and preparing the agenda for all meetings
of the Board of Supervisors including any necessary documentation
relative thereto. He shall receive notice of all committees, boards and
commissions of the Township and be entitled to take part, to attend and
take part in such meetings as he deems necessary to fulfill his duties
hereunder.
F. In informing the Board of Supervisors as to the conduct of Township
affairs and in furtherance thereof submitting periodic reports on the
condition of the Township finances and such other reports as the Board
of Supervisors may from time to time request.
G. Responsibility for letting of contracts in due form in accordance with
law and supervision of the faithful performance of all contracts, except
in such instances as these duties are expressly imposed upon some
other Township official by law.
H. Responsibility for enforcing the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the Township and collection of all
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 31-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 31-7
1:36
§ 31-8. Absence of the Manager.
In case of illness or the absence of the Manager from the Township, the
Board of Supervisors shall delegate one qualified member of the Township
staff who shall perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or
disability.
§ 31-9. Benefits. [Amended 9-14-1982 by Ord. No. 82-9]
The Township Manager shall receive benefits as set forth in the Township
Personnel Manual or otherwise as determined from time to time by the
Board of Supervisors by formal resolution. The Township Manager shall also
be entitled to reimbursement for all incidental expenses incurred by him in
his capacity as Township Manager. An itemized list of such expenses shall
be submitted periodically to the Township.
Chapter 38
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 57. Nuisances — See Ch. 214.
monies due and owing to the Township or proceedings which may be
necessary for security and collection of all Township claims.
I. Responsibility for action as the purchasing agent of the Township and in
this capacity all purchases shall be made in strict compliance with the
provisions of the Second Class Township Code,8 including maintenance
of an accurate account of all purchases made and the issuance and
implementation of appropriate rules and regulations governing the
requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
J. Responsibility for investigation and disposition of all complaints
regarding services or personnel of the Township including and
submission of timely reports thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
K. Employment by and with the approval of the Board of Supervisors,
experts and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection
with any functions of the Township acting at all times in the best
interest of the Township and in conformity with the Second Class
Township Code.9
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 31-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-9
1:37

ARTICLE I
Warrantless Arrests
[Adopted 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7 (Ch. 1, Part 3, § 302, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 38-1. Authority to arrest without warrant.
A. In addition to the powers provided by 53 P.S. § 66905 (regarding powers
of police officers), and by 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6324(3) (regarding taking a
juvenile into custody), police officers of Warrington Township shall,
upon view, have the right of arrest without warrant upon probable
cause when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the personal security
of any person or endangers public or private property for the following
offenses:
(1) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (Disorderly conduct).
(2) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (Public drunkenness).
(3) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (Obstructing highways).
(4) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (Underage drinking).
B. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant for a summary
offense, police officers shall comply with the requirements of the
applicable Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure governing the
procedure following arrest without a warrant.
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1
1:39

ARTICLE II
Tickets for Certain Offenses
[Adopted 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-10 (Ch. 1, Part 11, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 38-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall be
defined as follows, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTHORIZED LITTER RECEPTACLE — A litter collection receptacle which
is placed on the public right-of-way or on public property by the Township
for use by the public to deposit small quantities of hand-held trash, but not
household or commercial waste.
DUMPING — Includes, but is not limited to, depositing of litter, depositing
durable goods (refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), small appliances,
furniture, carpets, tires, vehicles, vehicle parts and automotive products
and other such municipal waste, hazardous waste, residual waste and
constructions or demolition debris on public or private property, except as
authorized by Warrington Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 280, Solid
Waste.
GRAFFITI — Includes any and all unauthorized inscriptions, words, figures,
paintings or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratch,
sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface
of public or private property, including, but not limited to, building
structures, fences, walls, vehicles, transport trailers, railroad cars,
dumpsters, etc. Graffiti shall not be construed to apply to easily removable
chalk markings on the public sidewalk and streets used in connection with
traditional children's games.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste material or a combination of solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material that, because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW) — A waste which would be
chemically or physically classified as a hazardous waste but is excluded
from regulation as a hazardous waste because it is produced in quantities
smaller than those regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and because it is generated by persons not
otherwise covered as hazardous waste generators by those regulations.
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; and
A.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed
of or otherwise managed.
B.
Such HHW materials meet one of the following four classifications:
(1) Toxic;
A.
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-2
1:41
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle which presents a harm or danger to the
public or is a public nuisance by virtue of its state or condition of disrepair.
LITTER — Includes, but is not limited to, all waste material, garbage, trash
(i.e., wastepaper, tobacco products, wrappers, food or beverage containers,
newspapers, etc.), municipal waste, human waste, domestic animal waste,
furniture or motor vehicle seats, vehicle parts, automotive products,
shopping carts, construction or demolition material, recyclable material,
dirt, mud and yard waste that has been abandoned or improperly discarded,
deposited or disposed or stored.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office
waste, and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments or from community activities
and which is not classified as "residual waste" or "hazardous waste" as
defined herein.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — A written document issued to a person in
violation of a Township ordinance which specifies the violation and contains
a directive to take corrective action within a specified time frame or face
further legal action.
(2) Flammable;
(3) Reactive; or
(4) Corrosive.
HHW consists of numerous products that are common to the average
household, such as pesticides and herbicides, cleaners, automotive
products, paints and acids.
B.
The following conditions, if present, are examples of a state or condition
of disrepair:
Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the vehicle's
body.
(1)
(2) Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle.
(3) Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle or deflated or flat tire(s).
(4) Unsecured and/or unlocked doors, hood or trunk.
Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced condition, on
concrete blocks or other similar apparatuses.
(5)
(6) Harboring of rodents, insects or other pests.
(7) Without valid Pennsylvania state inspection.
A.
The foregoing examples are not inclusive of all conditions which may
constitute a state or condition of disrepair.
B.
§ 38-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-2
1:42
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association or institution.
PLANTER STRIP — The nonconcrete space in the sidewalk filled with dirt
and/or grass.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land and the improvements thereon, not within
any public right-of-way, owned by any person and includes front, side and
rear yards; vacant lots, buildings and other structural improvements;
walkways and alleyways; and parking areas, designed or used either wholly
or in part for private residential, industrial, or commercial purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any condition or premises which is unsafe or
unsanitary or any condition that threatens the health, morals, safety,
comfort, convenience, or welfare of a community or enjoyment of property.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Any police officer, authorized inspector or public
official designated by the Board of Supervisors to enforce Township
ordinances.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land used, reserved or
dedicated as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk, trail or utility easement,
including curb and gutter areas.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material which would otherwise become
municipal waste, which can be collected, separated or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material or
products. These materials are designated by the regulations promulgated
under Chapter 280, Solid Waste.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any discarded material or other waste including
solid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from construction,
industrial, mining and agricultural operations, excluding municipal water
and sewer operations.
SHOPPING OR GROCERY CART — Includes any small or light vehicle,
typically owned by and used at retail stores, that is moved by hand and used
to carry groceries and other such items.
SIDEWALK AREA — The public right-of-way between the property line and
the curbline or the established edge of the roadway.
SKATEBOARD — A narrow board or platform mounted on wheels designed
to be operated by the rider standing thereon or sitting and propelled by
human power or gravity.
TREE WELL — The nonconcrete area surrounding a shade tree planted in a
sidewalk area.
VEGETATION — Any planting that is cultivated and managed for edible
or ornamental purposes, such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs, hedges,
flowers, etc.
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-2
1:43
VIOLATION TICKET — Issued by a police officer or other sworn public
officer to a person who violates a provision of this article.
WEEDS — All grasses, annual plants and vegetation, which meet any of the
following criteria:
§ 38-3. Violation descriptions.
The following are the types of violations that will be subject to the new
interim enforcement provisions. The appropriate Code sections are
referenced and enhanced where noted:
A. Exceed six inches in height.
Emit unpleasant or noxious odors or pollen, such as ragweed, dandelion
and miscellaneous other vegetation commonly referred to as "weeds"
or "brush."
B.
May conceal filthy deposits or serve as breeding places for mosquitoes,
vermin or other insects.
C.
D. May cause a public nuisance.
A. Illegal litter deposits.
(1) No person shall throw, scatter, deposit or sweep litter or cause
litter to be on any public place such as a street, sidewalk, park,
playground, or public open space, nor onto any private property,
except in authorized receptacles.
(2) No person shall deposit household or commercial waste in an
authorized litter receptacle. Only small quantities of hand-held
trash may be placed in authorized litter receptacles.
(3) Persons shall deposit litter in authorized litter receptacle in such a
manner as to prevent it from overflowing the receptacle.
(4) No person shall damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter
receptacle so as to interfere with its proper function or to detract
from its proper appearance.
(5) No person shall throw, scatter or deposit litter or dump liquids in
any Township storm drain inlet.
B. Vehicular litter.
(1) No person shall throw, scatter or deposit litter from a vehicle upon
any public street or other public place with the Township or upon
private property.
(2) The owner or operator of any motor vehicle from which the
aforementioned litter is thrown, discharged, dumped, deposited,
placed, left or caused to be thrown, discharged, dumped,
deposited, placed or left shall be responsible for such litter.
§ 38-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-3
1:44
(3) No person shall operate a vehicle unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from falling or
being blown, scattered or deposited upon any street, other public
place or private property; nor shall any person drive or move any
vehicle or truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud,
dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
C. Property maintenance violations.
(1) No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property shall
permit litter to accumulate on the property and adjacent sidewalk
area, including the tree well and planter strip. It shall be the
owner's, possessor's or responsible agent's duty to remove such
litter to prevent any such accumulation.
(2) No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property shall
accumulate, permit or store items such as furniture, durable goods
(refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), small appliances, carpets,
tires, vehicles, vehicle parts, automotive products or municipal
waste, hazardous waste, residual waste or construction or
demolition debris on the exterior of the property if it poses a threat
to the physical appearance, safety or public health of the
community or if its presence creates the potential for a public
nuisance.
(3) The owner, possessor or responsible agent of a commercial or
institutional property may be required to procure, place, empty and
maintain a sufficient number of litter receptacles on its property for
public use by its customers to prevent the chronic accumulation of
litter. These litter receptacles may not be placed in the public rightof-
way.
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct or reduce in any way
clear width of any doorway, hallway, passageway, fire escapes or
other exitways.
(5) No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property shall
permit grass or weeds to exceed six inches in height in the tree
well, sidewalk, curbline or planter strip. It shall be the owner's,
possessor's or responsible agent's duty to cut the grass or weeds to
prevent such growth.
(6) No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property or any
tract of land shall allow any growth of grass or weeds to exceed six
inches in height.
(7) The public officer shall only be required to notify the property
owner once per calendar year that his/her property needs cutting
before having it cut by the Township or its contractors. Following
such notification, the Township may cut the property. Recovery of
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:45
costs shall be in accordance with the procedures listed below in
§ 38-5, Enforcement.
(8) A junk or abandoned vehicle may not be parked, stored or left to
remain on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof on public
or private property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, within the Township of Warrington, unless necessary
for the operation of a business enterprise lawfully permitted on
private property. Any junk or abandoned vehicle or parts thereof
shall be removed.
(9) Vehicle parking is not permitted on grass, landscaped, dirt or stone
areas (except for stone driveways) of property. All parking areas
must be in compliance with all applicable Township ordinances,
codes and regulations. Township-sponsored or special events are
exempt from this restriction.
(10)No owner or responsible agent of real property shall permit graffiti
to remain on such property for more than 10 days, and it shall be
the owner's or responsible agent's duty to remove or cause to be
removed such graffiti. The Township shall notify the owner or
responsible agent of this requirement; and if not removed within 10
days of notification, the Township shall have the authority to
remove said graffiti. Recovery of costs shall be in accordance with
the procedures listed below in § 38-5, Enforcement.
(11)No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property shall
permit vegetation on the property to grow in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance.
(12) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of real property
to remove any satellite dish(es) from the exterior of such property
at the time of service disconnection.
D. Graffiti violations.
(1) No person shall apply graffiti to any natural or man-made surface
on public or private property.
(2) All persons directly or indirectly involved in the acts of graffiti may
be found to be equally responsible and guilty of the act, in addition
to the individual who may personally deface the object or area.
Such involvement may include, but is not limited to, such others in
a group who knowingly made available the tools, writing material,
ladders, lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly
supplied funds to acquire such materials for such purposes.
(3) Writing, drawing, printing or marking with ink, paint, chalk or
other substances on any real or personal property shall be
permitted only to the extent that compliance with Chapter 370,
Zoning, relating to signs, has been met and upon the procurement
§ 38-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-3
1:46
of a Township zoning permit where the following conditions are
met:
(a) The permit shall specify the size, location, site plan, and the
materials to be used and shall include a small design of the
proposed writing, drawing, printing or marking. A signed,
notarized statement authorizing permission for the writing,
drawing, printing or marking from the record owner of the
property or a duly authorized agent must also be included with
the permit application.
(b) No writing, drawing, painting or marking shall contain any
threats or offensive language.
(c) A permit fee, established by the Township of Warrington, shall
be paid in full to the Township. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E. Sale and possession of pressurized cans containing paint and certain
markers restricted.
(1) It is unlawful for any person and/or commercial establishment to
sell, exchange, give or loan, or cause or permit to be sold,
exchanged, given or loaned, any pressurized can containing any
substance commonly known as "paint" or "dye" and any marker
containing a fluid which is not water-soluble and has a point, brush,
applicator or other writing surface of 3/8 of an inch or greater to
anyone under the age of 18 years. Retail stores that sell these items
shall provide and post adequate signage stating the prohibition of
the sale of these products to anyone under the age of 18 years. The
signs shall be posted on the product display shelving and at the
store checkout areas.
(2) It is unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 years to purchase any
pressurized can containing paint or dye or marker as defined
above.
(3) No person shall aid, assist or abet a person under the age of 18 in
obtaining possession of paint in a spray can or any marker
containing a fluid which is not water-soluble and has a point, brush,
applicator or other writing surface of 3/8 of an inch or greater.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to have in
his/her possession any pressurized can containing any substance
commonly known as "paint" or "dye," or any marker containing a
fluid which is not water-soluble and has a point, brush, applicator
or other writing surface of 3/8 of an inch or greater, while on any
public highway, street, alley or way, park playground, swimming
pool, or other public place or property, or on private property
unless the owner of that property consented to the presence of the
paint or marker.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:47
(5) This prohibition shall not apply to a child using paint or a marker
while under the immediate supervision of his/her parent or legal
guardian; a student under direct supervision of his/her teacher; or
any employee using paint or a marker at the direction and under
the supervision of his/her employer.
F. Animal violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or
permit such dog or dogs to run at large in the Township of
Warrington.
(2) Any police officer, animal control officer, or constable may seize any
dog found at large in the Township. Such dogs are to be impounded
in a licensed kennel. Unlicensed dogs that are seized shall be held
in such kennel for 48 hours and, if not claimed, may be destroyed in
accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.10
(3) It shall be illegal within the Township of Warrington for any person
or persons to own, possess, harbor, or control any animal or bird
which makes any noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period
of 10 minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or
more to the disturbance of any person any time of the day or night
regardless of whether the animal or bird is physically situated in or
upon private property, said noise being a nuisance; provided that,
at the time the animal or bird is making such noise, no person is
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or
upon which the animal or bird is situated nor is there any other
legitimate cause which justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
(4) No person, having possession, custody or control of any dog, shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog to commit any nuisance,
including defecation, on any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or
sidewalk in the Township, or upon the floors or stairways of any
building or place frequented by the public or used in common by
any persons, or upon outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys,
curbs or sidewalks of any building abutting on a public street or
park, or upon the grounds of any private property other than the
property of the owner of such animal.
(5) Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog which
commits a nuisance, including defecation, in any area other than
the private property of the owner of such dog, as prohibited in the
Warrington Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 97, § 97-13,
shall be required to immediately remove any feces from such
surface and either:
(a) Carry same away for disposal in a toilet; or
10.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 38-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-3
1:48
(b) Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or
litter receptacle.
G. Building occupancy violations. Before a residential, commercial or
industrial building is reoccupied prior to its final sale or a new tenant
obtained, it shall be the duty of the seller or the landlord of the new
tenant to apply for an occupancy certificate at the office of the
Warrington Township Building Inspector. The Building Inspector or his/
her duly authorized agent shall, upon receipt of said application,
forthwith cause an inspection of the premises to be made.
H. Conduct.
(1) The operation, riding or coasting of skateboards within the cartway
of any public street is hereby prohibited at all times. The cartway is
the actual improved or unimproved traveling surface commonly
understood as that area set aside for the passage of motor vehicles.
(2) The operation, riding or coasting of skateboards in the public rightof-
way during hours of darkness, defined as 1/2 hour after sunset
and 1/2 hour before sunrise, is hereby prohibited.
(3) Where the operation or riding of skateboards is permitted on
sidewalks, the rider shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using
the sidewalk. Due and proper care for pedestrians must at all times
be exercised by the riders.
(4) Other violations to the Warrington Township Code of Ordinances,
pertaining to conduct, shall be subject to this overlay enforcement
ordinance and the associated penalties. These include the following
chapters:
(a) Chapter 153, Curfew.
(b) Chapter 202, Loitering.
(c) Chapter 337, Off-Road Vehicles.
I. Multifamily grass or weed nuisances. No person, firm, or corporation
owning or occupying any multifamily dwelling property within the
Township of Warrington shall permit any grass or weeds or any
vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to
exceed a height of six inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious
odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen or to
go to or produce seed. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing
upon any premises in the Township in violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township.
J. Peddling and solicitation violations.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:49
(1) It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, company,
corporation or organization to enter upon the premises of a private
residence or business at any time of the day or night for the
purpose of conducting any form of soliciting or peddling where the
owner or occupant of the residence or business has posted a "no
trespassing" sign or a "no soliciting" sign, or upon any property
duly registered by the occupant/possessor thereof on the Township
"do not solicit" list, which shall be maintained by the Code
Enforcement Officer and a copy provided to the applicant with the
license.
(2) Any violations to other parts or sections of the Code pertaining to
licenses, permits and general business regulations, including
Chapter 90, Alarm Devices; Chapter 104, Assemblies; Chapter 126,
Cable Television; Chapter 146, Contractors; and Chapter 229,
Peddling and Soliciting, shall be subject to this overlay
enforcement ordinance and the associated penalties.
K. Park and open space violations. Any violations to Chapter 223, Parks
and Recreation, shall be subject to this overlay enforcement ordinance
and associated penalties.
L. Water and sewer violations.
(1) Any violations to Chapter 257, § 257-39, shall be subject to this
overlay enforcement ordinance and associated penalties.
(2) Any violations to Chapter 257, § 257-40 shall be subject to this
overlay enforcement ordinance and associated penalties.
(3) Any violations to other parts or sections of Chapter 257, Sewers
and Sewage Disposal, shall be subject to this overlay enforcement
ordinance and associated penalties.
M. Solid waste violations.
(1) Any violations to Chapter 280, Article II, Collection and
Transportation of Waste, §§ 280-7 and 280-11, shall be subject to
this overlay enforcement ordinance and associated penalties.
(2) Any violations to Chapter 280, Article III, Recycling, §§ 280-18 and
280-19, shall be subject to this overlay enforcement ordinance and
associated penalties.
(3) Any violations to other parts or sections of Chapter 280, Solid
Waste, shall be subject to this overlay enforcement ordinance and
associated penalties.
N. Street and sidewalk violations. Any violations to the Warrington
Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 294, Streets and Sidewalks,
shall be subject to this overlay enforcement ordinance and associated
penalties.
§ 38-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-3
1:50
§ 38-4. Violations by a minor. [Amended 12-10-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-10]
§ 38-5. Enforcement. [Amended 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-10]
O. Swimming pool violations. Any violations to the Warrington Township
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 310, Swimming Pools, shall be subject to
this overlay enforcement ordinance and associated penalties.
P. Zoning violations.
(1) Any violation to Chapter 370, Zoning, shall be subject to this
overlay enforcement ordinance and associated penalties. These
include, but are not limited to, any violations related to signs or
fences, failure to obtain permits, use violations, setback violations,
and failure to comply with Warrington Township Zoning Hearing
Board orders.
(2) The designated Township officials empowered to enforce zoning
violations shall have all the duties and powers conferred by
Chapter 370 for this purpose. No permit shall be issued in
connection with any contemplated erection, construction,
alterations, repairs, extension, replacement and/or use of any
building, structure, sign and/or land unless it first conforms with
the requirements of Chapter 370.
A. Any violation of the provision of this article by a minor 10 years of age
and older may be cause for a citation, a violation ticket and/or a notice
of violation to be issued to the minor or to the parent or legal guardian
of the minor. Any violation of the provisions of this article by a minor
under the age of 10 may be cause for a citation, a violation ticket and/or
a notice of violation to be issued to the parent or legal guardian of the
minor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to
knowingly assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to
violate this article.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any sworn police
officer or other authorized municipal official as designated by the Board
of Supervisors.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this article may be cause for a citation,
a violation ticket and/or a notice of violation to be issued to the violator.
C. A notice of violation or violation ticket shall be served upon a violator by
handing it to the violator, by handing it at the residence of the person to
be served to an adult member of the household or other person in
charge of the residence, by leaving or affixing the notice or violation
ticket to the property where the violation exists, by handing it at any
office or usual place of business of the violator to his/her agent or to the
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:51
§ 38-6. Violation ticket appeals process. [Amended 12-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-O-10]
§ 38-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-10-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-10]
person for the time being in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice to
the violator's address of record.
D. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue may
constitute a separate offense for which a separate fine may be imposed.
E. A public officer is authorized and empowered to cause a violation to be
corrected.
F. If the Township has effected the correction of the violation, the cost
thereof may be charged to the owner of the property, tenant or
offending party. The cost shall be determined by the Township Manager
or his designate in order for the Township to be compensated for both
direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred.
G. Where the public officer or the Township takes corrective action to
abate a public nuisance, the cost thereof, including any labor or
materials supplied by the Township or its contractors, plus an
administrative fee added to each invoice incurred, shall be charged to
the owner and shall constitute a municipal lien against the real
property upon which said cost and fee were incurred. For nuisance
abatement in excess of $2,000, the administrative fee shall be 15% of
the actual cost incurred, including any labor or materials supplied by
the Township or its contractors.
A. A person in receipt of a violation ticket may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors by filing a request within 10 days of receipt of the violation
ticket.
B. A hearing officer, designated by the Board of Supervisors, may uphold
the appeal, deny the appeal or may modify the violation ticket and/or
any associated costs, fines or penalty amounts.
A. Violation ticket fines.
(1) For the first and second offense of a violation of this article within a
twelve-month period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amount
of $25 or $100.
(2) For the third offense of a violation of this article within a twelvemonth
period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amount of
$150 or $250.
(3) For the fourth offense of a violation of this article within a twelvemonth
period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amount of
$300 or $500.
§ 38-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-7
1:52
(4) For the fifth and subsequent offenses of a violation of this article
within a twelve-month period, a citation shall be prepared to
appear before the Magisterial District Judge for trial.
(5) Any persons who receive a violation ticket for any violation of this
article may, within 10 days, admit the violation, waive a hearing,
and pay the fine in full satisfaction.
(6) Any persons who violate the property maintenance provisions of
this article shall pay a fine of $25 or $100 for the first offense with
no additional cost to abate the violation. For the second and
subsequent violations of the property maintenance provisions, the
owner shall pay a fine as indicated in Subsection A(2) through (4)
above, and the owner shall pay all direct and indirect costs
incurred by the Township for the abatement of the violation.
B. Violation ticket penalties.
(1) If the person in receipt of a $25 violation ticket does not pay the
fine or request a hearing within 10 calendar days, the person will
be subject to a $10 penalty each day for days 11 through 20.
(2) If the person in receipt of a $100 violation ticket does not pay the
fine or request a hearing within 10 calendar days, the person will
be subject to a $25 penalty each day for days 11 through 20.
(3) If the person in receipt of a $150, $250, $300, or $500 violation
ticket does not pay the fine or request a hearing within 10 calendar
days, the person will be subject to a $50 penalty each day for days
11 through 20.
(4) Failure of the person to make payment or request a hearing within
20 calendar days of a violation ticket shall make the person subject
to a citation.
C. Citation fines. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this
article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall
also constitute a separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 38-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:53
Chapter 46
PENSIONS
Chapter 54
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 71.
§ 38-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 38-7
1:54
ARTICLE I
Drug and Alcohol Policy for CDL Drivers
[Adopted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11 (Ch. 1, Part 9, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 54-1. Pre-employment.
All applicants for commercial driver positions will be tested for cocaine,
phencyclidine (PCP), marijuana, opiates (including heroin) and
amphetamines (hereinafter collectively referred to as "controlled
substances") and alcohol prior to commencing employment with Warrington
Township. A commercial driver applicant testing positive for alcohol or
drugs will not be considered for employment with Warrington Township.
§ 54-2. Random testing.
Each year the consortium will use a random process to select at least 50%
of its CDL drivers who will be tested for the use of controlled substances.
Additionally, at least 25% of the consortium's CDL drivers will be randomly
tested for alcohol use in the first year of this policy. CDL drivers selected on
a random basis for testing will be required to supply a urine sample.
§ 54-3. Reasonable cause testing.
Testing will be required by the consortium upon reasonable cause. The
conduct necessitating testing, if at all feasible, shall have been witnessed
by a Supervisor or the Township Road Superintendent or his assistant, if
any, or the Township Manager. Each person making a determination of
reasonable cause must have received training in the detection of probable
drug use by observing a person's behavior.
§ 54-4. Mandatory post-accident testing.
A. CDL drivers shall provide urine specimens for controlled substance
testing as soon as possible after a commercial vehicle accident, but in
no case later than 32 hours after the accident. CDL drivers must be
tested for alcohol as soon as possible after a motor vehicle accident, but
in no case later than eight hours after the accident. A CDL driver may
not consume alcohol until he has been tested.
B. An accident is defined as involving:
(1) A fatality.
(2) Bodily injury that requires a person to be transported away from
the scene for medical treatment.
(3) Damage to any vehicle that requires the vehicle to be towed away
from the scene by a tow truck or another vehicle.
(4) If the CDL driver receiving a citation under state or local law for a
moving violation arising from the accident.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-4
1:55
§ 54-5. Return to duty testing.
If Warrington Township offers a CDL driver reemployment after the CDL
driver has been referred to an alcohol and substance abuse professional and
the CDL driver has undergone all recommended treatment, the CDL driver
will be tested for alcohol and controlled substances prior to returning to
duty. The CDL driver must test negative prior to returning to duty.
§ 54-6. Follow-up testing.
Any CDL driver who has returned to duty after a positive alcohol or
controlled substance test will be subject to unannounced follow-up tests for
a period of up to 60 months. There will be at least six follow-up tests given
during the first 12 months.
§ 54-7. Employee assistance program (EAP).
C. If, as a consequence of an accident, a CDL driver is seriously injured
and cannot provide a specimen at the time of the accident, he must
provide the necessary authorization for obtaining hospital records and
other documents that will indicate whether there were any controlled
substances or alcohol in his system at the time of the accident.
A. The consortium shall establish an employee assistance program in
which Warrington Township shall participate, which shall include the
following:
(1) An educational and training component for CDL drives, addressing
alcohol and controlled substances.
(2) An education and training component for supervisory personnel,
addressing alcohol and controlled substances.
(3) A written statement on file and available for inspection, outlining
the consortium's EAP.
B. The EAP training program for all CDL drivers and supervisory
personnel shall be conducted by the consortium and shall consist of at
least 60 minutes of training. The training program will also include the
following elements:
(1) The effects and consequences of alcohol and/or controlled
substance use on personal health, safety and the work
environment.
(2) The manifestations and behavioral causes what may indicate
alcohol and/or controlled substance use or abuse.
(3) Documentation of training given to CDL drivers and supervisory
personnel.
§ 54-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 54-8
1:56
§ 54-8. Notification of test results.
The consortium shall notify Warrington Township and Warrington Township
shall notify its CDL drivers and driver applicants of the results of tests
conducted pursuant to the USDOT regulation. CDL drivers and driver
applicants who test positive will also be advised specifically what controlled
substance or the amount of alcohol that was discovered.
§ 54-9. Record keeping.
§ 54-10. Access to test results and findings.
No program may obtain the individual test results retained by the MRO
and no MRO shall release the individual test results of any employee to
any person without first obtaining written authorization from the tested
individual, unless otherwise requested by law.
§ 54-11. Use, possession and sale on Township property.
A. All of the records relating to the administration and results of the
consortium's and Warrington Township's alcohol and controlled
substance testing program for its CDL drivers will be maintained for a
minimum period of five years, except that individual negative test
results shall be maintained for a minimum of 12 months.
B. There shall be a medical review officer (hereinafter referred to as
"MRO") who is a licensed doctor of medicine or osteopathy with
knowledge of drug abuse disorders and who is employed by the
consortium to conduct alcohol and controlled substance testing in
accordance with the USDOT regulations. The MRO for each subsidiary
and/or division shall be the sole custodian of individual test results for
that division. The MRO shall retain the reports of individual test results
for a minimum of five years.
C. The consortium and Warrington Township shall retain in the CDL
driver's personnel file information indicating only the following:
(1) The employee submitted to a controlled substance and/or alcohol
test.
(2) The date of such test.
(3) The location of such test.
(4) The identity of the person or entity performing the test.
(5) Whether the testing findings was "positive" or "subnegative."
D. The consortium and Warrington Township shall also maintain an annual
calendar-year summary of the records related to the administration and
results of the testing program for its CDL drivers and the USDOT
regulations.
§ 54-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-11
1:57
§ 54-12. Reservation of rights.
§ 54-13. Limitations; severability.
This article shall be limited by any applicable federal or state law or
conflicting Township ordinance, and by any applicable collective bargaining
A. Employees shall not use, sell, possess or receive alcohol or controlled
substances, or distribute or sell prescription drugs while on duty.
Violation of these rules will subject the employee to discipline up to and
including termination, subject to any applicable provisions and
procedures of a collective bargaining agreement. Illicit drugs include
prescription drugs for which the employee has a valid prescription.
B. The consortium and Warrington Township reserve the right, upon
reasonable suspicion, to ask for consent to search the vehicle or
personal property of any employee during working hours, or while on
Warrington Township property or designated workplace, or customer
property. If consent is refused, the consortium and/or Warrington
Township must obtain a search warrant as provided by law.
C. Any employee refusing to consent to or cooperate with a reasonable
search or investigation will be relieved of duty and removed from
Township property or the work place, resulting in appropriate
disciplinary action up to and including possible termination, for
insubordination.
D. Prescription drugs must be kept in their original container identifying
the drug, dosage, date of prescription and physician. Employees are
required to notify their supervisors if taking a prescription drug that
could impair their working ability or alertness.
E. Third-party or contractor employees while on Warrington Township
property will also be subjected to this policy with violations resulting in
removal from the premises.
F. Off-duty conduct. Employees are also expected not to engage in any offduty
or off-premises controlled substance or alcohol-related conduct
which may affect their work performance.
A. Warrington Township reserves the right to add to, change or modify this
policy in its sole discretion, and to terminate any employee at any time,
except as those rights are restricted by law or by an applicable
collective bargaining obligation or agreement. Warrington Township
accepts no liability in the event of an alleged breach of any of the
policies or procedures set forth in this article.
B. Warrington Township encourages every employee and prospective
employee voluntarily to comply with this article not only for his or her
own safety, but for the safety of others. Because of its importance,
Warrington Township will take all necessary steps to ensure
implementation of and compliance with this article.
§ 54-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 54-13
1:58
agreement. Any portion of this article which directly conflicts with such a
law, ordinance or agreement will not be implemented in that jurisdiction or
bargaining unit, but shall be severable and shall not affect the validity and
enforcement of the remainder of this article.
§ 54-14. Construal of provisions.
A. This article is not intended to confer any contractual or other rights or
claims in favor of Warrington Township's employees.
B. Any failure to implement this article or any part thereof, any variation,
addition or omission to the procedures set forth in this article shall not
confer any contractual or other rights or claims in favor of the employee
not otherwise conferred by law. Employees remain employed at will.
§ 54-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-14
1:59
Chapter 57
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 57-1. Creation.
A Warrington Township police force and/or department is hereby created as
of the date hereof and the Board will forthwith advertise for, interview and
test and thereafter employ a full-time Chief of Police and will employ such
full- and/or part-time officers, purchase such equipment, and do such other
acts as are necessary to effectuate the establishment of said police force.
Chapter 63
RECORDS, PUBLIC
§ 54-14 WARRINGTON CODE § 57-1
1:60
ARTICLE I
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 12-9-2008 by Res. No. 2008-R-80 (Ch. 1, Part 10, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 63-1. Information request form.
A requester of records shall complete an information request form provided
by the Office of Open Records and/or the Township and shall state the
records being requested with sufficient specificity.
§ 63-2. Open Records Officer.
The Township hereby designates the Township Manager of the Township
as the Open Records Officer in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rightto-
Know Law,11 and said Open Records Officer shall receive requests
submitted to the Township under the Right-to-Know Law, direct requests to
other appropriate persons within the Township or to appropriate persons
in another agency, track the Township's progress in responding to requests
and issue interim and final responses.
§ 63-3. Requests.
If a requested record contains both public record information as well as
nonpublic record information, the Township may redact the nonpublic
information from the record.
§ 63-4. Time for response; exceptions.
A. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a public record, the
Township shall make a good-faith effort to respond as promptly as
possible under the circumstances existing at the time of the request.
The response shall not exceed five business days from the date of
written request. The failure of the Township to respond in the
designated time frame is equivalent to the denial of the request, with
the following exceptions:
(1) The request requires the redaction of information within a public
record;
(2) The request requires the retrieval of the document from a remote
location;
(3) A timely response cannot be accomplished due to legitimate
staffing limitations;
(4) A legal review is necessary;
(5) The requester did not comply with the Township's policies
regarding public access;
11.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-4
1:61
§ 63-5. Denial of access.
If the request is denied, the following will be included with the denial:
§ 63-6. Appeal procedure.
If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an appeal
with the Office of Open Records or judicial, legislative or other appeals
officer designated under the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law within 15
business days of the mailing date of the Township's response or deemed
denial. The appeal shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rightto-
Know Act. The appeal shall state the grounds upon which the requester
asserts that the record is a public record and shall address any grounds
stated by the Township for denying or delaying the request.
§ 63-7. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
Fees for duplication, mailing or other costs associated with the provision
of records shall be assessed as provided in the Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S.
§ 67.1307.
§ 63-8. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on January 1, 2009.
(6) The requester refuses to pay fees; or
(7) The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the
required time period.
B. If one or more of the above exceptions apply, the Township shall send
written notice to the requester within five business days of the request
stating that the request is being reviewed, the reason for review and
the exception that applies, the expected response date and an estimate
of applicable fees owed when the record becomes available. If a
response is expected more than 30 days after the five-day period, the
request is deemed denied, unless otherwise agreed to by the requester
in writing.
A. A description of the record requested;
B. The specific reasons for the denial, including a citation of supporting
legal provisions of the Township;
C. The typed or printed name, title, business address, business telephone
number and signature of the Open Records Officer on whose authority
the denial was issued;
D. The date of the response; and
E. The appeal procedure.
§ 63-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 63-8
1:62
ARTICLE II
Disposition of Records
[Adopted 10-25-2016 by Res. No. 2016-R-55]
§ 63-9. Intent to follow Municipal Records Manual.
The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, intends to follow the schedules and procedures for disposition
of records as set forth in the Municipal Records Manual approved on
December 16, 2008 (and amended on July 23, 2009); and adopts by
reference the Record Retention Policy, specifically incorporating standards
and requirements for record disposition set forth pursuant to the Municipal
Records Manual of December 16, 2008, as amended on July 23, 2009, and
as may be amended from time to time.
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-9
1:63
Chapter 71
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 63-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 63-9
1:64
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 95-10 (Ch. 1, Part 1B, § 111, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances); amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-O-03]
§ 71-1. Compensation.
A. Each Supervisor of Warrington Township elected or appointed to office
with a term commencing on or after January 1, 2018, shall receive
compensation as a Supervisor in the annual amount of $4,125, which
shall be paid in equal quarterly installments or at the request of a
Supervisor on a monthly basis.
B. Each Supervisor elected or appointed to office prior to January 1, 2018,
shall receive compensation as a Supervisor in the annual amount of
$3,250, which shall be paid in equal quarterly installments or at the
request of a Supervisor on a monthly basis.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-1
1:65

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-4-1997 by Res. No. 97-R-3 (Ch. 1, Part 1C, § 121, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 11-28-2017 by
Res. No. 2017-R-51]
§ 71-2. Compensation.
The compensation of the Warrington Township Tax Collector elected for the
term of office beginning January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2021 is as
follows:
A. One percent of real estate tax, including interim bills;
B. Three percent of the fire hydrant assessment of 1/4 mill;
C. Three dollars per trash bill collected.
§ 71-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:67
Chapter 78
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 257.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision and land management — See Ch.
305.
Water — See Ch. 353.
§ 78-1. Department established.
The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township establishes a separate
Department of Water and Sewer within which all operations involving the
water and sewer systems formerly under control of the Warrington
Township Municipal Authority shall be operated with no revenues to be
commingled with other funds of the Township.
§ 78-2. Record of accounts.
The Department of Water and Sewer shall maintain separate records of
accounts of its operation.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 90
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tickets for certain offenses — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
Police Department — See Ch. 57.
§ 90-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Automatic Fire Protection
Device Regulations."
§ 90-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to
the exterior or interior of a building that emits a warning signal audible
§ 71-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 90-2
1:68
outside the building designed to attract attention when activated, requiring
fire department response.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (hereinafter referred to as "APD") —
Electronically operating instruments composed of sensory apparatus and
related hardware, which automatically transmits a prerecorded voice or
other alarm signal over regular telephone lines by direct or indirect
connection to the Bucks County Communications Center or other
emergency center upon receipt of a stimulus from sensory apparatus that
has detected a fire. Indirect connection shall include answering services
and all other persons monitoring and relaying the information to the Bucks
County Communications Center, or other emergency center.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device or
any audible alarm or other kind of direct or indirect signal given or caused
to be given the Bucks County Communications Center or other emergency
center and firemen respond, which is not the result of a fire, or similar
emergency.
MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR PERSON — Persons or persons responsible for
maintaining and repairing the fire alarm system. Such person or persons
shall be knowledgeable of the operation, maintenance and installation of
fire alarm systems. Such person or persons shall be knowledgeable of
all codes regarding operation, maintenance and installation of fire alarm
systems.
SUBSCRIBER — Any resident, person, corporation, institution, or company
keyed to an automatic protection device in the Township to a designated or
direct trunk line.
USER — Any resident, person, corporation, institution or company which
has installed an audible or other alarm system designed to alert firemen and
require their response.
§ 90-3. Registration of alarm installations; fees. [Amended
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
A. Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, every subscriber
or user of an automatic protection device for fire detection shall
register in writing with the Township of Warrington and provide such
information as may be required, which shall include, though not be
limited to, the following:
(1) The name, residence and telephone number of the user.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of at least two persons
who are authorized to gain entry into the protected premises, and
who are available to respond within 20 minutes of notification.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-3
1:69
(4) The name, address, and telephone number of the fire alarm
equipment supplier and person responsible for maintenance and
repair of the automatic protection device or audible alarm.
B. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the exclusive use of the Township pursuant
to this chapter.
C. The Township shall establish a fee for registration by the subscriber or
user.
D. Each subscriber shall enter into an agreement with the Township
whereby the Township shall be held harmless for any damage or
breakage caused by the Township while making forced entry to answer
an alarm, whether false or authentic.
E. Each subscriber or user shall, upon registration, agree to pay to the
Township such sums for false or accidental activation of fire alarms to
which firemen respond as are then currently set forth in the Township
Schedule of Fees and, further, shall agree to pay such sums as they may,
from time to time, be increased by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
F. Upon registration, the Township shall issue a permit to the subscriber
or user. A permit is required for the use or operation of any alarm
system. Use or operation without first obtaining a permit is unlawful.
The permit may be revoked by the Township for noncompliance with
any provision of this chapter.
G. The Township shall notify the subscriber or user, in writing, upon
receipt of the third false or accidental alarm within any twelve-month
period. Said notice shall be sent via U.S. first-class mail. Notice of fees
due shall be sent for each false alarm in excess of three in any twelvemonth
period.
H. The subscriber or user shall have 10 days to pay the fee charged from
the date of the notice.
I. Failure of the subscriber and/or user to respond to the notice sent or
refusal to pay the fee required shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, subject to the penalties provided in this section.
J. If, due to weather conditions, electrical failure, or other malfunction,
three or more false alarms from unrelated locations are received within
30 minutes of each other, the fee or penalty shall not be assessed nor
shall that alarm be counted for enforcement purposes.
K. It shall be unlawful to intentionally activate a fire alarm to summon the
firemen except for the reporting of a fire.
§ 90-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 90-4
1:70
§ 90-4. Repair and maintenance.
All automatic protection devices must be maintained by the user in good
repair to ensure maximum reliability of operation. For the purposes of this
chapter, any alarm transmitted or activated without any physical evidence
of a fire shall be construed as a false alarm.
§ 90-5. Automatic dialers.
§ 90-6. Audible alarms.
Audible alarms shall be designed to deactivate after 20 minutes of
operation. Each subscriber or user shall have 90 days following the effective
date of this chapter to comply with these regulations. Thereafter, all audible
alarms not in compliance shall be unlawful and must be disconnected, and
shall remain disconnected until brought into compliance with this chapter.
§ 90-7. Liability.
This chapter, nor any agreement resulting therefrom, shall not constitute
acceptance by Warrington Township of any liability to maintain any
equipment, to answer any alarm or any other occurrence in connection
therewith.
§ 90-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of
this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense. This chapter/article may be enforced initially by violation
ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures,
Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
Chapter 97
A. Automatic dialers shall only transmit a message approved by the
Township Fire Marshal. Said equipment shall be designed so as not to
transmit more than two messages arising out of the same fire, to the
Bucks County Communications Center, or other emergency center. The
message shall be no longer than 15 seconds in duration, and shall not
be repeated more than twice.
B. The equipment shall not be keyed to the primary telephone lines of the
Fire Department but shall only be keyed to designated phone numbers.
§ 90-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:71
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tickets for certain offenses — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 214.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 223.
§ 90-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 90-8
1:72
ARTICLE I
Dogs Running at Large
[Adopted 9-18-1973 by Ord. No. 4-73; amended in its entirety
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3 (Ch. 2, Part 1, of the 1995 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 97-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park,
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 97-2. Appointment and duties of Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors
to serve during its pleasure. Such Animal Control Officer along with the
police officers shall have concurrent responsibility for the enforcement of
this article and of the Dog Law of 1982, 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania, and shall have all the powers and duties of an Animal
Control Officer under said Act; provided that he shall not have the power
to make arrests under this Act of Assembly or any other Act of Assembly or
ordinance of the Township of Warrington.
§ 97-3. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Township of Warrington.
§ 97-4. Seizing of dogs.
The Animal Control Officer or any police officer or constable may seize any
dog found at large in the Township. Such dogs are to be impounded in a
licensed kennel.
§ 97-5. Licensed dogs. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner of a licensed dog by
registered or certified mail, with return receipt, that the dog is impounded
and will be disposed of in five days if not claimed. Five days after the return
receipt has been received, and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may
be sold or destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.12
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-6
1:73
§ 97-6. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs that are seized shall be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 97-7. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or Animal Control Officer,
constitute a threat to public health and welfare may be killed by the police
or Animal Control Officer.
§ 97-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $50 to
the Township of Warrington as well as reasonable fees for keeping the
animal in a kennel as fixed by a resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Any
person allowing a dog to run at large a third time in violation of this article,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket (citation);
see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for
Certain Offenses.
12.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 97-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 97-8
1:74
ARTICLE II
Noise Disturbances
[Adopted 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11; amended in its entirety
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1995 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 97-9. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warrington, finding that
excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social
well-being of the people as well as to their comfort, living conditions,
general welfare and safety and being therefore a public health and welfare
hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control
and more-effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of
excessive sound within the Township of Warrington.
§ 97-10. Noise disturbance.
It shall be illegal within the Township of Warrington for any person or
persons to own, possess, harbor, or control any animal or bird which makes
any noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or
makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of
any person any time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal
or bird is physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a
nuisance; provided that, at the time the animal or bird is making such noise,
no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in
or upon which the animal or bird is situated nor is there any other legitimate
cause which justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
§ 97-11. Exceptions.
This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful
any agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits by Act No.
1982-133.
§ 97-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 97-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-12
1:75

ARTICLE III
Cleanup of Waste
[Adopted 8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 97-7 (Ch. 2, Part 3, of the 1995 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 97-13. Animal defecation restricted.
No person, having possession, custody or control of any dog, shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog to commit any nuisance, including
defecation, on any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or sidewalk in the
Township, or upon the floors or stairways of any building or place
frequented by the public or used in common by any persons, or upon outside
walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or sidewalks of any building
abutting on a public street or park, or upon the grounds of any private
property other than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 97-14. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog which commits
a nuisance, including defecation, in any area other than the private property
of the owner of such dog, as prohibited in § 97-13 shall be required to
immediately remove any feces from such surface and either:
§ 97-15. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons
exempted.
The provisions of §§ 97-13 and 97-14 hereof shall not apply to a guide
dog accompanying any blind person or to a dog used to assist any other
physically challenged person.
§ 97-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No.
98-14; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 97-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-16
1:77

ARTICLE IV
Number of Animals
[Adopted 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-03 (Ch. 2, Part 4, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 97-17. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warrington, finding excessive
animals are detrimental to the physical, mental, and social well-being of the
people as well as to their public health and welfare, hereby declares that it
is necessary to limit the number of domestic animals within the Township to
protect the quality of life of its residents.
§ 97-18. Maximum number of animals.
It shall be illegal within the Township of Warrington for any person or
persons to own, possess, harbor, or control more than three each of dogs or
cats on any property.
§ 97-19. Exceptions.
§ 97-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall have been found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by
violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement
Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
A. This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare
unlawful any agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits.
B. This article shall not apply to litters of kittens or puppies under three
months of age, provided they are born by bona fide pet animals owned
by the residents of the property and not bred on a commercial basis.
Breeding or allowing an animal to be bred more than once in a twelvemonth
period shall be considered to be a commercial activity.
C. Dogs or cats in excess of three of each kind permanently owned as
existing pets at the time of passage of this article may remain as long as
the resident maintains ownership and complies with all other animal
control ordinances and regulations. Excess animals may not be
replaced after death, loss, or change of ownership. This exception does
not extend to transient animals.
§ 97-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-20
1:79
Chapter 104
ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 153.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 223.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 104-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY — An agent, occupant, lessee,
contract purchaser, or person other than the owner, having possession or
control of property.
PUBLIC GATHERING — All assemblies of people for the purpose of public
amusement reasonably anticipated to number more than 250 for a
continuous period of six hours or more, more than 10% of whom will
assemble outdoors or in structures specially constructed, erected or
assembled for the gathering, whether or not an admission fee is charged.
SPONSOR — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, joint venture, or any other legal entity whatsoever, who
initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts or causes to be advertised
a public gathering.
§ 104-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of property, or person in charge
of property to initiate, organize, promote, permit, conduct or cause to be
advertised a public gathering unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to
this chapter. A separate permit shall be required for each public gathering
for a period of time designated by the permit.
§ 104-3. Permit requirements; exemptions.
A. No public gathering may be held within the boundaries of Warrington
Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, unless the sponsor, the owner of
property and the person in charge of property upon which the
gathering will be conducted jointly apply for and are granted a permit
as herein provided.
B. No permit shall be available for an extent of more than 48 hours'
duration unless the application and permit specifically allow for an
extension of that period.
C. No applicant shall be under 21 years of age.
§ 97-20 WARRINGTON CODE § 104-3
1:80
§ 104-4. Application; fees. [Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-O-06]
D. In case of dispute over the number of people reasonably anticipated to
attend the public gathering, the decision of the Warrington Township
Director of Codes, Inspections, and Emergency Services, or his
designee, shall control.
E. The following activities shall be exempt from permit requirements but
shall coordinate with the Department of Codes, Inspections, and
Emergency Services and the Warrington Township police to ensure
minimum standards for public health and safety are met:
(1) Events held by Warrington Township.
(2) Regularly scheduled events held by public or private elementary
schools, middle schools, or high schools.
(3) Events held within the confines of a permitted assembly area and
not exceeding the permitted maximum capacity.
A. Written application for each public gathering shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township according to the
following schedule:
(1) A gathering numbering 250 to 1,000 persons, at least 20 days prior
to the first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(2) A gathering numbering 1,000 to 3,500 persons, at least 30 days
prior to the first day upon which the public gathering is to
commence.
(3) A gathering numbering 3,500 to 5,000 persons, at least 45 days
prior to the first day upon which the public gathering is to
commence.
(4) A gathering numbering over 5,000 persons, at least 60 days prior to
the first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(5) All applications submitted after the appropriate deadlines shall be
rejected without review.
B. Application shall be made on forms specified by the Board of
Supervisors of Warrington Township and shall contain at least the
following information:
(1) The full legal name, address and telephone number of all sponsors.
(2) The full legal name and address of the owner and person in charge
of the property to be utilized for the public gathering.
(3) If the sponsor-applicant is a partnership or joint venture, then all
parties thereto shall sign as applicants. If the sponsor-applicant is a
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:81
corporation, copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws, and
resolution authorizing the application may be required.
(4) The location and address of the property to be utilized for the
public gathering.
(5) The program of the public gathering or, if no program is prepared,
a narrative statement as to the purpose for which the public
gathering is to be conducted.
(6) A diagrammatic sketch plan of the proposed site of the mass
gathering showing the locations and dimensions of the proposed
service roads, potable water facilities, sanitary facilities, sewage
disposal facilities, medical service facilities, distribution of security
personnel, and provisions for food storage, as well as camping
facilities and projected plans for enclosure, if necessary, of the
proposed site.
(7) Evidence that all permits and licenses as required by state and
county statutes and rules and regulations enacted thereunder have
been obtained or will be obtained.
(8) A statement of the number of persons expected to attend such
event and duration of such attendance.
(9) The specific details relating to:
(a) Food and drink.
(b) Sanitary facilities.
(c) Transportation and parking facilities.
(d) Security and protection of surrounding areas, including
specific reference to the number of marshals assisting in the
control of traffic and supervision of those attending.
(e) On-site medical facilities and hospital care.
(f) Janitorial services and post-gathering trash removal.
(10) A certified copy of the bond or verified evidence of other suitable
financial arrangements, as hereinafter required, must be attached
to the application.
(11) A statement containing the names and addresses of licensed ticket
printers to be used and the plans for assuring the return of monies
upon the termination or cancellation of the event as well as the
means of notifying potential and existing ticket holders of such
cancellation where the anticipated number of people attending is
over 5,000 persons.
(12) Examples of proposed advertising of the event, if any.
§ 104-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 104-4
1:82
§ 104-5. Bond of indemnity; insurance.
(13) Applicants' statement that they shall abide by the terms and
provisions of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Bucks, and Township of
Warrington.
C. Each application shall be accompanied with a cash fee to cover the cost
of inspection, investigation, issuance and administration of the permit,
in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors. No part of the permit fee is refundable.
D. The Board of Supervisors, or its agent, shall either grant or deny the
application for a permit according to the following schedule:
(1) A gathering numbering 250 to 1,000 persons, five days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(2) A gathering numbering 1,000 to 3,500 persons, 10 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(3) A gathering numbering 3,500 to 5,000 persons, 15 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(4) A gathering numbering over 5,000 persons, 20 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
A. The applicants shall submit with their application a corporate bond of
indemnity in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, or cash deposit,
to save and protect Township streets, pavement, bridges, road signs
and all other Township property from any and all damage that might be
caused by vehicles, employees, or participants in the public gathering,
and to be used, if necessary, to restore the premises where such public
gathering is held to a sanitary condition and pay all charges and losses
to the Township for damages to the streets, pavement, bridges, and all
other Township property.
B. Should the permitted public gathering necessitate that the Township
deploy or employ additional personnel as a direct result of the public
gathering, such added expense shall be recoverable from the principals
and/or their indemnitor. The cash deposit or its balance will be returned
to the applicants upon final audit of the Township as to what damages, if
any, occurred and what deployment and employment of personnel, if
any, was necessitated.
C. The corporate bond of indemnity or cash deposit shall be in the
following amounts:
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-5
1:83
§ 104-6. Conditions of approval.
Persons Reasonably
Anticipated Cash Deposit or Bond Amount
250 to 1,000 $5,000
1,000 to 3,500 $10,000
3,500 to 5,000 $15,000
5,000 to 10,000 $20,000
Over 10,000 $30,000
D. The property owner or person in charge of the property making
application shall sign, as an additional indemnitor, to insure against
damage to streets, pavement, bridges, road signs, and all other
Township property, to meet costs of the Township for deploying or
employing personnel directly attributable to the conduct of the public
gathering, and to insure that the property will be restored to a sanitary
condition.
A. No permit shall be issued by the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township, or its agent, unless all of the conditions recited herein have
been satisfactorily concluded according to the following schedule:
(1) A gathering numbering 250 to 1,000 persons, six days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(2) A gathering numbering 1,000 to 3,500 persons, 11 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(3) A gathering numbering 3,500 to 5,000 persons, 16 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(4) A gathering numbering over 5,000 persons, 21 days prior to the
first day upon which the public gathering is to commence.
(5) All applications not meeting this schedule shall be denied.
B. Sanitary facilities. Written approval of the Bucks County Health
Department, indicating that applicant's plan for water supply, toilet
facilities, washing facilities, and food preparation and service, if
applicable, the type of food preparation and food facilities to be
provided, conforms with applicable state and county laws, rules and
regulations relating to the public health.
C. Public safety. Written statement of the Warrington Township Police
Chief indicating that plans have been made to meet the following
conditions:
(1) Applicants have provided for adequate traffic control and crowd
control personnel, i.e., one marshal for every 50 motor vehicles
§ 104-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 104-6
1:84
§ 104-7. Structures.
All facilities, including a stage, must have appropriate building permits
and must be specially assembled, constructed or erected for the public
gathering. Such facilities must be in place at least 24 hours before the
commencement of the public gathering and be approved by the Building
Code Official of Warrington Township.
§ 104-8. Conduct of public assembly.
reasonably anticipated to be at the location and one marshal for
each 150 persons reasonably anticipated to be in attendance.
(2) A list of those marshals must be presented to the Warrington
Township Police Chief with the application. The marshals must be
orientated and instructed by the Police Chief, or his designee, and
the sponsor of the public gathering prior to the commencement of
the gathering.
(3) Applicants have completely enclosed the ground where the public
gathering is to be held with snow fencing or other similar material
of equivalent strength of not less than four feet in height.
(4) Adequate lighting must be provided, subject to approval of the
Board of Supervisors or the Township Manager.
D. Medical services. Written approval by the Bucks County Department of
Health indicating that sufficient medical service has been provided by
the applicant. Each public gathering shall have as a minimum one
ambulance staffed by two adult individuals trained in first-aid
techniques in attendance at all times.
E. Parking facilities. Written approval of the Warrington Township Police
Chief indicating that parking is available within or adjacent to the
premises upon which the public gathering is to be conducted as herein
provided:
(1) Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one vehicle
for every four persons reasonably anticipated to be in attendance
at the public gathering.
(2) Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided from such parking
area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any time to or from
the parking area; provided, however, that should buses be used to
transport the public to the public gathering, it shall be shown that
public parking, as described above, is available at any site from
which buses are scheduled to pick up persons to transport them to
the public gathering.
A. No permittee, or persons having control of the public gathering, shall
condone the presence of intoxicating liquor or the consumption of
intoxicating liquor on the property; and no person during the public
§ 104-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-8
1:85
gathering shall take or carry onto the property, or drink thereon,
intoxicating liquor, except as licensed or permitted by state law.
B. The burden of preserving order during the public gathering is upon the
permittees of the public gathering. Any violation of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its rules and regulations, or of the
terms and conditions of this chapter, or other ordinances of Bucks
County or of Warrington Township, or the permit granted hereunder
may be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the Warrington
Township Director of Codes, Inspections, and Emergency Services, or
his designee, or by the Bucks County Health Department upon
notification to the person in charge that a violation exists and the
failure of the person in charge to take immediate action to correct the
violation. Upon revocation of any permit, the permittees of the public
gathering shall immediately terminate the assembly and provide for the
orderly dispersal of those in attendance.
C. The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township, its authorized agents
and representatives, and the representatives of the county and
Township departments having responsibility for approval under this
chapter shall be granted access to the public gathering at all times for
the purpose of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions
imposed herein.
D. There shall be no musical entertainment, either live or recorded,
utilizing sound-amplification equipment, and there will be no
programmed entertainment provided between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 10:00 a.m.
E. If, at any time during the conduct of the public gathering, the number of
persons in attendance exceeds by 10% the number of persons
represented by the applicants for the permit anticipated to be in
attendance, the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township, the
County Health Officer, or the Director of Codes, Inspections, and
Emergency Services, or his designee, shall have the authority to require
the applicant to limit further admissions until all conditions and
provisions recited herein are met.
F. Any applicant with more than 10% proprietary interest, if any, in the
public gathering, and the owner of property or person in charge of the
property, or their designated agents or representatives, shall be
required to be in attendance at the public gathering and shall be
responsible for ensuring that no person shall be allowed to remain on
the premises who is violating any state, county or Township laws, rules
or regulations.
G. Public gatherings operating without a permit under this chapter based
on a reasonable anticipation of fewer than 250 persons in attendance
shall limit attendance therein to 249 persons, and printed tickets, if
utilized, cannot number more than 249.
§ 104-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 104-9
1:86
§ 104-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section
of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense. This chapter may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
Chapter 113
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 214.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
§ 104-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-9
1:87

ARTICLE I
Multifamily Properties
[Adopted 7-21-1981 by Ord. No. 81-9 (Ch. 10, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 113-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Multifamily Grass or Weed Nuisance
Ordinance."
§ 113-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building divided into two or more dwelling
units, including townhouses and garden apartment dwellings, all as defined
by Chapter 370, Zoning.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 113-3. Prohibited acts; declaration of nuisance. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any multifamily
dwelling property within the Township of Warrington shall permit any grass
or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as
to exceed a height of six inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious
odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen or to go
to or produce seed. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any
premises in the Township in violation of this section is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort
of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 113-4. Responsibility of owner.
The owner of any multifamily dwelling premises, as to vacant premises or
premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or
cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such
premises in violation of the provisions of § 113-1 of this article.
§ 113-5. Notice; Township work and cost collection. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Township Supervisors or any officer or employee of the Township
designated thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the
case may be, of any multifamily dwelling premises whereon grass, weeds
or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions
of § 113-3 of this article, directing and requiring such occupant to remove,
trim or cut grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-5
1:89
of this article within seven days after issuance of such notice. In case any
person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such
notice, within the period of time stated therein, the Township authorities
may remove, trim, cut or destroy such grass, weeds or vegetation; and the
cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by the law,
may be collected by the Township from such person, firm or corporation, in
the manner provided by law.
§ 113-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof in an
action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. This article may be
enforced initially by violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance
Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 113-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 113-6
1:90
Chapter 119
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
§ 119-1. Building numbering system plan.
The Township Manager of Warrington Township is hereby empowered and
required to draw up or to have drawn up, subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, a building numbering plan for the entire Township
of Warrington and to assign numbers to all existing buildings and/or lots
within the Township of Warrington in accordance with said plan.
§ 119-2. Notice of assignment.
As soon as practical after the assignment of such numbers, the Township
Manager shall notify or cause to be notified the owner and/or occupant
of all existing buildings, in writing, of the assigned number, directing that
such numbers be affixed to the building or elsewhere upon the property in
the manner prescribed by this chapter within 30 days of such notice. Each
property owner and/or occupant who shall disregard or fail to comply with
such notice within the time limit specified shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
§ 119-3. Specifications. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The required numbers are to be of a durable light-reflecting material or to
be of a color which contrasts with the immediate background, and be Arabic
numerals or alphabet letters at least four inches high, with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch.
§ 119-4. Affixing of number.
Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line,
the numbers shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance
to the land on which the building is erected, or upon a gate, post, rural
mailbox, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily
discernible from the street. When any building is located within 50 feet
of the street line, the numbers may be conspicuously placed immediately
above, on or at the side of the main door of each building where practical,
in such a manner that the number can be seen plainly from the street.
§ 113-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-5
1:91
§ 119-5. Obstruction.
No numbers shall be placed so that they will be hidden at any time by
obstructions, screen or storm doors, grass, shrubbery, or trees. It shall be a
violation of this chapter to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any numbers
placed in conformity with this chapter. All numbers in conflict with the
officially assigned number shall be removed from the premises within 30
days of the date of the formal notice of assignment of numbers.
§ 119-6. Application to Township Manager.
Whenever a building shall hereafter be erected, the owner thereof or his
agent shall apply to the Township Manager for the official numbers thereof.
The assigned numbers shall be affixed by the owner or his agent in the
manner prescribed herein and shall be maintained as herein required for
existing buildings.
§ 119-7. Altering or defacing numbers.
Any person who shall alter or deface or remove or destroy any number and
not restore or replace the same within five days thereafter shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereinafter imposed.
§ 119-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 126
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 126-1. Purpose.
The Township of Warrington finds that the development of cable television
and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and
impact upon the people of Warrington. Because of the complex and rapidly
changing technology associated with cable television, the Township further
finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be
served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the
Township or such persons as the Township shall designate. It is the intent
of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these
§ 119-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-1
1:92
matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
to include this finding as an integral part thereof. Further, it is recognized
that cable communications systems have the capacity to provide not only
entertainment and information services to the Township's residents, but
can provide a variety of broadband, interactive communications services
to institutions and individuals. Many of these services involve Township
agencies and other public institutions, by providing governmental,
educational or health care communications. For these purposes, the
following goals underlie the regulations contained herein:
§ 126-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Warrington Cable
Communication Regulatory Ordinance," and it shall become a part of the
ordinances of the Township. This chapter shall take effect and be in force
from and after its adoption. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 126-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The
word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall
be given their common and ordinary meanings.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICES — A separately available
basic service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other
tier of service. Such basic service tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the
following: all signals carried in fulfillment of Cable Act, §§ 614 and 615; any
public, educational and governmental access programming required in this
chapter or the franchise; any signal of any television broadcast station that
is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber, except a signal which is
secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area
A. Communications services should be provided to the maximum number
of Township residents.
B. The system should be capable of accommodating both the present and
reasonably foreseeable future cable communications needs of the
Township.
C. The system should be improved and upgraded during the franchise
term so that the new facilities necessary for the operation of this system
shall be integrated to the maximum extent possible with existing
facilities.
D. The cable communications system authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall
provide a wide diversity of information sources and services to the
public.
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-3
1:93
of such station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the
grantee.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Warrington.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Also referred to as "system,"
means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves
only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common
ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities use any
public rights-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provision of Title II of the Cable Act, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
(4) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
CHANNEL — A six-megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of
carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or
other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals. One channel
of high-definition television will utilize more than six MHz.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such noncommercial
video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users on an
individual application basis. These may include, but are not limited to, oneway
video, two-way video, audio or digital channels among institutions.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT or CABLE ACT — The Communications Act of
1934; the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as they may be amended or succeeded
from time to time.
COMPLAINT — A verbal or written indication from a subscriber within
the Township of a problem that generates a work order by the grantee or
complaint to the Township that is communicated to the grantee with any
aspect of cable service.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber,
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
§ 126-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-3
1:94
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
DEDICATED INSTITUTIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS — Cable
communications channels dedicated to noncommercial use by the
Township, county, commonwealth or federal governmental agencies, and
public and nonprofit, private educational institutions.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel which can only be received by the
person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
television set, radio or other terminal.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
noncommercial educational access use.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted by separate agreement
pursuant to this chapter to construct, operate and maintain a cable
communications system along the public ways within all or a specified area
in the Township. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall
not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the Township as required by
other ordinances and laws of the Township.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire Township, or portions thereof, for which
a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of
the Township, including all territory thereafter annexed to the Township.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s) or
organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by
the Township, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the Township, of the
franchisee's gross revenues from the operation of the cable system in
exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated
or dedicated for noncommercial government access use.
GRANTOR — The Township of Warrington as represented by the Township
Board of Supervisors acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenue derived directly or indirectly by the
grantee from the operation of the cable communications system within
the Township. Revenues derived from the operation of the cable system
§ 126-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-3
1:95
received by any affiliate, subsidiary or any person in which the grantee
has a financial interest shall be included in the grantee's gross revenues in
any case where those revenues were derived by the affiliate, subsidiary or
person in which the grantee has a financial interest to avoid or reduce the
grantee's franchise fee obligation.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the
grantee.
MONITORING — Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is not a party to the communication, whether
the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose
whatsoever.
NARROWCASTING — The ability to distribute cable programming to a
particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers.
NONCOMMERCIAL — Access channel use in a manner similar to Public
Broadcasting Service station programming and underwriting
acknowledgments.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
PLANT MILE — A linear mile of cable as measured on the street or
easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial organizations
which is made available for use without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis
in accordance with the rules and regulations specified in the franchise.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel,
parkways, utility easements or other public right-of-way now or hereafter
held by the Township which shall entitle the Township and the grantee to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's
cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the
"public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the
Township that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain
only such rights to use property in the Township as the Township may have
the undisputed right and power to give.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Written notice addressed to the grantee at its
principal office within the Township or such other office as the grantee
has designated to the Township as the address to which notice shall be
transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less
than 10 calendar days prior to that day in which the party giving such
§ 126-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-3
1:96
notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In
computing said 10 calendar days, holidays recognized by the Township shall
be excluded.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Township as otherwise defined by
applicable law.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession.
SALE — Any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit, private educational institution
including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities.
SERVICE AREA — The entire geographic area within the franchise territory.
SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The cable communications system
constructed for use within the Township, without limitation, the headend,
antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters, health and
property security systems, equipment or facilities located within the
corporate limits of the Township designed, constructed or wired for the
purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial
cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio and visual, radio,
television and electronic signals to and from subscribers in the Township
and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits
of the Township intended for the use of the system; provided, however,
such system facility excludes buildings, contracts, facilities, and equipment
where primary use is for providing service to other system facilities located
outside the Township limits.
TRANSFER — The disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift,
assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 25% or
more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system,
or 30% cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to
a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or
person or group of persons acting in concert unless otherwise exempted
herein.
TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications,
which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
UPSTREAM SIGNAL — A signal originating from a terminal to the cable
system headend including video, audio or digital signals for either programs
or other uses such as security alert services, etc.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
§ 126-4. Grant of franchise.
A. Grant.
§ 126-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:97
(1) Grant. In the event that Township shall grant to the grantee a
nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable communications system within the Township, said
franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide
the services of a cable communications system as regulated by the
provisions of this chapter and the franchise. The franchise shall
include by reference those provisions of the grantee's "application
for franchise" that are finally negotiated and accepted by the
Township and grantee.
(2) Event of conflict. The franchise shall be granted under the terms
and conditions contained herein, consistent with applicable
statutory requirements. In the event of conflict between the terms
and conditions of this chapter, the franchise, or the terms and
conditions on which the Township can grant a franchise, the
statutory requirements shall control. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) General Township ordinances. Any franchise granted by the
Township is hereby made subject to the general ordinance
provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in
the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the
various codes and ordinances of the Township regarding permits,
fees to be paid or manner of construction.
B. Franchise area. The franchise area shall be the entire Township, or
portions thereof, for which a franchise is granted.
C. Use of public rights-of-way. For the purpose of operating and
maintaining a cable communications system in the Township, the
grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and
retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets and
ways within the Township such wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary to the
operation of the cable communications systems; provided, however,
that grantee complies with all design, construction, safety, and
performance provisions contained in this chapter, the franchise
agreement and other applicable local ordinances.
D. Use of Township facilities. In the event that a grantee chooses to utilize
Township-owned conduit or other facilities for any portion of its cable
communications system, the consideration for the use of Township
conduit or other facilities shall be at charges to be agreed upon
between the parties.
E. Use of grantee facilities. No poles or pedestals shall be erected by the
grantee without prior approval of the Township with regard to location,
height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any
pole of the grantee shall be a vested right and such poles shall be
removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:98
Township determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby. Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits, where
possible. The Township shall have the right, during the life of the
franchise, to install and maintain upon the poles owned by the grantee,
any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the
cable system operations of the grantee. The Township shall reimburse
the grantee for any make-ready costs. The use of grantee's poles shall
be at a fair and reasonable rate.
F. Franchise required. No cable communications system shall be allowed
to occupy or use the streets of the Township or be allowed to operate
without a franchise.
G. Term of franchise. The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be stated in the franchise.
H. Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be nonexclusive. The Township specifically reserves the right to
(1) grant at any time such additional franchises for a cable
communication system as it deems appropriate, and/or (2) build,
operate, and own such cable communication system or systems as it
deems appropriate. Subject to applicable law and regulation, any
additional cable communications system franchises granted by the
Township shall, to the extent practicable seek to create a level
regulatory playing field and shall contain similar terms and conditions,
including without limitation, provisions of public benefit with similar
cost, taking into account the size and population of the franchised
areas. A grantee is required to indemnify the Township and to hold the
Township harmless from all claims against it by third parties arising out
of its compliance with this provision to the extent that such claims are
not barred by Section 635A of the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (Limitation of Franchise
Authority Liability), or by any other provision of law.
I. Time is of the essence of this chapter. Whenever the agreement shall
set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the
grantee or the Township, such time shall be deemed of the essence and
any failure of the grantee or the Township to perform within the time
allotted shall be sufficient grounds for the other party to invoke an
appropriate penalty including possible revocation of the franchise,
subject to force majeure.
J. Law governs. In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
K. Transfer of ownership or control.
(1) Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be
sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not
limited to, transfer by force or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership or other means, nor shall the control of
the grantee be changed, without the prior consent of the Township.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:99
The Township reserves the right to impose certain conditions on
the transferee as a condition of transfer approval to ensure that the
franchisee is able to meet ordinance and franchise requirements
and existing operating practices.
(2) Transfer threshold. The grantee shall promptly notify the Township
of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by
any other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as
used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised. A transfer of
ownership requiring approval shall arise upon the disposal by the
grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale,
merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 25% or more at one time of
the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or 30%
cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to a
corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association,
or person or group of persons acting in concert. Except that no
consent shall be required for any sale, transfer or assignment of
ownership or control to an entity under common control with
grantee; provided, that prior to such transfer, grantee provides to
the Township verifiable information to establish that such
transferee under common control has the financial, legal and
technical ability to fully perform all obligations of the franchise.
(3) Township approval. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control
of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation
unless and until the Township shall have consented thereto, which
consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or
acquisition of control, the Township may inquire into the legal,
financial, character, technical and other public interest
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee
shall provide the Township with all required information relevant to
said inquiry. Failure to provide all information requested by the
Township as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the
proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control.
(4) Assumption of control. The Township agrees that any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the Township that it or its
designees satisfactory to the Township will take control and
operate the cable television system. Further, said financial
institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will
ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise
obligations during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise
control over the system for a period exceeding 18 months, unless
extended by the Township at its discretion and during said period
of time it shall have the right to petition for transfer of the franchise
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:100
to another grantee. If the Township finds that such transfer, after
considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other
public interest qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the
Township will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such
franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the Township to
such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(5) No waiver of Township property rights. The consent or approval of
the Township to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a
waiver or release of the rights of the Township in and to the streets,
and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
(6) Transfer time periods. The Township will not approve any transfer
or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of construction
of the proposed system unless appropriate guarantees which are
acceptable to the Township are made by the transferee.
(7) Disclosure of purchase price. The Township reserves the right to
require the grantee and transferee to disclose the purchase price of
any transfer or assignment of the cable system.
(8) Signatory requirement. Any approval by the Township of transfer of
ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective
controlling party becoming a signatory to the franchise.
(9) Time frame for Township review. The Township shall have 120 days
to act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that
contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in
accordance with FCC regulations and by the Township. If the
Township fails to render a final decision on the request within 120
days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting
party and the Township agree to an extension of time.
L. Franchise renewal. Upon completion of the term of any franchise
granted under this chapter, the Township may grant or deny renewal of
the franchise of the grantee in accordance with the provisions of the
Cable Act. The grantee shall own the cable communication system, but
shall have no property right in the public rights-of-way upon the
completion of the franchise term, including any renewals and
extensions thereof.
M. Police powers.
(1) Police powers. In accepting the franchise, the grantee
acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police
power of the Township to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to
comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by
the Township pursuant to such power.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:101
(2) Conflicts. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the
Township's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter,
except that any such exercise that is not of general application in
the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to grantee or cable
communications systems which contains provisions inconsistent
with this chapter or the franchise shall prevail only if, upon such
exercise, the Township finds an emergency exists constituting a
danger to health, safety, property or general welfare and such
exercise is mandated by law.
N. Franchise fees.
(1) Because the Township finds that:
(a) The streets of the county, commonwealth and Township to be
used by the grantee in the operation of its system within the
boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the county, commonwealth and
Township at great expense to its taxpayers.
(b) The grant to the grantee to the said streets is a valuable
property right without which the grantee would be required to
invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions.
(c) The administration of this chapter and the franchise imposes
upon the Township additional regulatory responsibility and
expense.
(d) A grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the Township
a franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise, but
in no event less than 5% of the gross annual revenues, or the
maximum amount permitted under applicable federal,
commonwealth or local law, if such maximum is greater than
5%. The annual franchise fee payable shall be in addition to
any other fee and shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise. Annually, the Township shall be furnished a
statement of said payment by a certified public accountant,
reflecting the total amounts of annual gross revenues, a
breakdown by type of revenue, and the above charges and
computations for the period covered by the payment.
(2) Franchise fee in addition to other tax or payment. The Township
believes that payment of the franchise fee made by grantee to the
Township shall not be considered in the nature of a tax, but shall be
in addition to any and all taxes which are now or may be lawfully
required hereafter to be paid by any federal, commonwealth or
local law. This payment shall be in addition to any other tax or
payment owed to the governments or other taxing jurisdiction by
the grantee.
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:102
(3) Acceptance by the Township. No acceptance of any payment by the
Township shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the Township may have for further or
additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for
the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
(4) Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates
specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an
interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate
equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the Township
primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid
amount is owed.
(5) Payments to be made quarterly. The franchise fee and any other
cost or damage assessed against the grantee shall be payable
quarterly to the Township of Warrington. The grantee shall file a
complete and accurate statement verified by a financial officer of
the grantee, of all gross revenues within the franchise area and the
number of subscribers per service during the period for which said
quarterly payment is made, and said payment shall be made to the
Township no later than 45 days following the expiration of each
calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30 and September 30, and
no later than the 90 days after the calendar quarter ending
December 31.
(6) The Township's right of inspection. The Township shall have the
right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit
and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this
chapter. Audits shall be at the expense of the Township unless the
audit reveals an underpayment of more than 5% in the amount of
the franchise fee due to the Township, in which event the cost of
the audit shall be borne by the grantee. Any additional amount due
the Township as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days
following written notice to the grantee by the Township which
notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
O. Forfeiture or revocation.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The Township reserves the right to revoke
any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and
privileges associated with the franchise in the following
circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach
under this chapter and the franchise grant:
(a) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this chapter, the franchise, or under
such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions
entered into by and between the Township and the grantee.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:103
(b) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
affect the liability and indemnification coverage or the
performance bond as required herein.
(c) If the grantee, after all established regulatory and appellate
procedures have been exhausted, shall violate any orders or
rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the
grantee relative to this chapter or the franchise.
(d) If the grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the Township
or cable subscribers.
(e) The grantee's construction schedule is delayed 180 days,
beyond the schedule contained in the franchise or beyond any
extended date set by the Township.
(f) The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt.
(g) Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service substantially throughout the franchise
area, except when approval of such interruption is obtained
from the Township.
(h) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal
thereof.
(i) If the grantee ceases to provide a substantial portion of
ongoing cable services for any reason within the control of the
grantee over the cable communications system.
(2) Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. The grantee
shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under
any provision of this chapter in any case, in which performance of
any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's
control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's
control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in
which the grantee holds a controlling interest whether held directly
or indirectly.
(3) Effect of pending litigation. Pending litigation or any appeal to any
regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall
not excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations
under this chapter or the franchise. Failure of the grantee to
perform such obligations because of pending litigation or petition
may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
(4) Procedure prior to revocation.
(a) The Township shall make written demand that the grantee
comply with any such requirement, limitation, term condition,
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:104
rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for
revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee
continues for a period of 30 days following such written
demand, the Township shall place its request for termination
of the franchise upon a regular Board of Supervisors meeting
agenda. The Township shall cause to be served upon such
grantee at least seven days prior to the date of such Board of
Supervisors meeting, a written notice of this intent to request
such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice
of which shall be published by the Township Manager or his
designee, at least once, seven days before such meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township.
(b) The Board of Supervisors shall hear any persons interested
therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not
any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause.
(c) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as reasonably determined by the Township, the Board of
Supervisors shall direct the grantee to comply within such time
and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are
reasonable.
(d) If the Board of Supervisors shall determine such failure,
refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then
the Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, declare that the
franchise of the grantee shall be terminated unless there is
compliance by the grantee within 90 days.
(5) Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires and is not
renewed or extended, is revoked or otherwise terminated, the
Township may in its sole discretion, do any of the following:
(a) Purchase the system under the procedures set forth in
Subsection T of this section.
(b) Effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another party.
(c) Order the removal of all or a portion of the system facilities as
required by the Township within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Township or require the original grantee to
maintain and operate its system for a period of six months or
until such further time as is mutually agreed upon.
(6) Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways
and places in as good a condition or better as that prevailing prior
to the grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances without
affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires or attachments.
The Township shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:105
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles
after removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance and performance
bond as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by the
grantee with the terms and conditions of this subsection, this
chapter and the franchise.
(7) Restoration by Township; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by
Subsections C and D and/or O(6) above, or any other work required
by Township law or ordinance within the time as may be
established and to the satisfaction of the Township, the Township
may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse
the Township the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an
itemized list of such costs or the Township may recover such costs
through the performance bond provided by grantee. The Township
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this section.
(8) Extended operation. Upon either the expiration and nonrenewal or
revocation of a franchise, the Township may require the grantee to
continue to operate the system for a period of six months from the
date of such expiration or revocation, or until such time as is
mutually agreed upon. The grantee shall continue to operate the
cable communications system under the terms and conditions of
this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular
subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be
provided at the time. The Township shall be permitted to seek legal
and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
P. Receivership and foreclosure.
(1) Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall,
at the option of the Township, cease and terminate 120 days after
the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to
take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(a) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after
their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms
and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted
pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said 120
days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise or
have commenced expeditiously and in good faith to do so in the
reasonable opinion of the Board of Supervisors; and
(b) Such receivers, or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute
an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in
the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:106
agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and
limitation of the franchise herein granted.
(2) Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or
any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the
Township may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the
successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all
rights and privileges of the grantee granted hereunder shall cease
and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:
(a) The Township shall have approved the transfer of the
franchise, in the manner this chapter provides; and
(b) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with
the Township to assume and be bound by all the terms and
conditions of the franchise.
Q. Equal opportunity policy. Equal opportunity employment shall be
afforded by all operators of cable television systems to all qualified
persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment
because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex or physical
handicap. Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions
enacted by federal, commonwealth and local authorities, as well as all
such provisions contained in this chapter and the franchise.
R. Notices. All notices from grantee to the Township pursuant to this
chapter and the franchise shall be to the Township Manager or his/her
designee. Grantee shall maintain with the Township throughout the
term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. Grantee
shall also maintain a locally accessible office as specified in this chapter
and the franchise, and telephone number for the conduct of matters
related to the franchise during normal business hours. The grantee
shall be required to advise the Township of such address(es) and
telephone numbers and any changes thereof.
S. Failure of Township to enforce this chapter, no waiver of the terms
thereof. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of
the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise by any failure
of the Township upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to
seek compliance with any such terms or conditions.
T. Rights reserved to the grantor.
(1) Right to purchase of the system by the Township upon termination
or expiration of the franchise.
(a) Right to purchase. In the event the grantee (1) forfeits and the
Township terminates the franchise for cause, pursuant to
provisions of this chapter and the franchise, or (2) the
franchise is not renewed at/or following the normal expiration
of the franchise term, the Township shall have the right,
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:107
directly or as an intermediary, to purchase the franchised cable
communications system or effect the ownership of the system
to another person. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be
as specified in the Cable Act. The Township shall notify the
grantee in writing within 30 days following nonrenewal or
termination of its intent to acquire the system on its behalf
or effectuate the ownership of the system to another person.
Purchase price shall be based upon the value of the system
determined pursuant to this section.
(b) Arbitration. In the event the Township and grantee are unable
to agree upon the value of the cable communications system,
either party may require by written notice to the other that the
value of cable communications system be submitted to
arbitration in the following manner:
[1] The Township and the grantee shall each within 15 days
after such written notice select an arbitrator who shall be
a disinterested person with reasonable knowledge and
experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated. The two
arbitrators thus selected shall immediately thereafter
select a third arbitrator who shall likewise be a
disinterested person having reasonable knowledge and
experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated.
[2] Within 30 days after appointment of all arbitrators and
upon 10 days' written notice to the parties, the panel of
arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the issue of
valuation and shall receive all relevant information from
the parties.
[3] The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at
the request of either party. All hearing proceedings,
debate and deliberations shall be open to the public and at
such times and places as contained in the notice or as
thereafter publicly stated, except that if two arbitrators
agree, debate and deliberations may be held in closed
session.
[4] The value of the system as determined by the arbitration
panel shall be determined pursuant to Subsection T(1)(a)
above.
[5] Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the panel of
arbitrators shall prepare findings and decision agreed
upon by a majority of the panel which shall be filed with
the Township and served by mail upon the grantee. The
decision of the panel regarding the value of the system
shall be final and binding upon the parties. Should there
be no majority decision, the proceedings shall become null
and void and shall be started anew, unless the parties
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-4
1:108
extend by mutual agreement the time which the panel of
arbitrators has to make a decision.
[6] Either party may seek judicial relief in the following
circumstances: (1) A party fails to select an arbitrator; (2)
the arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator; (3) one or
more arbitrators is unqualified; (4) designated time limits
have been exceeded; (5) the panel has not proceeded
expeditiously; (6) the decision was procured by corruption,
fraud or undue means; (7) there was evident partiality on
the part of one or more of the arbitrators; (8) the
arbitration panel exceeded its authority hereunder; (9)
based upon the record, the panel abused its discretion.
[7] In the event a court of competent jurisdiction determines
that judicial relief is appropriate to the circumstances set
forth above, the court in its discretion may order the
arbitration procedure repeated and issue findings, orders
and directions.
[8] The expenses of the arbitrators and those expenses
incurred by the panel as a whole shall be borne equally by
the parties.
(c) Notification. The purchase price shall be the value of the
system as determined by the arbitration panel.
(2) Right of inspection of records. Upon reasonable advance notice, the
Township shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal
business hours, all books, records, reports, maps, plans, financial
statements and other like materials of the grantee relating to the
operation of the cable communications system and the
enforcement of this chapter and the franchise within the Township,
including, but not limited to, system records where information is
not available on a franchise-area basis. Grantee shall provide such
information in such form as may be required by the Township for
said records.
(3) Right of inspection of construction. The Township shall have the
right to inspect all construction or installation work performed
subject to the provisions of the franchise and upon prior notice to
the grantee, to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent
provisions of the law. The grantee shall be afforded the opportunity
to be present at and observe such testing and shall be provided
with the results of any such testing undertaken by the Township.
(4) Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times, grantee
shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of
the Township, of system facilities, together with any appurtenant
property of grantee situated within or without the Township.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:109
§ 126-5. Regulation of franchise.
(5) Right to require removal of property. Upon denial of renewal of this
chapter or the franchise, or upon its revocation or expiration and
nonrenewal, as provided for herein, the Township shall have the
right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of the cable communications system required by public
necessity from all streets and public ways within the Township
within six months of receipt of a written notice from the Township.
(6) Expense reimbursement to Township. Unless otherwise provided in
the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay the Township a sum
of money which will, when added to application fees received,
reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with
preparation of this chapter, the initial franchise agreements,
including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorneys' fees,
publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs;
provided, however, that the Township shall submit a detailed
schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30
days after the Township furnishes the grantee with a written
statement of such initial franchise expenses.
A. Regulatory authority.
(1) On-going regulation. The Township shall exercise appropriate
regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and
applicable law. This authority shall be vested in the Township Board
of Supervisors and administered through the Township Manager or
his designee in order to provide day-to-day administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise
granted hereunder, and to carry out the Township's responsibilities
with regard to cable communications.
(2) Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply
with all laws and regulations of the local, commonwealth and
federal government. In the event that any actions of the
commonwealth or federal government or any agency thereof, or
any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication,
substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the
Township under this chapter or the franchise, or if in compliance
with any local, commonwealth, or federal law or regulation is in
conflict with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, or any law or
regulation of the Township, then the Township, at its option, may
notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions
which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations
or statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in
good faith with the Township in the development of alternate
provisions which shall fairly restore the Township to the maximum
level of authority and power permitted by law. The Township shall
have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable
§ 126-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-5
1:110
extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose
of this chapter and the franchise.
(3) Authority. The Township reserves the right to exercise the
maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully
permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the
franchise and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or
regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently
permitted to the Township, the Township may without the approval
of the grantee engage in any such additional regulation as may
then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this chapter
or the franchise.
B. Supervision of the franchise.
(1) The Township shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
(a) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and any franchise granted hereunder.
(b) Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise and
other applicable law.
(c) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
(d) Performance evaluation.
(e) Rate regulation, if applicable.
(2) The Township also reserves the right to perform the following
functions:
(a) Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the
operation of government channels.
(b) Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the
use of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.
(c) Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of
cable services.
(d) Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications
with other Township, state or regional telecommunications
networks.
(e) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications
policy for the Township, and determine the future cable-related
needs and interests of the community.
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-5
1:111
(f) Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations, and any other activities required for
the administration of the franchise.
(g) Monitor grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such
complaints.
(h) Receive applications for rate increases if applicable and
provide staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations
thereto.
(i) Monitor grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(j) Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(k) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed to insure compliance with this chapter and the
franchise.
(l) Assure continuity in service.
(m) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
C. Rates and charges.
(1) Schedule filings. Grantee shall file with the Township schedules
which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of
any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. No rates or
charges shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so
filed. Grantee shall notify subscribers in writing at least 30 days
prior to the implementation of any change in services offered, rates
charged, or terms and conditions related thereto.
(2) Nondiscriminatory rates. Grantee shall establish rates that are
nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers
which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the
franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall
prohibit the grantee from offering: (1) discounts to commercial and
multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (2)
promotional discounts; or (3) reduced installation rates for
subscribers who have multiple services. Grantee's charges and
rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills.
(3) Township regulation. To the extent that federal or commonwealth
law or regulation may now, or as the same may hereafter be
amended to, authorize the Township to regulate the rates for any
particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other
services provided by grantee, the Township shall have the right to
exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to
§ 126-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-5
1:112
refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at
the sole discretion of the Township.
D. Performance evaluation.
(1) Evaluation sessions. The Township and the grantee may, at the
discretion of the Township, hold scheduled performance evaluation
sessions every three years. All such evaluation sessions may be
open to the public.
(2) Special sessions. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any
time during the term of the franchise at the request of the
Township.
(3) Public hearings. All evaluation sessions may be open to the public
and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance
with public notice. Grantee shall notify subscribers of any such
public meetings by announcement on the designated local
government channel on the system between the hours of 11:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days preceding each session.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) Topics for review. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled
or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to
system performance and construction, grantee compliance with
this chapter and the franchise, customer service and complaint
response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming
offered, service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or
discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and
FCC filings, and line extensions.
(5) Cooperation by grantee. During the review and evaluation by the
Township, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the Township and
shall provide such information and documents as the Township may
need to reasonably perform its review.
E. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or utility which permits the
violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a fine of
$600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred
by the Township. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion
thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this
chapter which is found to have been violated. In addition to civil actions
before a Magisterial District Judge, the Township may enforce this
chapter in an action in equity brought in the Bucks County Court of
Common Pleas. This chapter may be enforced initially by violation
ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures,
Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:113
§ 126-6. Bonds, insurance and indemnification.
A. Construction bond and performance bond.
(1) Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the
grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the
franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and
expense, and file with the Township, a corporate surety bond in an
amount specified in the franchise to guarantee the faithful
performance of the grantee of all its obligations provided under
this chapter and the franchise. Failure to timely obtain, file and
maintain said bond shall constitute a substantial violation within
the meaning of this section.
(2) Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
(a) There shall be recoverable by the Township jointly and
severally from the principal and surety, any and all fines and
liquidated damages due to the Township and any and all
damages, losses, costs, and expenses suffered or incurred by
the Township resulting from the failure of the grantee to:
faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter and the
franchise; comply with all orders, permits and directives of any
Township agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults; pay fees due to the Township; or pay any claims, liens
or taxes due the Township which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable
system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not
be limited to, attorney's fees and other associated expenses.
(3) Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the
Township may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to
be reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond
subject to the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or
denied upon application by the grantee shall be without prejudice
to the grantee's subsequent applications or to the Township's right
to require the full bond at any time thereafter. However, no
application shall be made by the grantee within one year of any
prior application.
(4) Construction bond. The grantee shall maintain and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder agrees that it will
maintain through the rebuild or construction of the cable television
system as required by this chapter or the franchise, a faithful
construction bond in an amount specified in the franchise
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee in the
construction or rebuild of a cable television system complying with
related provisions of this chapter and the franchise, and upon the
further condition that if the grantee shall fail to comply with any
law, ordinance or regulation governing the construction or rebuild
§ 126-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-6
1:114
of the cable television system, there shall be recoverable jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of the bond any damages
or loss suffered by the Township as a result, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of repair,
construction, removal or abandonment of any property of the
grantee, plus attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the
bond.
(5) Use of performance bond and construction bond. Prior to drawing
upon the performance bond or the construction bond for the
purposes described in this section, the Township shall give the
grantee written notice of its intent to draw on the bond. Said notice
shall detail the basis for drawing on the bond and, if the grantee
has not already been provided with a written notice of violation and
an opportunity to correct the violation, the notice provided under
this subsection shall provide the grantee with a minimum of 30
days to remedy the matter. If the matter is not remedied within the
cure period specified in the applicable notice, the grantee shall
have 10 days from the receipt of such written notice to make a full
and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the payment
within 10 days, the Township may withdraw the amount thereof,
with interest, from the performance bond. Nothing herein shall
preclude the Township from taking action in emergency situations
without the thirty-day period specified above.
(6) Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the
performance bond or construction bond, the Township shall send to
the grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written
notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
(7) Replenishment of performance bond and construction bond. No
later than 30 days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail
notification of a withdrawal pursuant to Subsection A(5) above, the
grantee shall replenish the performance bond and/or construction
bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn.
(8) Nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation of performance bond and
construction bond. The performance bond and construction bond
required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township and
shall require 30 days' written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration
or cancellation to both the Township and the grantee. The grantee
shall, in the event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all
premiums for and file with the Township written evidence of the
issuance of replacement bond or policies within 30 days following
receipt by the Township or the grantee of any notice of
cancellation.
(9) Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation, the amount of the
performance bond provided for herein is subject to reasonable
adjustment as provided in the franchise.
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:115
B. Liability and insurance.
(1) Certificate of insurance. Prior to commencement of construction,
but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the
franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of
the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee
shall furnish to the Township certificates of insurance, approved by
the Township, for all types of insurance required under this section.
Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(2) Filing. Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance
with this section shall be filed and maintained with the Township
Manager during the term of the franchise, and may be changed
from time to time to reflect changing liability limits and/or to
compensate for inflation consistent with Subsection B(8) below.
Grantee shall immediately advise the Township of any litigation
that may develop that would affect this insurance.
(3) No liability limit. Neither the provisions of this section or any
damages recovered by the Township hereunder, shall be construed
to or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued
hereunder or for damages.
(4) Endorsement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this
chapter or the franchise shall contain the following, or a
comparable, endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may
not be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not
to renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after
receipt by the Township Manager, by registered mail, of a written
notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.
(5) Hold harmless clause. All contractual liability insurance policies
maintained pursuant to this chapter or the franchise shall include
the provision of the following hold harmless clause:
The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the
Township, its officials, agents, servants, and employees, and each
of them against and hold it and them harmless from any and
all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses,
including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees for or on
account of any injury to any person, or any death at any time
resulting from such injury, or any damage to any property, which
may arise or which may be alleged to have arisen out of or in
connection with the work covered by the franchise and performed
or caused to be performed by grantee, its employees, agents and
contractors or their successors. The foregoing indemnity shall
apply except if such injury, death or damage is caused directly by
the negligence or other fault of the Township, its agents, servants,
or employees or any other person indemnified hereunder.
§ 126-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-6
1:116
(6) Commonwealth institution. All insurance policies provided under
the provisions of this chapter or the franchise shall be written by
companies authorized to do business in the commonwealth, and
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Insurance.
(7) Names insured. At any time during the term of the franchise the
Township may request and the grantee shall comply with such
request to name the Township as an additional named insured for
all insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter
or the franchise.
(8) Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing
liability limits, all of the overages, limits and amounts of the
insurance provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases
at the end of every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to
the next three-year period, upon the determination of the
Township.
(9) General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees
that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general
liability insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of:
(a) $1,000,000 for property damage per occurrence.
(b) $2,000,000 for property damage aggregate.
(c) $5,000,000 for personal bodily injury or death to any one
person.
(d) $10,000,000 bodily injury or death aggregate per single
accident or occurrence.
(10) Policy inclusions. Such general liability insurance must include
coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form, premisesoperations,
explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard,
products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance,
broad-form property damage and personal injury.
(11) Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by
its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically
agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise,
automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned or rented
vehicles in the minimum amount of:
(a) $1,000,000 for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence.
(b) $500,000 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one
person.
(c) $500,000 for property damage per occurrence.
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:117
(12)Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The
grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise
granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain
throughout the term of the franchise workers' compensation and
employer's liability, valid in the Commonwealth, in the minimum
amount of:
(a) Statutory limit for workers' compensation.
(b) $100,000 for employer's liability.
(13)No limitation on liability. None of the provisions of this chapter or
any insurance policy required herein, or any damages recovered by
the Township hereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful
performance by or limit the liability of grantee under this chapter
or the franchise for damages either to the limits of such policies or
otherwise.
C. Indemnification.
(1) Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, grantee
shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its officers, public officials, boards and
commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all
lawsuits, claims, (including, without limitation, workers'
compensation claims against the Township or others), causes of
action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damages
(including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees
and disbursements assumed by the Township in connection
therewith but excluding claims, suits, actions, liabilities, judgments
or damages that are the direct result of negligence or deliberate
acts or omission of the Township, its officers, employees, agents,
boards or commissions):
(a) To persons or property in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of grantee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees, to which grantee's negligence shall in any way
contribute, and regardless of whether the Township's
negligence or the negligence of any other party shall have
contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or
damage.
(b) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trademark, tradename,
service mark or patent or any other right of any person, firm or
corporation, but excluding claims arising out of or related to
Township or educational access programming.
(c) Arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, commonwealth or local statute, ordinance or
regulation applicable to grantee in its business hereunder.
§ 126-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-6
1:118
§ 126-7. Design and construction provisions.
(2) The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The
Township shall give grantee reasonable notice of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by
the provisions of this section. Grantee will provide the defense of
any claims brought against the Township under this section of the
franchise by selecting counsel of grantee's choice to defend the
claim, subject to the reasonable consent of the Township; which
will not unreasonably be withheld. Nothing herein shall be deemed
to prevent the Township from cooperating with the grantee and
participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at
its own costs and expense, provided however, that grantee shall
have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claim or action
arising hereunder and grantee shall have the sole authority to
decide the appropriateness and the amount of any such settlement.
Recovery by the Township of any sum by reason of the liquidated
damages required by the franchise shall be deducted from any
recovery which the Township might have against the grantee
arising out of the same transaction under the terms of this section.
A. Authority to construct.
(1) Authorization to commence construction and application
procedures. Within 30 days after acceptance by the grantee of a
franchise, the grantee shall apply for any needed contracts for pole
use. Pole space and other facilities obtained from the Township,
utilities, and other lawful uses of the public way shall be at the cost
and expense of the grantee. Within 30 days after completion of the
make-ready survey identifying the routes of the system facility, the
grantee shall apply for all additional licenses from the
commonwealth, Township, or other necessary parties, such as the
railroads for crossing under or over their property. In any event, all
necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and
authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so that such
filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay with
the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise.
(2) Power to contract. Upon grant of the franchise and in order to
construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the Township,
the grantee shall obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate
Township, commonwealth, county and federal officials necessary to
cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their respective
jurisdiction; obtain permission, when required, from the Federal
Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain
whatever other permits a Township, county, commonwealth or
federal agency may require.
B. Construction and technical standards.
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:119
(1) Compliance with construction and technical standards. Grantee
shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its system in
a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction
standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards,
and detailed technical standards submitted by grantee as part of its
application, which standards are incorporated by reference herein.
The grantee, through the system, shall provide uniform, strong
signals which are free from any significant distortion and
interference. The system shall be designed, constructed, operated
and maintained for twenty-four-hours-a-day continuous operation.
The system shall produce, for reception on subscribers' receivers
which are in good working order, either monochrome or color
pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) which are free
from any significant interference or distortion which would cause
any material degradation of video or audio quality.
(2) State of the art. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and
maintain its system in accordance with the then current standards
of cable communications, such standards to include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(a) The system will be constructed to permit a minimum of 750
MHz operation.
(b) The grantee shall maintain its system facilities in a manner
which will continue to enable it to add new services and
associated equipment as specified in the franchise agreement.
(3) Township approval of construction plans. Prior to the erection of
any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or rebuild of the cable
communications system under this chapter, the grantee shall first
submit to the Township and other designated parties for approval a
concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or
installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together
with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such
facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole,
underground conduit, or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the
cable communications system shall be commenced by any person
until approval therefor has been received from the Township.
Approval of each phase of new construction or rebuild design plans
shall be deemed granted for any submission made to the Township
unless expressly disapproved within 60 days. All other approvals,
such as permits, will be provided within the time frames specified
by relevant law and regulation.
(4) Contractor qualifications. Any contractor proposed for work of
construction, installation, operation, maintenance and repair of
system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the
commonwealth and all local ordinances.
§ 126-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-7
1:120
(5) Minimum interference. The grantee's system and associated
equipment erected by the grantee within the Township shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of
streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or
other public ways and places. No pole or other fixture placed in any
public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to
interfere with normal travel on such public way.
(6) Township maps. The Township does not guarantee the accuracy of
any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing
substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the
location shall be verified by excavation.
(7) Quality of construction. Construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of the cable communications system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance
with then current technological standards and the manufacturer's
specifications. All cables and wires shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due
respect for engineering considerations.
(8) Construction standards. Grantee shall at all times comply with:
(a) National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of
Standards).
(b) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters).
(c) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
(d) Applicable FCC or other federal, commonwealth and local
regulations; and standards as set forth in the franchise.
(9) Noninterference. In any event, the system shall not endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise
area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment
located.
(10) Antennas. Any antenna structure used in the cable communications
system shall comply with construction, marking and lighting of
antenna structure standards as required by federal and
commonwealth or regulation.
(11) OSHA. All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are
used during construction, installation, operation and maintenance
of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
§ 126-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:121
(12) RF leakage. RF leakage shall not exceed FCC-permitted maximum
levels as evidenced by annual cumulative leakage index
measurements. FCC rules and regulations shall govern. The system
shall cause no measurable interference in TV signal reception to
any operating receiver not connected to and serviced by the
system.
(13) Standby power. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of
providing standby power for a minimum of eight hours for the
headend and two hours for transportation and trunk amplifiers.
C. System construction schedule. The franchise shall specify the
construction schedule.
D. Extension of service. The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling
units or commercial entities requesting service and in any additional
areas annexed to the Township within six months of such request,
subject to any line extension requirements specified in the franchise
agreement.
E. Use of streets.
(1) Underground installation. All installations shall be underground in
those areas of the Township where public utilities providing both
telephone and electric service are underground at the time of
installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility
facilities are aboveground at the time of installation, grantee may
install its service aboveground; provided, that at such time as those
facilities are required to be placed underground by the Township or
are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its
services underground without additional cost to the Township or to
the individual subscriber so served within the Township. Where not
otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter or the
franchise, the grantee's system shall be located underground at the
request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess
cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner
making the request. All cable passing under the roadway shall be
installed in conduit.
(2) Permits. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee
shall in each case file plans with the appropriate Township
agencies, complete use agreements with the utility companies,
obtain all construction permits and receive written approval of the
Township before proceeding, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed.
(3) Interference with persons, improvements, public and private
property and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including
poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located,
erected and maintained so that such facilities shall:
§ 126-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-7
1:122
(a) Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives or
persons.
(b) Not interfere with any improvements the Township, county or
commonwealth may deem proper to make.
(c) Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets,
alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or
property, except to the minimum extent possible during actual
construction or repair.
(d) Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of
private property owners, except to the minimum extent
possible during actual construction or repair.
(e) Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water
or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the
Township.
(4) Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of
pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall,
at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the
Township, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway,
landscaping or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a
condition as, or better than, before said work was commenced and
in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with
standards for such work set by the Township. Weather permitting,
restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 business
days after the damage is incurred and the grantee shall use its best
efforts to complete the restoration as soon as possible thereafter.
(5) Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the
period of the franchise, the Township, county or commonwealth
shall lawfully elect to alter, or change, the grade of any street, alley
or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the
proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures
at its own expense.
(6) Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the
request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by
the Township, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal,
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting
the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 15
working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
(7) Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when
in conflict with existing Township ordinances, to trim any trees
upon and overhanging public right-of-way so as to prevent the
§ 126-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:123
branches of such trees from coming in contact with system
facilities, except that at the option of the Township, such trimming
may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the
expense of the grantee.
(8) Easements. All necessary easements over and under private
property shall be the responsibility of the grantee.
(9) Private property. Grantee shall be subject to all laws, ordinances or
regulations regarding private property in the course of
constructing, installing, operating or maintaining the cable
communications system in the Township of Warrington. Grantee
shall promptly repair or replace all private property, both real and
personal, damaged or destroyed as a result of the construction,
installation, operating or maintenance of the cable communications
system at its sole cost and expense.
F. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
(1) Approval for poles. No poles shall be erected by the grantee
without prior approval of the Township with regard to location,
height, types and any other pertinent aspect and consideration
given by the Township to the availability of existing poles and local
aesthetics. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding
structure of the grantee shall give rise to a vested interest and such
poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at
its own expense whenever the Township determines that the public
convenience would be enhanced thereby.
G. Construction reporting requirements.
(1) Progress reports. Within 30 days of the granting of a franchise to
construct a new system pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall
provide the Township with a written progress report, detailing
work completed to date and a schedule for completion of
construction. Such report shall include a description of the
progress in applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or
certifications and any other information the Township Manager
may deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be
determined by the Township Manager and may be modified at his/
her discretion. The time frame established above shall not apply to
the upgrade or rebuild of an existing system.
(2) Time frame for reports. Written progress reports as described in
Subsection G(1) above, shall be submitted to the Township on a
bimonthly basis throughout the new construction or rebuild
process. The Township Manager may require more frequent
reporting if he/she determines it is necessary to better monitor the
grantee's progress.
(3) Subscriber information. Prior to the commencement of any
significant system construction, the grantee shall produce an
§ 126-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-7
1:124
informational document to be distributed to all residents of the
area to be under construction, which shall describe the activity that
will be taking place. The informational document shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township Manager prior to its distribution.
H. Tests and performance monitoring.
(1) Completion tests. Not later than 60 days after any new or
substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for
service to subscribers, and thereafter on the annual anniversary of
the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall conduct
technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with all
technical standards contained in this chapter and the franchise,
and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC.
(2) Methodology. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the
supervision of, a qualified engineer or technician with proper
training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to
the Township, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration
and test procedures, and the qualification of the engineer
responsible for the tests.
(3) Test points. System monitor test points shall be established at or
near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or
near trunk line extremities. Such periodic tests shall be made at the
test points as shall be required by the FCC and/or the franchise.
(4) FCC tests. In addition to the performance test reports required
herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC
shall be submitted to the Township within 60 days of completion.
(5) Township-required tests. Whenever there have been similar
complaints made or when there exists other evidence which, in the
judgment of the Township, casts doubt on the reliability or quality
of the grantee's system, the Township shall have the right and
authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the
performance of its system with respect to the specified complaints.
To the extent permitted by law or regulation, the Township may
require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test
procedures or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal.
Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the Township no later
than 30 days after the Township formally notifies the grantee and
shall include the following information: the nature of the
complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system
component was tested; the equipment used, and procedures
employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and methods by
which said complaints were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall
be supervised by a qualified engineer or technician, who shall sign
all records of the special tests and forward same to the Township
with a report interpreting the results of the tests and
recommending what actions should be taken. If requested by the
§ 126-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:125
§ 126-8. Service provisions.
Township, and at the Township's expense, the grantee shall allow
an independent engineer to conduct such tests. Grantee shall
reimburse the Township for the expense of the tests if such tests
indicate that the cable communications system does not
substantially comply with relevant laws and regulations.
A. Services to subscriber and users.
(1) Programming. Concurrently with the activation of the cable
communications system in the Township, the grantee shall provide
all services to subscribers as described herein and in the franchise.
(a) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming
and services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire
to change the selection of programs or services offered on any
of the tiers, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of
services provided over the system. Any such change in
programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions
and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be
reported to the Township at least 30 days prior to the proposed
implementation, and when practicable, 45 days' prior notice to
the Township. The grantee shall notify all subscribers in
writing at least 30 days prior to implementing any change in
the selection of programs or services offered on any tiers, or
prior to adding or deleting any channels or changing the
channel number for any station. The grantee shall use its best
efforts to ensure diversity of programming.
(b) A basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout
the term of this chapter and the franchise.
(c) At a minimum, the grantee shall provide and maintain, within
the time frame specified in the franchise, the following access
channels whose purposes are outlined below:
[1] "Government Access Channel," which shall be a
specifically designated channel for noncommercial local
governmental use and shall be managed, scheduled and
programmed exclusively by the Township.
[2] "Educational Access Channel," which shall be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial use by local public
and private school authorities, and shall be managed,
scheduled and programmed exclusively by them.
[3] "Public Access Channel," which will be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial use by members of
the general public on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall
be managed and scheduled by the grantee.
§ 126-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-8
1:126
(d) The grantee shall make available leased-access channels for
commercial use as required by federal law.
(e) The grantee shall fully provide, at a minimum, services,
facilities and equipment for public, educational and
government access as indicated in the franchise.
(2) Emergency override. The grantee shall provide, service and
maintain public emergency transmission facilities to the Township,
as described in the franchise.
B. Installations, connections and other grantee services.
(1) Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a
service not exceeding 150 feet from a feeder cable or pedestal
attachment to the customer's residence. Service in excess of 150
feet and concealed wiring shall be charged at such cost as exceeds
normal installation costs. The desire of the subscriber as to the
point of entry into the residence or commercial establishment and
as to the location of pedestals shall be observed whenever possible.
Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The
grantee shall use due care in the process of installation and shall
repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said
installation. Weather permitting, such restoration shall be
undertaken within no more than 10 days after the damage is
incurred and the grantee shall use its best efforts to undertake and
complete such restoration as soon as possible thereafter.
(2) On-time guarantee. Excluding circumstances beyond its control,
the grantee shall guarantee that service and installation
appointments will be performed promptly. To this end, and except
as provided above, grantee shall not charge a subscriber for an
installation where the grantee is late for the installation
appointment. Furthermore, in the event grantee is late for a service
appointment, grantee shall provide the affected customer with a
credit of $20. Where the grantee schedules appointment windows,
the grantee shall be considered late for an appointment if it does
not arrive at the customer's home within the scheduled window.
(3) Antennas and antenna switches. Except in cases where safety is
threatened after notification to the affected party and the safety
problem is not corrected, the grantee shall not, as a condition to
providing cable communications service, require any subscriber or
potential subscriber, to remove any existing antenna structures for
the receipt of over-the-air television signals. The grantee shall
install, upon the request of the subscriber, an RF or antenna switch
where required for the provision of services provided by the
grantee. If the grantee finds safety a problem, the affected
subscriber shall be notified, provided with an opportunity to
correct the problem and have service resumed after correction has
occurred.
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-8
1:127
(4) Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to the potential
subscriber, as part of its promotional literature, information
concerning the availability of a lockout device for use by a
subscriber. The grantee reserves the right to require a reasonable
deposit for the use of this device, as set forth in the rate schedule.
The lockout device described herein shall be made available to all
subscribers requesting it beginning on the first day that any cable
service is provided.
(5) Reconnection. Grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed.
(6) Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable
service disconnected without charge. Such disconnection shall be
made as soon as practicable and in no case later than 15 days
following notice to grantee of same. A refund of unused service
charges shall be paid to the customer within 45 days from the date
of termination of service.
C. Service calls and complaint procedures.
(1) Business office. The grantee shall establish, operate and maintain
within 10 miles of the Township a business office, teleproduction
facility, and maintenance and repair facility for the purpose of
receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects
of the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
system and for the payment of subscribers' service charges, and
providing facilities for the production of programming.
(2) Telephone service. The grantee shall have a locally listed or tollfree
telephone number to receive subscriber service calls 24 hours
a day, seven days a week. The grantee shall provide a sufficient
number of telephone lines and telephone staff members to enable
subscribers to reach the grantee as specified in the FCC
regulations. Grantee's number shall be published and made
available to subscribers and the general public. The grantee shall
in addition provide a private telephone number to the Township
and utility companies to enable the Township or the utility
companies to reach the grantee in case of emergency on a twentyfour-
hour, seven-days-a-week basis for same day response.
(3) Response time. The grantee shall respond to and resolve
subscribers' complaints or requests for service in connection with
repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities. The
grantee shall respond as quickly as possible to such complaints and
requests, but shall in any case respond within the time frames set
forth in the franchise. Complaints or requests which may pose a
potential health and safety hazard will be responded to
immediately. In connection with billing complaints, the grantee
shall respond within seven business days.
§ 126-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-8
1:128
(4) Grantee rules. The grantee shall prepare and file with the Township
copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the
handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee shall,
by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone
number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such
inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish
information concerning the Township office responsible for the
administration of the franchise including, but not limited to, the
address and telephone number of said office.
(5) Complaint records. The grantee shall keep full records in
connection with all inquiries, or complaints and requests in
connection with the system that result in the generation of a work
order or are referred by the Township, or that are referred to the
grantee's customer satisfaction department for resolution. Such
records shall identify the person contacting the grantee, and the
person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject matter of
the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the
matter in question or the action taken by the grantee in connection
with the contact, and the date and time thereof, and such other
information as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee. These
records shall be made available for periodic inspection by the
Township.
(6) Equipment service. The grantee shall service or replace without
charge above the normal lease cost all equipment which it owns
and leases to the subscriber; provided, however, that the grantee
may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any
equipment damaged due to negligence of such subscriber. This
provision shall not apply to any equipment covered by a separate
service/maintenance contract.
(7) Investigation and remedial action. For recurrent complaints
regarding service deficiencies (other than total or partial loss of
service, such as "ghosting," weak audio signal, distortion and the
like), the Township Manager may require the grantee to investigate
and report to him/her the causes and cures thereof, and the
Township Manager may also conduct his/her own investigation.
Thereafter, the Township Manager may order specified remedial
action to be taken within reasonably feasible time limits. If such
action is not taken, or is ineffective, or if within 30 days the grantee
files with the Board of Supervisors a notice of objection to the
order, the Board of Supervisors may conduct a hearing and may, if
the evidence warrants a finding of fault on the part of the grantee,
take appropriate action pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
D. Continuity of service mandatory.
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-8
1:129
(1) Subscription rights. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive
continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and
other obligations to the grantee are honored.
(2) Cooperation. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify
or sell the system, or the Township gives notice of intent to
terminate or fails to renew its franchise, the grantee shall
cooperate with the Township or new grantee or operator in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such
period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period
during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to
reasonable costs for the services when it no longer operates the
system.
(3) Failure to provide continuity. In the event the grantee fails to
operate the system for 30 consecutive days without prior approval
of the Township or without just cause, the Township may, at its
option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time
as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the
Township or a permanent operator is selected. If the Township is
required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall
reimburse the Township for all reasonable costs or damages in
excess of revenues from the system received by the Township that
are the result of the grantee's failure to perform.
E. Protection of subscriber privacy.
(1) Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. Grantee shall at all
times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this chapter
and other applicable federal, commonwealth and local laws.
(2) Notice of privacy provisions. At the time of entering into an
agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a
subscriber, and at least once a year thereafter, grantee shall
provide notice in the form of a separate written statement to
subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber
of the privacy rights of the subscriber and the limitations placed
upon grantee with regard to the collection, retention, inspection
and dissemination of any personally identifiable information.
(3) Correction policy. Each subscriber shall be provided access to all
personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which
is collected and maintained by grantee. Such information shall be
made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a
convenient place designated by grantee. A cable subscriber shall
be provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such
information.
F. Rights of individuals.
(1) Nondiscrimination required. Grantee shall not deny service, deny
access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel
§ 126-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-8
1:130
§ 126-9. Books, records and reports.
users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, age, sex or physical or mental handicaps, provided
the subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for the service desired.
Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal,
commonwealth and local laws and regulations, and all executive
and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are
hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference.
(2) Fairness of accessibility. The entire system of the grantee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and
equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and
other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other
entities having a legitimate use for the network; and no one shall be
arbitrarily excluded from its use; allocation of use of said facilities
shall be made according to the rules or decisions of the grantee and
any regulatory agencies affecting the same.
(3) Information accessibility. Each individual shall have the right to
information concerning the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations formulated pursuant to it by the Board of
Supervisors, the grantee, agent or entity created hereunder or
pursuant to this chapter.
A. Books and records available to the grantor.
(1) Records. The Township or its officially designated representatives
shall have the right to inspect all pertinent or relevant records,
books, plans, customer service logs and financial statements
maintained by grantee which relate to the operation of the cable
system, enforcement of this chapter and the franchise, and directly
to computation of gross annual revenues, and construction and
location of facilities within the Township, at grantee's place of
business upon reasonable notice and during normal business
hours. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by
the grantee on the basis that said records contain "proprietary"
information. The Township and its officially designated
representatives agree to treat any information disclosed and
reports, maps and other documents submitted to or inspected by
the Township or its designated representatives as confidential and
only to disclose it to employees, agents or representatives thereof
that have a need to know or in order to enforce the provisions
hereof. Grantee shall make available adequate financial records
within the Township to permit the auditing of the grantee's gross
revenues. The Township shall notify the grantee in a timely manner
if a request is made for information which the grantee has clearly
marked as "confidential." Such notification shall specify the period
of time the grantee has to submit to the Township, any comments
on the request, and may, at its own expense, resist the request. The
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-9
1:131
Township, in any event, shall not be liable for any disclosure
required by law.
(2) Review. Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of
the Township to examine and copy or transcribe any and all maps
and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under its
control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property
of grantee. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the
Township, or upon reasonable request made available in the
Township, and if the Township shall determine that an examination
of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the
performance of any of their duties, then all travel and maintenance
expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be
paid by grantee.
B. Reports required. The grantee shall file with the Township:
(1) Regulatory communications. Upon request from the Township, any
reports required by the FCC, including, but not limited to, any
annual proof of performance tests and results, equal employment
opportunity (EEO) reports, required financial information, and all
petitions, applications and communications of all types submitted
by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission
(SEC), or any other federal or commonwealth regulatory
commission or agency, having jurisdiction over any matter affecting
operation of grantee's system will be made available to the
Township.
(2) Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles
of plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year
shall be submitted to the Township. After completion of initial
construction or any rebuild, maps designating the location of the
cable plant shall be filed with the Township. Thereafter, any
revisions to the system shall be reflected in updated maps provided
to the Township in a timely manner after such changes are made.
(3) Construction reports. During the progress of any initial, rebuild, or
other major construction undertaken during the term of the
franchise, reports shall be sent to the Township on a bimonthly
basis until construction is complete, as specified in this franchise.
(4) Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results shall
be supplied to the Township when sections of the system are rebuilt
and annually as required in § 126-7H(2) and (5)of this chapter.
(5) Test required by Township. Technical tests required by Township as
specified in § 126-7H(5)of this chapter and the franchise shall be
submitted within 30 days of notification.
(6) Change in service. Written notification of any change in
programming or service shall be provided to the Township 30 days
§ 126-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-9
1:132
prior to implementation, and when practicable, prior notice shall
be given 45 days in advance.
(7) Grantee rules. The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or
application forms of regular subscriber service policy regarding the
processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber
disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and
conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its
subscribers shall be filed with the Township and conspicuously
posted in the grantee's local office. All such terms and conditions,
including schedule of charges, must have been filed with the
Township prior to their becoming effective. Such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions
hereof or applicable commonwealth and federal laws, rules or
regulations.
(8) Proof of bonds and insurance. Grantee shall submit to the Township
the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and
written evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies
of insurance required by this chapter, or certified copies thereof,
and written notice of payment of required premium.
(9) Financial and ownership reports. The following financial reports for
the franchise area shall be submitted to the Township as provided
for below:
(a) An annual ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any
time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an
interest in the franchise of 5% or more to be provided where
any changes in ownership have occurred from those previously
reported.
(b) A fully audited and certified financial report from the previous
calendar year, including year-end balance sheet; income
statement showing subscriber revenue from each category of
service and every source of nonsubscriber revenue, line item
operating expenses, depreciation expense, interest expense
and taxes paid; statement of sources and applications of funds;
and depreciation schedule to be provided every three years, if
requested. The fully audited and certified information will be
provided on a Township basis for gross revenue. Required
financial information may be provided on a consolidated basis
for expenses, depreciation, and sources and applications of
funds.
(c) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures
including the cost of construction and of equipment to be
provided every three years, if requested. Such information may
be provided on a consolidated basis where franchisee-specific
information is not available.
§ 126-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-9
1:133
§ 126-10. Miscellaneous provisions.
(d) An annual list of any changes to the officers and members of
the board of grantee and of any parent corporation.
(e) An annual report of the grantee and any parent corporation.
(10) Operational reports. The following system and operational reports
shall be submitted to the Township upon written request by the
Township Manager or his designee:
(a) A report on the system's technical tests and measurements as
set forth herein and in the franchise.
(b) A report on programs and services offered by grantee,
including public, educational, government and leased access.
(c) An annual summary of the previous year's activities including,
but not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of
service offered, including number of pay units sold, new
services offered, and the amount collected annually from other
users of the system and the character and extent of the service
rendered thereto.
(d) An annual summary of complaints received and handled in
addition to any reports required in the franchise.
(e) An annual projection of system and service plans for the future.
(11) Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
Township at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or
property, as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the
performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the
Township in connection with this chapter or the franchise, upon
written request of the Township Manager or his designee.
C. Records required.
(1) Mandatory records. The grantee shall at all times maintain:
(a) A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experience for the preceding period
prior to a performance review or a maximum of three years,
whichever is less.
(b) A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps
showing the location of all cable communication system
equipment installed or in use in the Township, exclusive of
subscriber service drops.
(2) Other records. The Township may impose reasonable requests for
additional information, records and documents from time to time.
§ 126-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-10
1:134
A. Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions
of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this chapter.
B. Franchise applications.
(1) Invitation of any applications for a franchise, public notice of
"request for proposals." The Township may invite applications for a
cable television franchise by means of a public notice advertising
the availability of its "request for proposals."
(a) The public notice shall contain, but need not be limited to:
[1] A description of the franchise area which is sought.
[2] A statement that a formal "request for proposals" is
available to prospective applicants from a Township
official whose name, address and telephone number are
specified.
[3] A statement that applications for the franchise must be
submitted in writing in the form and manner specified in
the "request for proposals" no later than a day certain.
[4] A statement that all applications will be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at a
specified location.
(2) Request for proposals. Prior to inviting any applications for any
television franchise, the Township shall prepare a "request for
proposals" that shall contain, but need not be limited to, the
following:
(a) A description of the cable television system and services
desired by the Township including any system specifications
established by the Township.
(b) A statement specifying the form that all applications shall
follow.
(c) A statement indicating the amount of the application fee (if
any) to be submitted with the application, and the manner in
which such fee is to be submitted.
(d) A statement that all applications must contain the information
required by the "request for proposals."
(e) The closing date for the submission of applications.
(f) The name, address and telephone number of the Township
official(s) who may be contacted for further information.
§ 126-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-10
1:135
(3) Requirement for public hearing on reasonable notice. The
Township shall conduct a public hearing prior to awarding or
denying any cable television franchise. The hearing shall be
preceded by reasonable notice to each of the franchise applicants
and to the public, and shall be conducted by the Township Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the following procedures:
(a) There shall be an agenda for the hearing which shall specify
the proposal(s) to be considered at the hearing.
(b) Every person who has applied for a cable television franchise
shall appear at the hearing either in person or by authorized
representative. The application of any applicant not so
appearing shall not be further considered, except for good
cause shown.
(c) All persons shall be given opportunity to participate in the
hearing, but nothing contained herein shall limit the power of
the presiding officer to establish reasonable time limits and
otherwise limit repetitive statements or questions.
(d) The notice of hearing shall:
[1] Conform to all relevant commonwealth and local laws and
ordinances.
[2] Describe the agenda to be considered at the public
hearing.
[3] Indicate that copies of all franchise applications are
available for public inspection during normal business
hours at a place to be specified in the notice.
(4) Township discretion. The Township, at its discretion, may reject any
application for a franchise. In awarding a franchise, the Township
shall allow the applicant's cable system a reasonable period of time
to become capable of providing cable service to all households in
the franchise area; may require adequate assurance that the cable
operator will provide adequate public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial
support; and may require adequate assurance that the cable
operator has the financial, technical or legal qualifications to
provide cable service.
C. Calculation of time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance
of or doing of any act, duty matter, payment or thing is required
hereunder and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing
thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so
as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed
period of duration time. When the last day of the period falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the
computation.
§ 126-10 WARRINGTON CODE § 126-10
1:136
Chapter 131
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
§ 131-1. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township hereby finds:
§ 131-2. Prohibitions; violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995
by Ord. No. 95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
A. That the Surgeon General of the United States has called for a ban on
the sale of cigarettes by vending machines;
B. That the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has banned the sale or
furnishing of cigarettes or tobacco in any form to minors under the age
of 18;
C. That the presence of cigarette vending machines permits
indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors, not preventable by any
assured means of enforcement;
D. That no penalty has been imposed by commonwealth statute upon
minors for the purchase of cigarettes; rather, penalties are imposed
only on the seller.
A. No person shall own, operate, rent or permit the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under his/her control, in the Township of
Warrington.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 126-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:137
Chapter 140
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 90.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 174.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 131-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 131-2
1:138
ARTICLE I
Occupancy Certificates Upon Sale or Lease of Buildings
[Adopted 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-12 (Ch. 4, Part 3, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances; amended in its entirety 6-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-O-08]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the Township
stipulating that the property meets all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations of the Township of Warrington, including the Property
Maintenance Code, and may be used or occupied as intended.
SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION — A violation of an adopted building, housing,
property maintenance or fire code or maintenance, health or safety
nuisance ordinance that makes a building, structure or any part thereof
unfit for human habitation and is discovered during the course of a
Township inspection of a property and disclosed to the record owner or
prospective purchaser of the property through issuance of a Township
report.
TEMPORARY ACCESS CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the
Township as a result of the Township inspection of a property incident to
the resale or rental of a property that identifies at least one substantial
violation, and the purpose of the certificate is to authorize the purchaser
or owner to access the property for the purpose of correcting substantial
violations pursuant to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the
Township of Warrington and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including
the Property Maintenance Code. No person may occupy a property during
the term of a temporary access certificate, but the owner shall be permitted
to store personalty that is related to the proposed use or occupancy of the
property or is needed to repair the substantial violations during the time of
the temporary access certificate.
TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the
Township as a result of the Township inspection of a property incident
to the resale or rental of the property that reveals a violation but no
substantial violation, and the purpose of the certificate is to authorize the
purchaser or tenant to fully utilize or reside in the property while correcting
violations pursuant to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the
Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the Property
Maintenance Code.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION — A condition which renders a building
or structure, or any part thereof, dangerous or injurious to the health,
safety or physical welfare of an occupant or the occupants of neighboring
dwellings. The condition may include substantial violations of a property
that show evidence of: a significant increase to the hazards of fire or
accident; inadequate sanitary facilities; vermin infestation; or a condition
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-1
1:139
of disrepair, dilapidation or structural defects such that the cost of
rehabilitation and repair would exceed 1/2 of the agreed-upon purchase
price of the property.
VIOLATION — A violation of a properly adopted zoning, building, housing,
property maintenance or fire code or maintenance, health or safety
nuisance ordinance that does not rise to the level of a substantial violation
and is discovered during the course of a Township inspection of a property
and disclosed to the record owner or prospective purchaser of the property
through issuance of a Township report.
§ 140-2. Changing occupancy without certificate.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to change the occupancy of any residential
dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial building within the Township of
Warrington or permit such a change, without first obtaining an occupancy
certificate or temporary occupancy certificate.
§ 140-3. Obtaining a certificate.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to occupy any
residential dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial building within the
Township of Warrington when an occupancy certificate or temporary
occupancy certificate is required by this article, without first obtaining such
a certificate.
§ 140-4. Requirements upon sale or lease.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or lease any
residential dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial building within the
Township of Warrington without first obtaining an occupancy certificate,
temporary occupancy certificate, or temporary access certificate,
regardless of whether there is a change in occupancy at the time of such
sale. This requirement shall not apply to real estate transfers to any bank,
savings association, credit union, mortgage lender, or any similar financial
institution or other subsidiary thereof, which losses incurred on a loan or
other obligation in default secured by a mortgage, deed of trust or other
lien on the property.
§ 140-5. Applications and fees.
A. Applications for occupancy certificates shall be made to the Township of
Warrington on forms provided for that purpose.
B. The Township shall, from time to time, establish by resolution such fees
as it deems reasonable and proper to be charged for the issuance of an
occupancy certificate, temporary occupancy certificate and temporary
access certificate pursuant to the provisions of this part.
§ 140-1 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-6
1:140
§ 140-6. Receipt of completed applications.
Upon receipt of a properly completed application for an occupancy
certificate and payment of the required fee, the Township shall promptly
inspect the residential dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial building
which is the subject of the application to determine if the building conforms
to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the Township of
Warrington and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the Property
Maintenance Code.
§ 140-7. Inspection in compliance.
If, upon inspection, the Township shall determine that the residential
dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial building is in compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, then the Township shall issue
an occupancy certificate to the applicant.
§ 140-8. Inspection not in compliance.
§ 140-9. Compliance requirement and reinspection.
A. If, upon inspection, the Township shall determine that the residential
dwelling unit or commercial or industrial building is not in compliance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, then the Township
shall refuse to issue an occupancy certificate and shall promptly notify
the applicant, in writing, of the refusal and the specific reasons therefor
with citations of the specific sections and subsections of the laws,
ordinances, and regulations being violated. Upon notification by the
applicant that the residential dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial
building has been brought into compliance, the Township shall conduct
a reinspection and upon a determination that the unit or building is in
compliance, shall issue an occupancy certificate to the applicant.
B. If the Township inspection of a property incident to the resale or lease
of the property reveals a violation but not a substantial violation, the
Township shall refuse to issue an occupancy certificate and instead
issue a temporary occupancy certificate and shall promptly notify the
applicant, in writing, of the refusal and the specific reasons therefor
with citations of the specific sections and subsections of the laws,
ordinances, and regulations being violated.
C. If the Township inspection of a property incident to the resale or lease
of the property reveals at least one substantial violation, the Township
shall issue a temporary access certificate and shall promptly notify the
applicant, in writing, of the refusal and the specific sections and
subsections of the law, ordinances, and regulations being violated.
A. Any purchaser or owner of property with a known violation of any
applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations must either bring the
property into compliance or demolish the building or structure in
accordance with the law within 12 months of the date of purchase. At
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-9
1:141
§ 140-10. Violations and penalties.
the request of the property owner, the Township may, at its discretion,
negotiate a longer period of time for maintenance and repair of the
structure under a temporary occupancy certificate.
B. At the expiration of the twelve-month period, or before that time if
requested by the property owner, the Township shall reinspect the
property for the purpose of determining compliance with the cited
violations. If a temporary access certificate has been issued and
reinspection indicates that the noted substantial violations have been
corrected but other cited violations remain, the Township shall issue a
temporary occupancy certificate to be valid for the time remaining on
the original temporary access certificate. If reinspection indicates that
all noted violations have been corrected, the Township shall issue an
occupancy certificate for the property.
A. Failure to comply with § 140-9A of this article shall result in:
(1) Revocation of the temporary occupancy certificate or temporary
access certificate;
(2) The purchaser or owner being subject to any existing laws,
ordinances, and regulations relating to the occupation of a
property without an occupancy certificate;
(3) The purchaser or owner being personally liable for the costs of
maintenance, repairs or demolition sufficient to correct the cited
violations, and a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than
$10,000.
This section shall not apply to a violation of a Township code or
ordinance for which a fine, other penalty or judgment to abate or
correct was imposed by a Magisterial District Judge or Municipal
Court, or a judgment at law or in equity was imposed by a Court
of Common Pleas prior to purchase, or where the Township denies
the certificate pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S. Chapter 61 (relating to
neighborhood blight reclamation and revitalization).
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the other
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $250 and costs of
prosecution, and in default thereof, to imprisonment in the Bucks
County Prison for not more than 10 days.
§ 140-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-10
1:142
ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-09 (Ch. 5, Part 1, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 140-11. Adoption of state code.
A. Warrington Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time,
and its regulations.
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of
Warrington Township.
C. Administration and enforcement of the code within Warrington
Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as
determined by the governing body of Warrington Township from time to
time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of Warrington Township to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of Warrington
Township.
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Warrington Township.
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this act through an
intermunicipal agreement.
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this act on behalf of Warrington
Township.
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
D. A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of Warrington Township in conformity with the requirements of
the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and
for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities.
E. Fire Code, Residential Code, Building Code.
§ 140-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-11
1:143
(1) All building code ordinances relating to fire suppression, fire
detection and fire alarms which were adopted by Warrington
Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the
requirements of the code, shall continue in full force and effect
until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
A copy of said ordinances has been attached.13
(2) All ordinances relating to annual and resale firesafety inspections
which were adopted by Warrington Township on or before July 1,
1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the code,
shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such
provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the
code, as amended from time to time. A copy of said ordinances has
been attached.14
(3) All residential code ordinances relating to offsets between multiple
single-family dwellings and automatic sprinkler systems which
were adopted by Warrington Township on or before July 1, 1999,
and which equal or exceed the requirements of the code, shall
continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions
fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as
amended from time to time. A copy of said ordinances has been
attached.15
(4) All building code ordinances or sections thereof relating to the
relief from personal responsibility for the code official, officer or
employee charged with enforcement of this code, while acting for
the jurisdiction. A copy of said ordinances has been attached.16
(5) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose
requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the code
are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of
the code.
(6) All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Warrington
Township not governed by the code shall remain in full force and
effect.
F. Fees assessable by Warrington Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
G. If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this article is held, for
any reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article.
13.Editor's Note: Said ordinances are on file in the Township offices.
14.Editor's Note: Said ordinances are on file in the Township offices.
15.Editor's Note: Said ordinances are on file in the Township offices.
16.Editor's Note: Said ordinances are on file in the Township offices.
§ 140-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-11
1:144
ARTICLE III
Demolition Permits
[Adopted 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-O-05 (Ch. 5, Part 5, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 140-12. Approvals for partial demolition.
The Building Code Official shall be required to obtain all information and
issue all requisite approvals for partial demolition, as an integral element
in the process, methods and time schedule related to the requirements of
Section 3303 of the International Building Code, and the property owner
shall remain obligated and liable for all elements of the building demolition
to the full extent as provided thereunder.
§ 140-13. Permit required.
No fire, police and emergency entities shall participate in any training
evolutions on any property without obtaining a Township-approved
demolition permit for such property, indicating, in part, that all demolitions
shall be completed within 10 days after the completion of the subject
training evolution; the consent of the property owners permitting Township
employees or agents to complete any demolition not completed by the date
indicated; and the obligation of the subject property owners to reimburse
any costs or expenses incurred by the Township to comply with all other
provisions as are set forth in the subject permit.
§ 140-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-13
1:145

ARTICLE IV
Amendments to Construction Codes
[Adopted 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-01 (Ch. 5, Part 3, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 140-14. General provisions.
§ 140-15. International Building Code (IBC). [Amended 11-13-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The Board of
Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases be declared unconstitutional.
B. The Township Manager shall certify to the adoption of this article, and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this article shall
take effect and be in force from and after its approval as required by
law.
C. This article and the rules, regulations, provision, requirements, orders
and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in
full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and
adoption.
D. Nothing in this article hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 140-22 of this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this article.
A. In addition to the parts of the International Building Code of 2015 (IBC)
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township
also adopts Appendix C, Agricultural Buildings; Appendix F, Rodent
Proofing; Appendix G, Flood-Resistant Construction; and Appendix I,
Patio Covers.
B. Insertions, deletions, and revisions adopted prior to 1999. Sections of
the IBC are hereby readopted, as follows:
(1) IBC 101.1. Insert: "Warrington Township."
(2) IBC 903.2.4.(1). Use Group F. Change: "12,000 square feet" to
"5,000 square feet."
(3) IBC 903.2.7(1). Change Group M from "12,000 square feet" to
"5,000 square feet."
§ 140-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-15
1:147
(4) IBC 903.2.9(1). Change Group S-1 from "12.000 square feet" to
"5,000 square feet."
(5) IBC 903.2.9.1(1). Repair Garages. Change "10,000 square feet" to
"5,000 square feet" as the maximum floor area, before requiring an
automatic sprinkler system in repair garages located in two-story
buildings.
(6) IBC 903.2.10. Change Group S-2. An automatic fire-suppression
system shall be provided throughout Use Group S-2 buildings that
exceed 12,000 square feet in area.
(7) IBC 907.2.1. Delete the first sentence of Section 907.2.1 and
substitute the following:
Section 907.2.1. "A manual and automatic fire alarm system shall
be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in any Group A occupancy,
regardless of occupant load."
(8) IBC 907.2.1. Delete the exception to Section 907.2.1.
(9) IBC 907.2.2.
(a) Change: Use Group B. A combination manual and automatic
fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all Use
Group B occupancies.
(b) Delete the exception.
(10) IBC 907.2.4.
(a) Change: Use Group F-1. A combination manual and automatic
fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all Use
Group F-1 occupancies.
(b) Delete the exceptions.
(11) IBC 907.2.7.
(a) Change: Use Group M. A combination manual and automatic
fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all Use
Group M occupancies.
(b) Delete the exception.
(12) IBC 907.2.24. Add: Use Groups S-1 and S-2. A combination manual
and automatic fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained
in all Use Group S-1 and S-2 occupancies.
(13) IBC 1612.3. Insert: "Bucks County" as the title of the jurisdiction
for which the Flood Study was published and "March 16, 2015" as
the date of issuance of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
§ 140-15 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-16
1:148
§ 140-16. International Plumbing Code (IPC). [Amended 7-27-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-O-07; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
A. In addition to the parts of the International Plumbing Code of 2015
(IPC) adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington
Township also adopts Appendix B, Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities;
Appendix C, Structural Safety; Appendix D, Degree Day and Design
Temperatures; and Appendix E, Sizing of Water Piping System.
B. Insertions, deletions, and revisions adopted prior to 1999. Sections of
the IPC are hereby amended as follows:
(1) IPC 305.4.1. Insert: "Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below
finished grade at the point of septic system connection. Building
sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade."
(2) IPC 701.2. Change: Sewer Required. Change "International Private
Sewage Disposal Code" to "the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection."
(3) IPC 702.3. Change: Building sewer pipe. Building sewer pipe shall
be service weight cast-iron pipe or SDR-35 PVC pipe. The other
materials listed in Table 702.3 are not approved for use.
C. Insertions, deletions, and revisions adopted since 1999. Sections of the
IPC are hereby amended as follows:
(1) IPC 101.1. Insert: "Warrington Township."
(2) IPC 106.6.2. Change: The fees for all plumbing work shall be as
indicated in the Fee Schedule resolution adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) IPC 106.6.3. Insert: "50%" in two locations.
(4) IPC 108.4. Insert: "a summary offense punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days."
(5) IPC 108.5. Insert: "shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50 or
more than $100."
(6) IPC 301.8. Insert: "Connection to Public Water and Sewer. The
water distribution and drainage system of any building in which
plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water
main and sewer, respectively, if available. A public water main or
public sewer system shall be considered available to a building
when the building is located within 150 feet of the public water
main or sewer."
(7) IPC 903.1. Insert: "All open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof, except where
a roof is used for any purpose other than weather protection, the
§ 140-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-16
1:149
§ 140-17. International Fire Code (IFC). [Amended 11-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
roof extensions shall be run at least seven feet (2,134 mm) above
the roof."
A. In addition to the parts of the International Fire Code of 2015 (IFC)
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township
also adopts Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;
Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; Appendix D, Fire
Apparatus Access Roads; Appendix E, Hazard Categories; Appendix F,
Hazard Ranking; and Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and
Volume Equivalents.
B. Insertions, deletions, and revisions adopted prior to 1999. Sections of
the IFC are hereby amended, as follows: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) IFC 5504.3.1.1. Add: Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited in any area
of Warrington Township within the "fire limits for cryogenic fluids
area." The "fire limits for cryogenic fluids area" is described as any
land zoned RA Residential Agricultural District; RA-2 Residential
Agricultural District; RA-3 Residential Agricultural District; RA-4
Residential Agricultural District; R/PRD Planned Residential
Development District; R-1 Low-Density Residential District; R-1C
Residential District; R-2 Medium-Density Residential District; R-3
Single-Family Residential District; R-2I Residential Infill District;
IU-A Institutional-Age Qualified Residential Community District; or
IU-A-1 Institutional-Age Qualified District-1. Such storage is
permitted in the land zoned as follows: IU Institutional Use District;
C-1 Commercial 1 District; C-2 Commercial 2 District; PI-1 Planned
Industrial District; PI-2 Planned Industrial District; OI Professional
Office - Light Industry District; CR/O Corridor Residential/Office
District; CBD Central Business District; OS/P Open Space/Parkland
District; Q Quarry District; CE Cemetery District; and J Junkyard
District.
(2) IFC 5704.2.9.6.1. Add: Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in any area of
Warrington Township within the "fire limits for Class I and Class II
liquids area." The "fire limits for Class I and Class II liquids" is
described as any land zoned RA-2 Residential Agricultural District;
RA-3 Residential Agricultural District; RA-4 Residential
Agricultural District; R/PRD Planned Residential Development
District; R-1 Low-Density Residential District; R-1C Residential
District; R-2 Medium-Density Residential District; R-3 Single-
Family Residential District; R-2I Residential Infill District; IU-A
Institutional-Age Qualified Residential Community District; IU-A-1
Institutional-Age Qualified District-1. Such storage is permitted in
the land zoned as follows: RA Residential Agricultural District; C-1
§ 140-16 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-17
1:150
§ 140-18. International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings (IRC). [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-02;
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
Commercial 1 District; C-2 Commercial 2 District; PI-1 Planned
Industrial District; PI-2 Planned Industrial - Mobile Home District;
OI Professional Office - Light Industry District; CR/O Corridor
Residential/Office District; Q Quarry District; CE Cemetery
District; and J Junkyard District.
(3) IFC 5706.2.4.3. Add: Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks on farms and on construction sites is permitted
anywhere in Warrington Township, subject to the requirements
found in Section 3406.2.
(4) IFC 6104.2. Add: Storage of liquefied petroleum gas in tanks larger
than 2,000 gallons' capacity is prohibited in any area of Warrington
Township within the "fire limits for liquefied petroleum gas area."
The "fire limits for liquefied petroleum gas" is described as any land
zoned RA Residential Agricultural District; RA-2 Residential
Agricultural District; RA-3 Residential Agricultural District; RA-4
Residential Agricultural District; R/PRD Planned Residential
Development District; R-1 Low-Density Residential District; R-1C
Residential District; R-2 Medium-Density Residential District; R-3
Single-Family Residential District; R-2I Residential Infill District;
IU-A Institutional-Age Qualified Residential Community District;
IU-A-1 Institutional-Age Qualified District-1; IU Institutional Use
District; C-1 Commercial 1 District; C-2 Commercial 2 District; OI
Professional Office - Light Industry District; CR/O Corridor
Residential/Office District; OS/P Open Space/Parkland District; Q
Quarry District; CE Cemetery District; or J Junkyard District. Such
storage is permitted in the land zoned as follows: PI-1 Planned
Industrial District; PI-2 Planned Industrial - District; CBD Central
Business District; and any at facility approved by the code official.
C. Insertions, deletions, and revisions adopted since 1999. Sections of the
IFC are hereby amended, as follows:
(1) IFC 101.1 Insert: "Warrington Township."
(2) IFC 109.4 Insert: "a summary offense punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days."
(3) IFC 111.4 Insert: "shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50 or
more than $100."
A. In addition to the parts of the International Residential Code for Oneand
Two-Family Dwellings of 2015 (IRC) adopted by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township also adopts Appendix A, Sizing
and Capacity of Gas Piping; Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems
Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I, Appliances,
§ 140-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-18
1:151
and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents; Appendix C, Exit
Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Venting Systems; Appendix D,
Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance
Installation; Appendix F, Radon Control Methods; Appendix H, Patio
Covers; Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures; and Appendix K,
Sound Transmission.
B. Insertions, deletions, and revisions. Sections of the IRC are hereby
amended, as follows:
(1) R101.1. Insert: "Warrington Township."
(2) R105.1. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this
code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make
application to the Building Code Official and obtain the required
permit. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) R105.2. Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for
the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code
shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done
in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any
other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor
area does not exceed 192 square feet. Zoning permit is
required.
2. Fences not over six feet high. Zoning permit is required.
3. Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of
the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. Zoning and building
permits are required.
4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity
does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 liters) and the ratio
of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. Zoning
permit is required.
5. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story
below. Zoning permit is required.
6. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops
and similar finish work.
7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches
(610 mm.) deep. Zoning permit is required.
§ 140-18 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-18
1:152
8. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a oneor
two-family dwelling. Zoning permit is required.
9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not
project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior
wall and do not require additional support.
10. Roofing and siding, on condition that snow and ice shields
are provided.
11. Replacement windows, if same size.
Electrical:
1. Repairs and maintenance: A permit shall not be required for
minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or
the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved permanently installed receptacles.
2. Replacement of standard receptacles with ground-fault
circuit-interrupter (GPI) receptacles.
Gas:
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes-drying appliances.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval
of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval
of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds
(4.54 kilograms) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by
motors of one horsepower (746 watts) or less.
8. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing:
§ 140-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-18
1:153
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent
pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap,
drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective
and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same
with new material, such work shall be considered as new
work, and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as
provided in this code.
The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water
closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
(4) 301.2(1). Insert: The following additional Climatic and Geographic
Design Criteria:
Table R301.2(1): Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
Wind Design
Subject to Damage
From
Ground
Snow
Load
Speed
(mph)
Topographic
Effects
Special
Wind
Region
Windbourne
Debris
Zone
Seismic
design
category
Weatherizing
Frost
Line
Depth Termite
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice
Barrier
Underlayment
Flood
Hazard
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
30 115 No No No B Severe 36 in. Mod-
High
11° F Yes March
16,
2015
1,000 51° F
(5) Insert R324. Automatic Sprinkler System.
(a) An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
new single-family detached dwellings and townhouses,
including attached garages. Additionally, an automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing
residential structures undergoing complete reconstruction.
Such systems shall be designed in accordance with the current
edition of NFPA 13D and 13R. The riser shall be designed in
accordance with Standard Detail W6, Typical Residential
Meter and Sprinkler Installation, found in the Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Specifications. The pipes may be
insulated in accordance with the Standard Residential Details
for Water/Sprinkler Connections. For the purpose of this
section, complete reconstruction shall mean the removal and
replacement, or the covering of existing materials, elements,
equipment or fixtures using new materials, elements,
equipment or fixtures.
(b) Exceptions:
[1] Bathrooms having an area of 55 square feet or less.
§ 140-18 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-18
1:154
§ 140-19. International Mechanical Code (IMC). [Amended
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
In addition to the parts of the International Mechanical Code of 2015 (IMC)
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township also
adopts Appendix A, Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-
Throughs.
§ 140-20. International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). [Amended
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
In addition to the parts of the International Fuel Gas Code of 2015 (IFGC)
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township also
adopts Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping (IFGS); Appendix B,
Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods,
Category I, Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents
(IFGS); Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems (IFGS); and Appendix D, Recommended Procedure for
Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation (IFGS).
§ 140-21. International Existing Building Code (IEBC). [Amended
11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-13]
In addition to the parts of the International Existing Building Code of 2015
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Warrington Township also
adopts Appendix B, Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing
Buildings and Facilities.
[2] Closets having an area of 24 square feet or less.
(6) Insert R327. Basement alterations:
(a) Any sprinklered house may have a basement converted into
living space without providing secondary egress, except
conversion to sleeping rooms is prohibited unless egress is
provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 310.
(b) Any nonsprinklered house must provide proper egress in
accordance with the requirements of Section 310.
(7) P2603.5.1 Insert: Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below finished
grade at the point of septic system connection. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade.
(8) P3002.2. Building Sewer. Building sewer piping shall be serviceweight
cast-iron pipe or SDR plastic pipe. The other materials
listed in the code are not approved. Forced main sewer piping shall
conform to one of the standards for ABS plastic pipe, cast-iron pipe,
copper or copper-alloy tubing, PVC plastic pipe, or pressure-rated
pipe listed in Table P3002.2.
§ 140-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-22
1:155
§ 140-22. Repealer.
Upon the effective date of this article, Ordinance 2007-O-08 and
subsequently adopted amendments are hereby repealed.
§ 140-23. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on the date of approval of this article by
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
§ 140-22 WARRINGTON CODE § 140-23
1:156
Chapter 146
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Tickets for certain offenses — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
§ 146-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Warrington Township
Contractor Licensing Ordinance."
§ 146-2. Definitions. [Amended 2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The masculine includes the feminine, the
singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
CONTRACT — An agreement for payment other than reimbursement of
costs, whether oral or written, and whether contained in one or more
documents, between a contractor and an owner or another contractor for
the performance of work, including all labor, services, and materials to be
furnished and performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide employee of the
owner, who undertakes or offers to perform construction, repair, reroofing,
remodeling, rehabilitation, alterations, installation, repair, demolition, and
shall include, but not be limited to, paving, concrete, signs, alarm systems,
plumbing, electrical, and any other residential or nonresidential
construction, repair, alteration, or demolition in the Township, whether
as a general contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor, or home
improvement contractor with respect to the owner.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Warrington.
LICENSE YEAR — A twelve-month period beginning the first day of January
each year.
OWNER — Any property owner, tenant, or other person who orders,
contracts for, or purchases the services of a contractor, or any person
entitled to the work of a contractor pursuant to a contract, gift, or
otherwise.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
corporation, trust or other legally recognizable entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warrington.
§ 140-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:157
§ 146-3. Enforcement.
The Enforcement Officer or his authorized representatives shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 146-4. Compliance required.
No person shall act as a contractor in the Township except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Any person, including an owner, who
willfully aids a contractor in violating any provisions of this chapter is in
violation of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter may not be waived
by agreement.
§ 146-5. Craft licenses.
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to authorize
the licensee to perform any particular type of work or type of business
which is reserved to qualified licensees under other provisions of state or
local law.
§ 146-6. Licenses required; application and renewals.
Every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter to begin to
engage in the business of acting as a contractor in the Township shall, on
or before the first day of each license year, or prior to commencing business
during a license year, make application for a license to act as a contractor
in the Township. Such application shall be made by the completion of an
application furnished by the Enforcement Officer and the payment of a
license fee as hereinafter set forth in this chapter. Each application must
contain information as set forth hereafter in this chapter. Each application
for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a natural person, and in the
case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner thereof, and
in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof. Each successful applicant
shall be issued a license, which license shall be in the form of a wallet-size
card and in the form of a vehicle sticker. Additional vehicle stickers shall be
available at a minimal cost set by the Township. Every licensed contractor,
while actually acting as a contractor in the Township, shall carry on his
person the said license card and shall display it to the Enforcement Officer
or his representative upon demand. Every licensed contractor shall at all
times display the vehicle sticker license(s) on the rear of the vehicle(s) used
primarily for the activities as a contractor. All contractors' licenses shall
expire at midnight on the day immediately preceding the beginning of each
license year, unless the license is revoked or suspended prior thereto under
the terms of this chapter. A person with an unexpired license and which
has not been revoked or suspended during the current year who makes
application for a license for the following license year need not complete
an application form, but shall only submit the required license fee, and
shall advise of any changes to the information required and set forth on the
original application. Any person carrying on the business of a contractor in
§ 146-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 146-6
1:158
the Township shall secure a license under the terms of this chapter in each
license year during which the business is conducted in the Township.
§ 146-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the official transactions of
any authorized representative of:
§ 146-8. Insurance required.
No contractor's license shall be issued unless the applicant files a certificate
of insurance with the Enforcement Officer at the time of license application.
The certificate of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages
afforded under the policy shall not be cancelled until at least 15 days'
prior written notice of such cancellation has been give to the Township.
The certificate of insurance must evidence policies of insurance, maintained
at the expense of the applicant, for public liability, bodily injury, property
damage, products liability, and completed operations each of which must
have a single occurrence limit of at least $50,000. Blasting and demolition
insurance shall also be required if blasting and demolition shall be
performed, and the reasonable limits of such insurance shall be determined
by the Enforcement Officer at the time of application, based on the nature
and extent of the applicant's proposed operations. All types and limits of
insurance for which certificates are presented at the time of application
shall be maintained throughout the license year.
§ 146-9. Annual license.
A. The government of the United States, any state or commonwealth of the
United States, any political subdivision of any state or commonwealth,
or any agency or instrumentality of the foregoing governments.
B. No contractor's license shall be required of any person when acting in a
particular capacity or particular type of transaction as follows:
(1) A person who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary.
(2) A person who is required by state law to attain standards of
competency or experience, and who must obtain licensing under
such state law, as a prerequisite to engage in a craft or profession,
and who is acting exclusively within the scope of such craft or
profession for which he is currently licensed pursuant to such law.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the owner or tenant of a
property who performs work on the owned or leased property.
A. At the time of application for an annual license or for the renewal of a
current license, or upon application for a limited license, the applicant
shall deliver to the Enforcement Officer a license fee, payable to the
Township. The fee shall be set forth in the Township Fee Schedule, as
the same shall be amended from time to time.
§ 146-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-9
1:159
§ 146-10. Limited license.
In lieu of an annual license, an application may be made, and a license
issued for a particular job. This license shall expire upon the completion
of the job designated on the license application, and shall be valid for that
particular job only. The fee for a limited license shall be as set forth in the
Township Fee Schedule and the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 146-11. Issuance or refusal to issue license; form of license
application.
§ 146-12. Changes in ownership, management, address or trade
name. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
Every contractor licensee shall, within 10 days after a change in ownership,
directors, officers, management, address or trade name notify the Township
Manager of such change.
B. The fee imposed shall be payable per license year or any portion thereof
during which any application for an annual license is received. There
shall not be a prorated reduction for an annual license fee.
A. When an application has been filed with the Enforcement Officer in
proper form, the Enforcement Officer shall, within a period of 30 days
from the date following the date the application is received, issue or
refuse to issue the appropriate contractor's license to the applicant. If
issuance of a license is denied, the Enforcement Officer shall mail to the
applicant, by regular mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant
at the address set forth on the application, a written statement setting
forth the reasons for the denial within the aforesaid thirty-day period.
B. The application for a license shall be a printed form, provided to the
applicant by the Enforcement Officer, and the application shall require
a written answer to all questions contained thereon. Failure to answer
all questions on the application form shall mean that the applicant is not
entitled to consideration of this application until he has answered all
questions. The application form shall be signed by the applicant under
oath. The questions and information requested on the application form
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) The names of owners, partners, directors and officers of the
applicant, the business address, and trade name of the applicant.
(2) A statement as to whether or not any municipality has refused to
issue or has revoked any similar contractor's license to the
applicant within two years previous to the date of the application.
In the event there has been such a denial or revocation, the
applicant must explain in writing the reasons for such denial or
revocation.
§ 146-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 146-13
1:160
§ 146-13. Standards for refusal of issuance or renewal of license.
No license shall be issued or renewed under the following circumstances:
§ 146-14. Revocation of licenses.
The Enforcement Officer shall revoke any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter under the following circumstances:
§ 146-15. Prohibited acts.
In addition to all other acts prohibited by the terms of this chapter, those
acts warranting revocation of a license under this chapter shall also be
prohibited acts under this chapter.
A. If the applicant falsely answered any question or questions contained
on the application form.
B. If the applicant has been refused a contractor's license or has had a
contractor's license revoked or suspended by this or any other
municipality within two years prior to the date of application for
issuance or renewal, and if the refusal, revocation, or suspension by
this or any other municipality was due to a willful failure to comply with
the municipality's Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire,
Zoning or Housing Code, or any other code pertaining to construction,
alteration, or repair of a building or structure.
A. If the licensee falsely answered a question or questions contained on
the application for licensing or renewal of licensing previously
submitted to the Enforcement Officer.
B. If the licensee fails to maintain, during the license year, the policies of
insurance required under the provisions of this chapter.
C. If the licensee willfully violates any of the terms or provisions of any
Warrington Township Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire,
Zoning or Housing Code or any other code pertaining to construction,
alteration, and repair of structures or buildings, or any terms or
provisions of this chapter.
D. If the licensee willfully violates any condition or requirement of any
permit issued by the Township, including building, sewer construction,
or highway permits.
E. If the licensee conducts a contractor's business in the Township under
any name other than that under which he is licensed.
F. If the licensee fails to comply with an order, demand, or requirement
lawfully made by the Enforcement Officer under the authority of this
chapter or any other Township ordinance, law or regulation.
§ 146-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-16
1:161
§ 146-16. Nonwaiver.
This chapter shall not be construed as superseding or waiving the
requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the Township
requiring the issuance of permits to plumbers, electricians, and other
contractors, which permit is required as a condition to perform work within
the Township.
§ 146-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, incurred by
the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate
officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable
relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. This chapter
may be enforced initially by violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38,
Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
Chapter 153
CURFEW
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
OFFICIAL TIME — Eastern standard time; except from the last Sunday in
April to the last Sunday in October, it shall be Eastern daylight saving time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as applied to
associations or partnerships, shall include the members or partners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian, or any adult person,
18 years of age or over, responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
§ 146-16 WARRINGTON CODE § 153-1
1:162
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, parking lot, sidewalk, walkway,
highway, road or alley, park, playground, wharf, dock, public building or
vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 153-2. Curfew regulations. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
A. Unlawful conduct of minors.
(1) No minor shall remain on or upon any public place or any
establishment between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day, official time. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor upon an
errand or other legitimate business directed by such minor's parent
or to any minor who is engaged in gainful employment during
curfew hours.
B. Unlawful conduct of parents.
(1) No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon
any public place or any establishment between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official time, except that on
Fridays and Saturdays the hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to
6:00 a.m.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent who
directs a minor upon an errand or other legitimate business or to
any parent of a minor engaged in gainful lawful employment during
curfew hours.
C. Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments. No
operator of an establishment or his agents or employees shall
knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said
establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day, official time, except that on Fridays and Saturdays the
hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m.
D. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provisions of this
chapter shall obtain information from such minor as to his name
and address, age and the name of his parent or parents. The minor
shall thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith.
(2) Any parent who violates the provision of Subsection B above shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First offense. A written notice shall be sent to the parent or
parents of the minor advising of the violation of Subsection A of
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-2
1:163
Chapter 165
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
§ 165-1. Control of earthmoving and related items.
this section and advising of the possible penalties if the
violation occurs again. The notice shall be sent by certified
mail.
(b) Second and subsequent offenses. Any parent or parents who
shall violate any provision of Subsection B above, after having
received notice of a prior violation, upon conviction thereof in
an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(3) Any operator of an establishment who violates the provisions of
Subsection C above, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this
chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This chapter may be enforced initially by
violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement
Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
A. No changes shall be made in the contour of any land and no grading,
excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover of any land shall commence until such time that a plan
for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed with and
reviewed by the Warrington Township Engineer or there has been a
§ 153-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 165-1
1:164
Chapter 174
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236. Rental property — See Ch. 248.
determination by the Township Engineer that such plan is not
necessary.
B. Such plans shall conform to the following sections of Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development:
(1) Article III, § 305-25, Clearing, Grading and Drainage.
(2) Article III, § 305-26, Stormwater Management.
(3) Article III, § 305-27, Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
C. Such plans shall also conform in their entirety to the requirements of
Chapter 288, Stormwater Management.
D. Any activity disturbing 1,000 square feet or more of earth (2,000 square
feet or more for in-ground swimming pool construction) shall submit a
plan to the Bucks County Conservation District for review. No permit
may be issued without a letter of adequacy from the Bucks County
Conservation District.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:165

ARTICLE I
Rapid Access Key Boxes
[Adopted 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4 (Ch. 7, Part 1, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 174-1. Required use.
All industrial uses, uses classified as Use Groups F and H by the Warrington
Township Building Code, and any other property determined by the
Warrington Township Fire Marshal as being required to install a rapid
access key box shall install a rapid access key box.
§ 174-2. Type and location.
The rapid access key box shall be of a UL type and shall be approved by the
Warrington Township Fire Marshal's Office prior to installation. The rapid
access key box shall be installed in a location approved by the Warrington
Township Fire Marshal.
§ 174-3. Contents.
All rapid access key boxes required to be installed under this article shall
contain the following, each clearly labeled:
§ 174-4. Time for compliance.
All existing buildings required by this article to install a rapid access key
box shall comply with this article within six months of the effective date of
this article. All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied, or buildings
currently under construction which are required by this article to install a
rapid access key box shall comply immediately.
A. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of
such buildings.
B. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms.
C. Keys to the locked elevator rooms.
D. Keys to the elevator controls.
E. Keys to any fenced or secured areas.
F. Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Marshal.
G. A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
H. Material safety data sheets (MSDS).
§ 174-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-5
1:167
§ 174-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Warrington Township
Fire Marshal. The owner or occupier of any use required to comply with the
terms of this article who shall fail to comply herewith shall be in violation of
this article. Violations of this article shall be enforced by an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. Upon conviction in a summary offense, the violator shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation and/or imprisonment for
up to 90 days in the Bucks County Correctional Facility.
§ 174-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 174-5
1:168
Chapter 181
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 174-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-5
1:169

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 181-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,17 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township does
hereby order as follows.
17.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-1
1:171

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 181-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 181-3. Applicability. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within Warrington Township unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 181-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 181-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Warrington
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 181-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:173

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 181-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 181-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of Warrington Township.
§ 181-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Director of Codes,
Inspections and Emergency Services.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);18 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);19 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);20 and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
18.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 181-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-8
1:175
§ 181-9. Application procedures and requirements; fees.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any cumulative
substantial damage concerns can be addressed before the permit is
issued. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction
elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement. [Amended
1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Warrington Township.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
§ 181-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-9
1:176
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Tax parcel number (TPN) of the land on which the proposed
construction is to occur.
(4) Name and address of contractor.
(5) Site location, including address.
(6) Listing of other permits required.
(7) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(8) A plan of the site, signed and sealed by a professional engineer or
professional land surveyor currently licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
§ 181-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-9
1:177
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer or professional land surveyor currently licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the
following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines at one-foot or two-foot intervals
referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988
(NAVD 88); [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, as amended from time to
time.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 181-16), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
§ 181-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-9
1:178
§ 181-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Department, Municipal
Engineer, County Conservation District, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 181-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 181-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 181-23F and § 181-24, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 181-23F and 181-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 181-24
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Township, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction
as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 181-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-12
1:179
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 181-13. Start of construction.
§ 181-14. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit or the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted, in
writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development
permit does not refer to the zoning approval. [Amended 1-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
§ 181-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-14
1:180
§ 181-15. Appeals.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Township shall
be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to
Warrington Township of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution.
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity, for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance
within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or
building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board of
Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Warrington Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code21 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.22
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et. seq.
§ 181-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-15
1:181

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 181-16. Identification.
§ 181-17. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Warrington Township classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated March
21, 2017, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), or the most-recent revision thereof, including all
digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
[Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Warrington Township and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 181-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-17
1:183
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined. [Added 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
(a) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted in an
AE Zone without floodway, unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed development together with all other existing and
anticipated development, would not result in an increase in
flood levels within the entire community during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the Township may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township. In the absence of any of the above data or
documentation, the community may require elevation of the lowest
floor to be at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. The AO
and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones AO and
AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject inundation by
one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where average depths are
between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall
be established to guide floodwaters around and away from structures
on slopes. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
D. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Warrington Township has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
§ 181-17 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-17
1:184
§ 181-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 181-21C for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
§ 181-19. Boundary disputes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator; and
any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 181-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
as delineated and adopted on a local flood hazard map using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as
flood of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 181-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-20
1:185

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 181-21. General provisions.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the Township
and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Whenever a letter of map change is required to be submitted to FEMA.
The applicant shall enter into a professional services agreement with
Warrington Township, and the applicant shall prepare and submit the
letter of map change in conformance with FEMA requirements to
Warrington Township for review by the Township Engineer. Upon the
Township Engineer's recommendation, the Floodplain Administrator
shall submit the letter of map change to FEMA for approval. The
applicant shall reimburse Warrington Township for all fees paid to
FEMA and all review fees charged by the Township Engineer plus an
administrative fee of 10%. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA's conditional approval of map change
and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of floodplain
management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood
elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the post-project
condition. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 181-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-21
1:187
§ 181-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
D. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
E. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 181-17C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy:
§ 181-21 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-22
1:188
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 181-17C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement, certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof adopted by Warrington Township, and ASCE 24
and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be utilized
where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
§ 181-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-22
1:189
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 192 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 181-22 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-22
1:190
§ 181-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(9) For accessory structures that are 192 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in Article VIII of this chapter. If a variance is
granted, a signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion
agreement) shall be recorded on the property deed prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. [Added 1-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
§ 181-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-23
1:191
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 181-24 shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 181-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-23
1:192
§ 181-24. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A below shall be prohibited, and no variance shall be allowed.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act,23 and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
23.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 181-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-24
1:193
§ 181-25. Subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 181-24 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-26
1:194
§ 181-26. Manufactured homes.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall:
(1) Be placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least two feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Equipment requirement: [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-O-01]
(a) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation and shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse,
and lateral improvement.
(b) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water resistant.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401-405 shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most-recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit's(s') installation.
§ 181-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-27
1:195
§ 181-27. Recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued by
the National Weather Service.24
24.Editor's Note: Original subsection A(4), pertaining to manufactured homes, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01.
§ 181-27 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-27
1:196
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 181-28. General prohibitions.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act,25 the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area. No variances are allowed.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
25.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 181-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-28
1:197

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 181-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 181-30 shall apply.
§ 181-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 181-17C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 40% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or later versions
thereof as adopted by Warrington Township.
D. Within any floodway area/district (see § 181-17A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional
office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 40% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "cumulative substantial damage" shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
§ 181-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-30
1:199

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 181-31. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Warrington Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 181-32. Procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Warrington Township
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 181-15and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that
would cause any increase in BFE. In A Areas, BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 181-17C. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-O-0126]
B. No variance shall be granted for development which may endanger
human life (§ 181-24) or prohibited activities (Article VI).
C. The Warrington Township Engineer shall review all materials related to
requests for variances under this section and shall be present at Zoning
Hearing Board hearings to provide technical input as needed. Expenses
for the engineer review and appearance at hearings shall be paid from
the escrow established by the applicant.
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Warrington Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Warrington Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Warrington Township
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted original subsection 1(B), which immediately
followed this subsection, and renumbered the remainder of this section.
§ 181-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-32
1:201
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will: neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor create
nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with
any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
(4) That all of the conditions required for granting a variance listed in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code27 or the Warrington Township
Zoning Code are met.
(5) In rendering a decision, the Warrington Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall apply the most-restrictive requirements.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Warrington Township Zoning Officer. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 181-32 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-32
1:202
ARTICLE IX
Terminology.
§ 181-33. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 181-34. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or "one-percentannual-
chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period, for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on
average, equals or exceeds 20% of the market value of the structure before
the damages occurred.[Added 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
§ 181-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-34
1:203
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
D.
§ 181-34 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-34
1:204
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 181-16 and 181-17 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive
days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.28
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started
after September 29, 1978, and before the effective date of this chapter
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
28.Editor's Note: The definition of "minor repair," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01.
§ 181-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-34
1:205
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
29, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
29, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of two feet.29
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
29.Editor's Note: The definition of "repetitive loss," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01.
§ 181-34 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-34
1:206
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 40% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement, This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" or "cumulative substantial damage,"
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.[Amended 1-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-01]
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the Township,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 181-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-34
1:207
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 181-34 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-34
1:208
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 181-35. Adoption; when effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately and shall remain in force until
modified, amended or rescinded by Warrington Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 181-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-35
1:209
Chapter 209
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 318.
§ 181-35 WARRINGTON CODE § 181-35
1:210
ARTICLE I
Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-O-11;30 amended in its entirety
2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-04]
§ 209-1. Fees to be added to the unpaid claims.
The Township hereby approves the following fee schedule for the collection
of the unpaid claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claims:
A. Legal fees.
Initial review and sending first
legal demand letter
$175
File lien and prepare satisfaction $250
Prepare writ of scire facias $250
Research, prepare and obtain
reissued writ
$75
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.
R.C.P. 237.1
$50
Prepare motion for alternate
service
$250
Prepare praecipe to amend $50
Prepare and present motion to
amend
$200
Obtain vehicle identification
number (VIN) for mobile home
$100
Prepare motion to consolidate
claims
$250
Prepare motion to add United
States as defendant
$175
Prepare pretrial memorandum $200
Prepare petition for judgment for
want of sufficient affidavit of
defense pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7271
$150
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution and
resolve distribution issues
$400
30.Editor's Note: The enabling clause for this ordinance provided: "to be fair to all property
owners in Warrington Township it is necessary for the Township to recover promptly
unpaid, delinquent water, sewer and tapping fees (the "unpaid claims"), if necessary, by
legal proceedings..."
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1
1:211
§ 209-2. Costs to be added to the unpaid claims.
In addition to the fees set forth in § 209-1 above, the reasonable and
necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs, expenses, commissions and fees
incurred in collection, including, but not limited to, postage, title searches,
VIN searches, prothonotary fees and charges, and sheriff fees, shall be
added to the unpaid claims.
§ 209-3. Credit card and debit card charges.
The Township authorizes any attorney or private collector collecting the
unpaid claims on behalf of the Township to accept payment of the unpaid
claims by credit card or debit card. Where payment is made by credit
card or debit card, any fees charged by the credit card or debit card
company and/or the credit card or debit card servicing agent shall be
charged immediately to the credit card or debit card used to make payment.
This applies to credit card or debit card payments made by mail, telephone,
over the internet, or in person.
§ 209-4. Interest.
Interest will be assessed upon the unpaid claims at a rate of 10% per annum
and added to the unpaid claims.
§ 209-5. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with the Act:
Continue sheriff sale $50
Prepare and present petition for
free and clear sale
$400
Services not covered above At an hourly rate between $75 to
$275 per hour
B. Collection fees.
Notice of delinquent claim and fee
shifting
$40 per notice, plus applicable
postage
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan
of three months or less
$25
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan
of more than three months
$50
Handling fee for returned check Bank charge, if any
C. Payoff fee.
Providing guaranteed payoff to
third parties
$25
§ 209-1 WARRINGTON CODE § 209-5
1:212
§ 209-6. Related action.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered
to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate
to implement this article.
§ 209-7. Appointment of Solicitor.
The Township appoints Michelle R. Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the
limited purpose of collecting the unpaid claims and hereby authorizes her,
and all attorneys employed by Portnoff Law Associates, Ltd., to sign any
and all documents, including municipal claims and liens, on behalf of the
Township.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an unpaid claim account, the Township
or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the property owner or
other entity liable for the account (the property owner).
B. If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days prior to
assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Township or its designee
shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to
the property owner.
C. All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the property
owner's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Township or such other address obtained by
the Township from the county tax assessment office.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of municipal claim or other charge, the year that it
became due and the amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees no earlier than 30 days after receipt of the first notice, or no
earlier than 10 days after receipt of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Township's representative designated as responsible
for collection matters.
§ 209-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-7
1:213
Chapter 214
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tickets for certain offenses — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 209-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 209-7
1:214
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-5-1971 by Ord. No. 6-71 (Ch. 10, Part 4A, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any condition, whether existing on public or private property,
amounting to a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, accumulations
of garbage, rubbish, trash, debris, automobiles, or the carrying on of any
offensive manufacture or business.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any condition or premises which is unsafe or
unsanitary or any condition that threatens the health, morals, safety,
comfort, convenience, or welfare of a community or enjoyment of
property.[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 214-2. Creation of nuisance prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or entity
whatsoever to create or cause a nuisance within the Township of
Warrington.
§ 214-3. Permission of nuisance prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or entity
whatsoever to permit a nuisance to exist on any real estate within the
Township of Warrington which is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by
such person, corporation, partnership or entity.
§ 214-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 214-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-5
1:215
§ 214-5. Removal of nuisance. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Township, by its duly authorized representatives, may remove or
correct any nuisance conditions after 10 days' written notice to the violator
to do so and may enter upon the property of the violator to remove or
correct the same, and thereafter may collect the cost of such removal or
corrections plus 10% from the violator.
§ 214-6. Remedies cumulative.
The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and nonexclusive.
§ 214-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 214-6
1:216
ARTICLE II
Motor Vehicle Nuisances
[Adopted 7-19-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6 (Ch. 10, Part 4B, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 214-7. Definitions.
§ 214-8. Motor vehicle nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor
vehicle nuisance upon the open private grounds of such person, owner or
lessee within the Township except as hereinafter provided. A motor vehicle
nuisance shall include any motor vehicle which is unable to move under its
own power and has any of the following physical defects:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LESSEE — Owner for the purpose of this article when the lessor holds
the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a
motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon public
streets or highways, and including trailers or semitrailers pulled
thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a danger or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare
of the citizens of the Township.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on
which motor vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership,
association or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
A. Broken windshield, mirror or other glass, with sharp edges.
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
C. Missing door, window, hood, trunk or other body part which could
permit animal harborage.
D. Any body part with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust.
E. Missing tire resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
§ 214-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-8
1:217
§ 214-9. Storage of motor vehicle nuisances.
F. Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
G. Broken head lamp or tail lamp with sharp edges.
H. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
I. Protruding sharp object from the chassis.
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for door or trunk.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and firewall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
R. Broken communication equipment antennae.
S. Suspended on unstable supports.
T. Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township.
A. Residential zoning districts. No person, owner or lessee of property in a
residential zoning district may store more than three motor vehicle
nuisances on their property. Such person, owner or lessee may store up
to three motor vehicle nuisances if they first apply for a permit for
either temporary or permanent storage and pay a fee to the Township
as established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. All motor
vehicle nuisances in residential zoning districts shall be stored within a
garage or other enclosed building or outside within an opaque fence at
least six feet high which is locked at all times when unattended.
B. Nonresidential zoning districts. A person, owner or lessee of property in
a nonresidential zoning district may store one more motor vehicle
nuisances on their property for 90 days. If any motor vehicle nuisances
are stored on nonresidential property for more than 90 days, the motor
vehicle nuisances shall be stored within a garage or other enclosed
building or outside within an opaque fence at least six feet high which is
locked at all times when unattended.
§ 214-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 214-9
1:218
§ 214-10. Inspection of premises; notice to comply.
§ 214-11. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the person, owner or lessee of grounds on which motor vehicle nuisances
are stored in violation of this article does not comply with the notice to
abate the nuisance within the time limit prescribed, the Township shall have
the authority to take measures to correct the conditions and collect the cost
of such corrections plus 10% of all costs. The Township, in such event and
pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have
the right and power to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the
foregoing.
§ 214-12. Hearing. [Amended 12-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-23]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township Zoning Officer may
request and shall then be granted a hearing before a hearing officer
appointed by the Board of Supervisors, provided he files with the Board of
Supervisors, within 10 days after notice of the Township Zoning Officer's
decision, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor. The hearing shall commence not later
than 30 days after the date on which the petition was filed unless postponed
for sufficient cause.
§ 214-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of Chapter 370, Zoning.
A. The Township Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to inspect private
property on which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is
compliance with the provisions of this article. If noncompliance with the
provisions of this article constitutes a nuisance, or if any condition,
structure or improvement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the public, he shall issue a written notice to be served by registered
or certified mail upon the owner of said premises or, if the owner's
whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice and,
thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a
reasonable time.
§ 214-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-13
1:219
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 214-14. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather,
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 214-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 214-14
1:220
Chapter 223
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tickets for certain offenses — See Ch. 38, Art.
II.
Animals — See Ch. 97.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 229.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 337.
§ 214-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-14
1:221

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations31
[Adopted 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-04 (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms
used in this article shall have the following meanings:
AMENITY — A natural or created feature or structure that enhances the
aesthetic quality, visual appeal or makes more attractive a particular
property, place or area for the enjoyment of the public using open space,
parks and recreational facilities.
FACILITY — Refers to areas and amenities within the open space, parks and
recreational boundaries which are available for public use.
FACILITY USE PERMIT — Refers to the written authorization issued by the
Township of Warrington for the use of a requested facility or activity within
open space, parks and recreational areas.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water improved or essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public use.
OPEN SPACE, GREEN — An open space area not occupied by any structures
or impervious surfaces.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned and maintained by Warrington
Township for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
PARK — A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and
passive recreation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
unincorporated association or any other group who may apply for a facility
use permit.
PLAYGROUND — An active recreational area with a variety of facilities,
including equipment for younger children as well as court and field games.
RECREATION FACILITY — A place or structure designed and equipped for
the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure-time activities usually of a formal nature
and often performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at
prescribed places, sites or fields.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Activities that involve relatively inactive or lessenergetic
activities, such as walking, sitting, picnicking and table games.
31.Editor's Note: Former Part 1, Park and Playground Rules and Regulations, adopted
10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5, as amended, was superseded 3-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-04.
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-2
1:223
§ 223-2. General supervision; adoption of rules and regulations;
enforcement.
§ 223-3. Hours.
§ 223-4. Reserved use of facilities.
A. All Township open space, parks, trails and recreational areas and other
Township-owned parcels shall be operated and maintained under the
general supervision of the Board of Supervisors and the Warrington
Township Parks and Recreation Board. The Parks and Recreation Board
shall recommend adoption of the rules governing the open space, parks
and recreational areas to the Board of Supervisors.
B. All trails traversing public open space, parks and recreational areas will
be supervised by the Parks and Recreation Board.
C. It shall be the duty of the Parks and Recreation Board, assisted by the
Warrington Township Police Department, to enforce the provisions of
this article.
A. The parks and playgrounds shall be open between the hours of sunrise
and sunset. At sunset all activities in the parks and playgrounds shall
cease and all persons in the parks and playgrounds shall leave as soon
as possible.
B. The use of parks, playgrounds and active recreational areas beyond
sunset and before sunrise can continue in accordance with a facility use
permit or by authorization by the Parks and Recreation Board. No
person shall enter or leave a park or playground except by the
entrances provided for that purpose. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The reserved use of Township open space, parks, recreational areas
and/or facilities, such as recreation fields and other facilities, by
organized groups or individuals shall be scheduled at the discretion of
the Parks and Recreation Board or its designee, and a facility use
permit shall be issued specifying the date, time and location of the use,
and such use shall be subject to any conditions that may be imposed
under this article.
B. Application for a facility use permit shall be made upon the official
forms designated by the Township and shall be accompanied by the
required fee(s). An applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
Applications for a facility use permit are available at the Township
Building.
C. Persons or organizations to whom facility use permits are issued will be
held responsible for the actions and conduct of all those associated with
the authorized facility use. Groups or persons in receipt of a facility use
permit may not prevent other park system users from making use of
available facilities.
§ 223-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 223-4
1:224
§ 223-5. Personal conduct.
§ 223-6. Disposal of waste.
§ 223-7. Motor vehicles.
D. The Township reserves the right to revoke permits for any seasonal
dates and times requested and not used.
E. All groups using the facilities with a facility use permit must provide
appropriate insurance to the Township as per the application.
F. No gathering or meeting of any kind assembled through advertisement
shall be permitted in any open space, parks or recreational areas
without the prior written permission of the Parks and Recreation Board.
A. No person shall improperly conduct him or herself within the open
space, parks and recreational areas so as to annoy any other person
using the facility.
B. No person or group shall possess or consume any drugs or alcoholic
and/or intoxicating beverages in the open space, parks or recreational
areas. No intoxicated person shall be permitted.
C. No gambling or obscene or indecent act shall be permitted in any open
space, parks and recreational areas.
D. No abusive, indecent or threatening language nor any conduct that may
annoy others shall be permitted.
E. No person shall damage, deface, graffiti, destroy or remove any park
property, including, but not limited to, signs, structures, equipment,
natural growth or other amenities.
F. No person shall climb any tree or break, cut down or remove or in any
manner injure or deface any ornamental tree, plant, shrub, fern, flower,
flower bed or turf in any open space, park or recreational areas; nor
shall any person remove, disturb, interfere with or take any of the
blossoms or fruit growing upon any tree, shrub or bush in the open
space, parks or recreational areas.
G. No person shall enter a lavatory in a park or playground set apart for
the opposite sex.
A. All waste, animal waste and garbage shall be disposed of in receptacles
designated for such purpose. The burning of trash or garbage is
prohibited. It is unlawful to transport trash, garbage or any other
disposal matter to any park for the purpose of disposal.
B. There shall be no littering in any open space, park or recreational
areas, including along the public trails.
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-7
1:225
§ 223-8. Firearms and hunting. [Amended 1-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-O-01]
§ 223-9. Building of fires.
No person shall set or maintain any fire in the open space, parks or
recreational areas except in grills or fireplaces maintained for that purpose
and located by authority of the Parks and Recreation Board.
§ 223-10. Pets/animals.
§ 223-11. Notices and signs.
No person shall deface or destroy any notice or sign posted at any place
within the open space, park or recreational areas by authority of the Parks
and Recreation Board, nor shall any person post any notice or placard at
any place within the open space, parks and recreational areas other than by
authority of the Parks and Recreation Board or the Board of Supervisors.
A. No person shall operate, stop or park any motor vehicle except on park
roads, parking areas or other areas so designated for such use; nor
shall any person operate any motor vehicle, including, but not limited
to, an automobile, motorcycle or mini-bike, in a reckless or negligent
manner in excess of the posted speed limit or in such a manner as to
become a nuisance to other recreational users.
B. The speed limit in all Township open space, parks and recreational
areas shall be 15 miles per hour.
A. Damaging, destroying or removal of any nest or habitat of any birds or
animals in any Township open space, parks or recreational area is
strictly prohibited.
B. No person shall disturb the water fowl in the streams, pools or ponds or
birds, nests or eggs or fish (other than by fishing in areas where fishing
is permitted) in any part of the open space, parks and recreational
areas.
A. Dogs and other domestic animals are allowed only in designated areas
and must be tethered on leash no longer than six feet. Dogs and other
domestic animals are strictly prohibited in all play areas, including, but
not limited to, ball fields, tennis courts, basketball courts and
playgrounds within any open space, park or recreational area.
B. All animal droppings shall be immediately removed from the open
space, park and recreational areas by the person in ownership or
control of the animal.
§ 223-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 223-12
1:226
§ 223-12. Dangerous athletic equipment.
No person shall use javelins, arrows, discuses, lawn darts or similar athletic
equipment dangerous in character unless the use has been expressly
permitted by the Parks and Recreation Board.
§ 223-13. Sound equipment.
No person shall use any sound-amplification equipment in the open space,
parks and recreational areas except by special permission from the Parks
and Recreation Board.
§ 223-14. Explosives and fireworks.
§ 223-15. Golf.
The playing or practicing of golf is prohibited except in areas specifically
designated for that purpose by the Parks and Recreation Board.
§ 223-16. All-terrain vehicles (ATVs).
The use of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) is prohibited in all open space, parks
and recreational areas.
§ 223-17. Skateboarding.
Skateboarding is prohibited in all open space, parks and recreational areas.
§ 223-18. Sale of items.
No person or business shall set up any booth, table, stand or vehicle for the
sale of any article, merchandize or food whatsoever within the limits of the
open space, parks and recreational areas without the consent of the Board
of Supervisors, which shall have the authority to refuse such consent in the
instance upon the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Board. All
requests must be in writing to the Parks and Recreation Board. The police
will be notified of any permits or authorities.
§ 223-19. Solicitation.
Solicitation is prohibited and enforced by the Warrington Township Police
Department.
A. No person shall have in his or her possession or ignite any fireworks, as
defined in the International Fire Code. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. The discharge or possession of any rocket, firecracker or other
fireworks or any explosive substance within the park system is
prohibited unless authorized by a permit.
§ 223-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-20
1:227
§ 223-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation if this article continues
or each section of this article which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially
by violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement
Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 223-20 WARRINGTON CODE § 223-20
1:228
ARTICLE II
Township Parks32
[Adopted 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-11 (Ch. 16, Part 2, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 223-21. Park names.
The following is a list of the Warrington Township parks and their respective
names:
Warrington Township Parks
Alou Tot Lot: 1800 Triumphe Way, Warrington, PA 18976
Barness Park: 2750 Bristol Road, Warrington, PA 18976
Dapple Tot Lot: 2025 Dapple Drive, Warrington, PA 18976
Igoe Porter Wellings Memorial Field: 3095 Bradley Road, Chalfont, PA,
18914
King Park: 1597 Turk Road, Warrington, PA 18976
John Paul Park at Lower Nike, 301 Folly Road, Chalfont, PA 18914
Palomino Park: 2100 Palomino Drive, Warrington, PA 18976
Penns Wood Tot Lot: 351 Kansas Road, Warrington, PA 18976
Shank Tot Lot: 615 Philadelphia Avenue, Warrington, PA 18976
Mary Barness Tennis and Swim Club: 2501 Freedoms Way, Warrington, PA
18976
The Special Equestrian Center: 2800 Street Road, Warrington, PA 18976
Twin Oaks Day Camp: 3129 Bradley Road, Chalfont, PA 18914
Upper Nike Park: 300 Folly Road, Chalfont, PA 18914
Valley Glen Park: 1851 Appaloosa Road, Warrington, PA 18976
Warrington Village Tot Lot: 990 Continental Drive, Warrington, PA 18976
Willow Knoll Park: 2235 Pileggi Drive, Warrington, PA 18976
32.Editor's Note: Former Part 2, Park and Open Space Rules and Regulations, adopted
6-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-O-08, was superseded 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-04.
§ 223-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-21
1:229
Chapter 225
PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS,
ANTIQUES AND SECONDHAND OR USED GOODS
§ 225-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS DAYS — Excludes Saturdays, Sundays and Federal or State legal
holidays.
DEALER — A pawnbroker, dealer in precious metals, antique dealer and/or
secondhand dealer.
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity, who or which purchases precious metals
from the general public for resale or other commercial disposition, or any
individual who acts as agent for such individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity for such purchase or purchases.
GOVERNMENT IDENTIFICATION — An unexpired document issued by the
Federal Government, the Commonwealth or any other state government,
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or any United
States territory that includes all of the following: the name, age, and
address of the seller; a photograph of the seller; an expiration date.
ITEM — Personal property, precious metal, antique and/or secondhand or
used good.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
PAWNBROKER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or
other business entity, including an itinerant merchant, doing business in
the Township that lends money in exchange for personal property deposited
by a pledger as security that can be sold if the loan is not repaid within
a specified period, and/or engages in purchase and re-sale of any
merchandise from a pledger or seller.
PLEDGE — An article and or articles deposited with a Pawnbroker as
security for a loan or currency, in the course of his/her business as defined
in the preceding section.
PLEDGER — The person who obtains the loan from a Pawnbroker and
delivers a Pledge into the possession of a Pawnbroker, unless such person
discloses that he/she is or was acting for another, in which case a "pledger"
means the disclosed principal.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or other business entity including an itinerant merchant doing
business in the Township that purchases or makes appraisals of Precious
metals and their alloys for resale to refiners, brokers or the public.
§ 223-21 WARRINGTON CODE § 225-1
1:230
PRECIOUS METALS — Items containing or being of gold, silver or platinum,
including, but not limited to, jewelry and silver services, but excluding
coins, ingots, bullion or photographic film or any article containing less than
5% of gold, silver or platinum by weight.
SECONDHAND DEALER OR ANTIQUE DEALER — An individual,
partnership, association, corporation, or other business entity including
an itinerant merchant doing business in the Township that purchases or
makes appraisals of secondhand or used goods for resale or refining, or an
individual who acts as an agent for such individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or other business organization or entity.
SECONDHAND OR USED GOOD — One that is being purchased by or
otherwise transferred to a second or later end user.
SELLER — The person who obtains payment from a Dealer in return for the
sale of any merchandise to the Dealer.
TRANSACTION — A purchase, sale or loan by any Dealer.
§ 225-2. Licenses and registration.
§ 225-3. Records required.
A. License required. No person shall act as a Dealer unless he or she had
obtained a license from the Township for each location from which that
person intends to operate.
B. Registration. No person shall act as a Dealer unless he or she pays an
annual registration license fee of $200 for each location from which the
applicant intends to operate.
C. Pawnbrokers license. No license to act as a Pawnbroker shall be issued
by the Township unless the Applicant has been licensed first by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as required by the Pawnbrokers
License Act, 63 P.S. 281-1, et seq.
A. All Dealers are required to maintain records of all Transactions,
including but not limited to, Pledges, loans, purchases and sales.
Records shall be kept in the English language.
B. All records shall include the following information:
(1) Date of sale;
(2) Time of sale;
(3) Location of sale;
(4) Make;
(5) Model;
(6) Serial number;
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:231
§ 225-4. Weighing devices.
§ 225-5. Identification of pledger/seller.
The Dealer shall obtain the following information from the Pledger and or
Seller for the purposes of establishing identification of each Pledger and or
Seller:
(7) Model number;
(8) Description;
(9) Color;
(10) Special markings of the Pledge or sale Item;
(11) Currency amount paid to Pledger and/or Seller;
(12) Copy of the Pledger/Seller Government Identification.
C. A color photograph shall be produced for all Items. A color photograph
shall be produced for all Precious Metals received. The photograph
shall be: taken from two different perspectives; no less than 1:1 scale;
and of sufficient size and clarity to identify any distinguishing details of
a purchased Item, including identifying marks, initials, insignias,
inscriptions or other unique identifying features.
D. A photograph of the Seller, directly facing the camera in full-face view,
of sufficient size to ensure that the head measures between 1 and 1/38
inches from the bottom of the chin to the top of the head.
E. A copy of all Pledge and/or sale Transactions containing this
information shall be retained at the location of the business for a period
of two years after the date of Transaction, payment, loan or sale of the
Pledge, whichever is later.
A. All scales or other devices used by Dealers to weigh Precious Metals
must be of a type approved for commercial use in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and must be inspected and sealed by the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Ride and Measurement Standards' Weights and Measures
Division.
B. Dealers must notify the Pennsylvania Bureau of Ride and Measurement
Standards' Weights and Measures Division whenever a weighing device
referred to in subsection (1) above is moved from one location to
another.
A. A photocopy of verified Government Identification.
B. An accurate physical description of the Pledger and or Seller including
race, gender, eye and hair color and identifying marks, if any.
§ 225-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 225-6
1:232
§ 225-6. Stolen property.
A Dealer may seize any Item offered in a sale or Pledge which he/she has
reason to believe is stolen property. The Dealer shall issue a seizure receipt
to the person presenting such property in Pledge and shall immediately
deliver such seized property together with a copy of the seizure receipt to
the Township Police Department.
§ 225-7. Electronic filing.
§ 225-8. Holding period and inspection.
A. Responsibility of Township.
(1) The Township Police Department shall enter into an agreement
with an online entity which operates an electronic database for law
enforcement agencies for the purpose of identifying stolen
merchandise and persons suspected of thefts.
(2) The entity chosen by the Township Police Department to administer
the electronic inventory tracking system shall insure that all data
remain secure and confidential by providing to each Dealer login
security protocols which meet current industry standards, and shall
employ state of the art technology to protect the data from all
forms of unauthorized access and malicious intrusion.
B. Responsibility of dealer.
(1) Each Dealer doing business in the Township shall, within 30 days of
the adoption of this chapter, maintain an electronic inventory
tracking system which is capable of securely and confidentially
uploading all Transactions via computer to the entity designated by
the Township Police Department.
(2) No later than the conclusion of each business day, every Dealer
must upload, in the manner specified by the Police Department, the
required tracking information for all Transactions during the
course of business on that day.
(3) The Township Police Department may, by virtue of this chapter,
require a fee of up to $400 per location to defray the costs of the
internet-accessible electronic inventory tracking system.
A. All Items shall be kept in unaltered condition, available for inspection
by law enforcement officials in the course of their law enforcement
duties, for 10 full Business Days following a Transaction by a Dealer or
a data upload as specified in Section 607 above.
B. Law enforcement officials shall not require a search warrant to inspect
the Item, unless the inspection is made during hours other than regular
business hours.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8
1:233
§ 225-9. Business with minors.
All business Transactions between Dealers and Minors are prohibited.
§ 225-10. Violations and penalties.
C. During the holding period, any Item subject to the holding period shall
be segregated from other inventory to insure that it is not placed in an
area or section where personal property and or Precious Metals are
offered for sale. Where any Items is held off the premises, the Dealer
shall make the Item available for inspection within 24 hours after
receiving a request for inspection by law enforcement officials.
D. Any law enforcement official who has reason to believe any Item was
not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct the Dealer to hold
the Items for a reasonable length of time that the law enforcement
official considers necessary to identify it.
A. Fines. Any person and/or Dealer who violates, fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine not
exceeding $600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
B. Dealer's license suspension. In addition to the fines specified in
subsection 1 above, a Dealer who violates any provisions of Chapter
shall have his license(s) suspended.
(1) The Dealer's license shall be suspended for 90 days for the first
offense.
(2) The Dealer's license shall be suspended for a period of one year
upon each succeeding violation.
C. Suspension of Dealer's license.
(1) If a Dealer's license is suspended, the Township shall provide
written notice of the suspension to the Secretary of Banking for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Secretary of Banking shall
then conduct a hearing to ascertain if the Dealer's license shall be
revoked.
(2) If the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
revokes the Dealer's license, the Dealer shall be prohibited from
ever obtaining an operating license in the Township, regardless if
the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
reinstates the Dealer's license.
(3) No operating license shall be issued when any Dealer's license has
been revoked by the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, where the Dealer retains a property interest in the
§ 225-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 225-10
1:234
Chapter 229
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 229-1. Definitions.
location where the operating license was suspended or the
Pawnbroker retains a pecuniary interest in the corporation or any
affiliated business entities therein.
D. Cease operations.
(1) During any period of license suspension, the Dealer shall cease
operation at each and every location of the Dealer's business.
(2) Cease operations order.
(a) The Township shall issue a cease operations order for each
business location operated by the Dealer whose license(s) has/
have been suspended in accordance with the Township
Administrative Code.
(b) The cease operations order shall identify the prohibited
operations and shall state that the applicable license has been
suspended for violation(s) of the Code.
(c) The cease operations order shall be in force for the full period
of any license suspension, and shall set forth this period in the
order.
(d) The Township shall not remove any posted cease operations
order until the Township is satisfied that all suspended licenses
have been restored, or the property interests in the location
have been changed so that neither the person or Dealer under
license suspension, nor any member of his immediate family, or
in the case of a corporation, the corporation or any affiliated
business entities, retain a pecuniary interest therein.
E. License at cease operations location. No person or Dealer shall be
issued a license for a business location that has been posted with a
cease operation order, as long as any person under a license suspension
or revocation, or any member of that person's immediate family, or in
the case of a corporation, the corporation or any affiliated business
entities, retain a pecuniary interest in the property at that location.
A. Words and terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any person, firm, group, partnership,
corporation, or association whose avowed purpose and object is to
benefit, assist, aid and further the following causes:
(1) Philanthropy.
§ 225-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-1
1:235
§ 229-2. License and registration required.
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION — Seeking money donations, pledges
thereof, or anything of value to benefit, assist, aid, and further the
cause of a charitable organization, either orally or by literature
distribution.
LITERATURE — Books, pamphlets, handbills, tracts, cards, circulars,
pictures, films, magazines, or any other written or printed material.
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
merchandise or services for immediate delivery, which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling or has in his
or her possession or control or offers to immediately provide to any
person, homeowner or business in the Township.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
SOLICITING —
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting, as herein
defined.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
Assistance to persons who are poor, impoverished, destitute,
underprivileged, needy, diseased, injured, crippled, disabled,
handicapped, or in need of physical or mental rehabilitation.
(2)
Churches, religious societies, or other religious sects, groups, or
orders espousing spiritual and altruistic motives or conduct.
(3)
The teaching of patriotism, or promoting relief and assistance to
this nation's war veterans.
(4)
Beneficial education of the mind or assistance to educational
institutions.
(5)
(6) The protection and sustenance of animals.
COMMERCIAL — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for
any goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery, or for services
to be performed for any person, homeowner, or business in the
Township on a temporary basis.
(1)
CHARITABLE — The soliciting of membership, money and/or
property by or on behalf of charitable organizations from any
person, homeowner, or business in the Township, either from house
to house or from a fixed location.
(2)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 229-1 WARRINGTON CODE § 229-2
1:236
§ 229-3. Application procedure.
A. No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
without first having registered and obtained a license from the
Warrington Township Code Enforcement Office.
B. It shall be unlawful for a charitable organization to solicit for money or
anything of monetary value without first registering in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this chapter for charitable solicitation. Any
person or individual that is merely proselytizing for either religious or
political purposes, distributing religious or political handbills at no cost,
or exercising the right to anonymous religious or political speech
without soliciting any funds and without selling any goods or soliciting
for contributions is not required to register or obtain a license.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Any person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
shall submit in person a written application to the Warrington Township
Code Enforcement Office on a form furnished by the Warrington
Township Code Enforcement Office, together with a copy of the
applicant's criminal history and any other report or information
required by the Warrington Township Police Department.
B. If any additional license is also required from any state or county
officer, including a license from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
the collection and distribution of sales tax on all taxable items, the
applicant shall, when making such application, provide the Township
with proof of the current and valid issuance of each such license.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
C. The application shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and phone number.
(2) The name, address and phone number of the person, corporation or
other entity by whom or by which he is employed or represents.
(3) The applicant's criminal history report (Pennsylvania State Police
Request for Criminal Record Check, SP4-164), obtained from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and dated no more than 90 days
before the date of the application.
(4) Pennsylvania Child Abuse History Form (CY 113) obtained from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and dated no more than 90 days
before the date of the application.
(5) The type of goods, wares and/or merchandise services he wishes to
peddle, solicit and/or deal with or the subscription, article, device,
contribution, service or contract for which he desires to sell or for
which he wishes to peddle or solicit within the Township.
§ 229-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-3
1:237
§ 229-4. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the proper fees are paid
to the Township, receipt for which may be given by the Township Manager
or any authorized member of the Warrington Township staff. Such fee shall
be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors per
year per person if the person is walking from door to door, and as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors per year per person
if the person is operating from a vehicle.
§ 229-5. Issuance of license; custody and display; grounds for
denial.
(6) The length of time and dates of the peddling or solicitation for
which the license is to be issued.
(7) The make, model, and license plate of each vehicle to be used by
the applicant, if any.
D. Whenever a group or organization desires to utilize more than one
person for peddling or soliciting purposes in the Township, each such
person shall make separate application under this chapter and shall do
so in person. Each person to be engaged in peddling or soliciting shall
make separate application under this chapter and shall do so in person.
All applicable personal information specified above shall be given for
each such person, including required proof of identity, and an individual
license shall be required for each such person to be engaged in
peddling or soliciting.
E. Licenses issued under this chapter are not transferable from one
person to another.
F. Applications for charitable solicitation shall include a copy of the
charitable organization's current certification or other proof of current
registration with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
State, Bureau of Charitable Organizations.
A. Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Warrington
Township Police Department, or such other official as may be
designated by the Board of Supervisors, shall review the application. If
such application is found by the applicable Township official to be
complete and in proper order, said Township official shall issue the
license required by this chapter within 10 days from the completed
filing of said application. The license shall contain the information
required to be provided on the application. Such license shall include a
picture of the applicant to whom the license is issued, if the Township
elects to so require.
B. Every such license holder shall display openly the license upon his
person if engaged in peddling or solicitation from house to house or
§ 229-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 229-5
1:238
§ 229-6. Daily registration required.
Every person licensed to solicit or peddle in the Township shall report in
person on those days on which he intends to solicit or peddle and register
with the Warrington Township Police Department by signing a registration
book, indicating his name and license number.
§ 229-7. Rules of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter shall, in
the conduct of his activities, comply with the following rules of conduct:
business to business and also shall display the license at every location
where he shall engage in business if doing so from a fixed location.
C. Upon the advice of the Warrington Township Police Department, the
Code Enforcement Office shall not issue a peddling or soliciting license
to any applicant who, within 10 years prior to the date of the
application, has either:
(1) Been convicted of any felony;
(2) Been convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
(3) Served a sentence or period of probation for any felony or for any
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within 10 years prior to the
date of the application.
A. He shall display openly his license at all times and exhibit it, upon
request, to any police officer or Township official or to any person on
whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk.
B. He shall not permit any person to have possession of his license and
shall immediately report its loss to the Warrington Township Police
Department.
C. He shall not cause or permit his license to be defaced or altered in any
way.
D. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupants and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request of the occupant.
E. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation, and,
particularly, he shall not represent his license to be an endorsement by
the Township (or its agents, servants, workers or employees) of such
peddler or solicitor, his goods, the services of him or his employer nor
the organization he may represent.
F. He shall immediately surrender his license to the Warrington Township
Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, upon expiration or
revocation thereof.
§ 229-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-7
1:239
§ 229-8. License revocation procedure.
Upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the rules of conduct
established by § 229-7 or any other provision of this chapter or upon
ascertainment that the licensee has made any false statement in his
application for license hereunder, any license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be revoked by the Warrington Township Code Enforcement
Officer, or his designee. Notice of revocation shall be given by written
notice, personally served or sent by certified mail, to the address designated
for this purpose in the application for a license. The revocation shall be
effective immediately upon issuance of the said notice of revocation by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
G. He shall not engage in selling or offering for sale, or in seeking or
taking of orders or contracts for, any goods, wares, merchandise,
article, device, subscription, contribution, service or contract not stated
in the application for which a license has been issued, nor shall any
person use any vehicle for soliciting or peddling other than the vehicle
registered upon his license.
H. No person engaged in soliciting or peddling shall hawk or cry his goods,
wares, merchandise, offers, contracts or services upon any of the
streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall be use any loudspeaker,
except when the street is closed for a special event and a license for the
said soliciting or peddling has been duly issued by the Township.
I. No person engaged in soliciting or peddling shall hawk or cry his goods,
wares, merchandise, offers, contracts or services upon any of the
streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall be use any loudspeaker
or horn or any other device for announcing his presence by which
members of the public are annoyed.
J. No person engaged in soliciting or peddling shall park any vehicle upon
any of the streets or alleys of the Township in order to sort, rearrange or
clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise or samples, order books,
contracts, circulars, literature or advertising matter pertaining thereto;
nor shall any such person place or deposit any refuse upon any such
streets or alleys or sanitary or storm sewers; nor shall any such person
maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle
upon any street or alley in the Township for longer than necessary in
order to solicit from or peddle to persons residing or businesses located
in the immediate vicinity.
K. No person engaged in soliciting or peddling shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets or alleys or sidewalks of the Township
for the purpose of soliciting or peddling with or without any stand or
counter.
§ 229-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 229-9
1:240
§ 229-9. Waiver of fee.
Any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, any
person, corporation, partnership or association, and the agents and
employees thereof, who or which has complied with the provisions of and
can exhibit satisfactory evidence of compliance with the Pennsylvania
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as
amended, or §§ 501(c), 501(d) and/or 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
or any other statute of like nature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the United States governing solicitation for charitable, benevolent, patriotic
or any purposes or who or which is soliciting for any civic, religious or
charitable organizations representative of any public school, student,
church, fire company, veterans' organization or similar institution shall be
permitted, in lieu of the registration heretofore required, to register his or
its solicitors and peddlers acting for and on behalf of such organization or
association by the submission of the names and addresses (and pictures
if requested) of all persons acting for and on behalf of such organization,
together with a certification by the person submitting such list that all of the
persons whose names appear on such list are members of such organization
and/or are acting on its behalf and have no criminal record as provided
in § 229-5 hereof. Such group registrations shall be exempt from the fee
provided herein.
§ 229-10. Exemptions.
The following organizations and activities shall not be required to register
or pay the fee set forth herein. All other provisions of this chapter shall
apply to said persons, organizations and activities.
A. The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of
merchants or their employees or agents in delivering goods or services
in the regular course of business.
B. Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to engage in an activity described in § 229-1 hereof, when so engaged,
including, without limitation, real estate, insurance or securities
brokers and salesmen.
C. Persons soliciting funds or canvassing for purposes permitted under the
Act of 1937, June 3, P.L. 1333 (25 P.S. § 2601 et seq.), as amended
(Pennsylvania Election Code).
D. Authorized persons, carrying satisfactory identification, engaged in
making surveys or collecting information for the federal, state, county
or Township government, or any agency thereof.
E. Residents of the Township under 18 years of age who take orders for
and deliver newspapers, greeting cards, magazines, candy, cookies and
other items on behalf of an organization of a type listed in § 229-9 of this
chapter.
§ 229-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-11
1:241
§ 229-11. Permitted hours of operation.
§ 229-12. Seasonal sales.
§ 229-13. Prohibited acts.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person,
company, corporation or organization to enter upon the premises of a
private residence or business at any time of the day or night for the
purpose of conducting any form of soliciting or peddling where the owner or
occupant of the residence or business has posted a "no trespassing" sign or
a "no soliciting" sign, or upon any property duly registered by the occupant/
possessor thereof on the Township's "do not solicit" list, which shall be
maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer and a copy provided to the
applicant with the license.
§ 229-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offences in the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section
of this chapter which shall have been found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense. This chapter may be enforced initially by
violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement
Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
A. Commercial soliciting and peddling shall be limited to the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in residential areas and
during regular business hours in commercial areas.
B. Charitable soliciting, and soliciting, peddling and other activities by the
organizations and individuals exempt from registration under § 229-10
of this chapter, shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Saturdays, and 12:00
noon to 5:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays.
A. Ice cream trucks may be permitted to operate within Warrington
Township from April 1 through October 15. All vendors shall be licensed
as required by § 229-2 of this chapter.
B. Christmas tree lots may be permitted to operate from November 15
through December 31. All vendors shall be licensed as required by
§ 229-2 of this chapter unless exempted under § 229-10. All unsold trees
shall be removed and be disposed in a legal manner no later than
December 31.
§ 229-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 229-14
1:242
Chapter 236
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 140. Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 174.
§ 236-1. Adoption of Code.
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Township Manager of Warrington Township, being marked and designated
as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2015," as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of Warrington Township, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office
of the Township Manager of Warrington Township are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 236-2.
§ 236-2. Insertions, deletions and revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: "Warrington Township."
B. Section 103.5. Insert: "All permit fees shall be governed by the current
fee schedule adopted by separate resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, as of the date of the permit application."
C. Section 105.4. Revise: "Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, install, alter, or
repair a building or structure or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under provisions of this code, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.
§ 229-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-2
1:243
§ 236-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be a violation for any person to fail to comply with a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with the Property Maintenance
Code of Warrington Township. Upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, the defendant shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues, or each section of the Property Maintenance Code of
Warrington Township which is found to have been violated, shall constitute
a separate offense. This chapter may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
Chapter 248
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of
this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense."
D. Section 112.4. Revise: "Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs."
E. Section 302.4. Insert: "Six inches."
F. Section 304.14. Insert: "April 1 to September 30."
G. Section 602.3. Insert: "October 1 to April 1."
H. Section 602.4. Insert: "October 1 to April 1."
§ 236-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 236-3
1:244
ARTICLE I
Occupancy Reports
[Adopted 4-3-1990 by Ord. No. 90-5 (Ch. 4, Part 1, of the 1995 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 248-1. Lessor required to file report.
Each landlord, lessor and sublessor of property in the Township of
Warrington, or the agent or manager of such landlord, lessor or sublessor,
shall file with the Township on or before July 15 of each year, on a form
prescribed and supplied by the Township, a list of all resident tenants or
resident lessees as of July 1 of each year.
§ 248-2. Report to be filed in duplicate.
The above form, listing resident tenants and resident lessees, shall be filed
in duplicate with the Township.
§ 248-3. Report to be supplemented within 15 days.
The said list shall be supplemented within 15 days of the arrival of resident
tenants or resident lessees not previously reported or of the departure of
resident lessees or resident tenants previously reported.
§ 248-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this article has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(b) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this article.
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:245
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of
this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(3) Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 248-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 248-4
1:246
Chapter 257
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 181.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Water — See Ch. 353.
§ 248-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:247

ARTICLE I
Connections
[Adopted 1-22-1974 by Ord. No. 1-74 (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 257-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated in this
section:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
LATERAL — A part of the sewer system extending from a public main or
street to curbline, or property line if there is no curb, including the "Y"
connection from the main sewer line.
NOTICE — A written or printed notice, which shall be served upon the
owner if he be found within the Township, or if he cannot be found within
the Township, said notice may be served by any of the following methods:
(1) by registered or certified U.S. mail addressed to the last known address
of the owner; or (2) by leaving the same with the owner's agent or the party
in possession; or (3) by posting the same on the most public part of the
premises concerning which the notice is directed.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
ORDINANCES — Ordinances of the Township of Warrington herein, or
heretofore, or hereafter adopted concerning the collection and disposal of
sewage.
PERSON — Includes individuals, associations, partnerships, limited
partnerships, joint stock companies and corporations.
PROPERTY, ACCESSIBLE — Each lot or piece of land adjoining, abutting on,
or which is adjacent to the sewer system.
SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
SEWER DISTRICT — Such area as shall hereafter be defined or designated,
from time to time, by the Supervisors of Warrington Township for the
drainage and disposal of sewage.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system and sewage
treatment plant or plants, together with the appurtenant facilities currently
owned or hereinafter constructed and any improvements, additions, or
extensions that hereafter may be made thereto by the Township or an
authority of the Township, or to any part or parts of any or all thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warrington, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-2
1:249
§ 257-2. Sewer area.
A system of sewers and drainage is hereby established and ordained to
be constructed for said Township for the purpose of disposing of domestic
drainage and sewage by disposal plant, or any other form, method or
disposal that the Board of Supervisors may hereafter set forth.
§ 257-3. Location of sewers.
The location of sewers or any extension thereof shall be designated by
ordinance, and said ordinance shall incorporate by reference thereto the
general provisions of this article and any amendments hereto.
§ 257-4. System of sewers.
The system of sewers and drainage hereinbefore or hereinafter established,
and designated on the maps and plans, which are made part of this article
and any ordinance adopted, shall be laid, as far as practicable, along
and within the lines of the public roads and highways of the Township,
as on said plans or maps designated; and where such system diverges
from said public roads or highways, as shown on the plan and maps, and
passes through private property, the consent of the owner of such private
property shall be first obtained, if possible; and if not, such sewerage
system shall be constructed through such private property upon providing
for compensation in accordance with the Act of Assembly in such a case
made and provided.
§ 257-5. Approval of agreement.
In all cases where it becomes necessary to extend the Township sewers
into an adjoining borough or township for the purpose of disposing of
said sewage, the Supervisors of Warrington Township shall approve an
agreement with such borough or township, or any of their authorized
agencies, regarding rights-of-way through private property, ownership,
maintenance and joint use of such line.
§ 257-6. Extension of system.
The extension of the system of sewers and drainage hereby established so
as to cover additional portions of the Township shall be hereafter, from time
to time, adopted and approved by the Board of Supervisors; and when such
extension and additions have been thus approved and ordained, the same
shall become part of the system of sewers and drainage hereby established.
§ 257-7. Requirement to connect. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
A. All persons owning an occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sanitary sewers shall, at their own expense, connect
such building with the sanitary sewer system within 60 days after
notice to do so from the Township or notice to do so from the
§ 257-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-7
1:250
§ 257-8. Other receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sanitary sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain, or cause to be
erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool, septic tank
or any other receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage after the
expiration of the periods specified in § 257-7 hereof, or otherwise at any
time to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other
facilities for the discharge of sewage except into the sewer system.
§ 257-9. Nuisances. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole
or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system, and which
shall be required to connect thereto, or who otherwise erects, constructs,
uses or maintains any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or other
receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage in violation of this article
shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting, constructing and
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Township or the Warrington
Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and directed to abate
in the manner approved by law.
§ 257-10. Application and permit. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3]
All connections with said sewer system shall be made only upon application
and permit in prescribed form and shall be made in accordance with such
rules and regulations and upon such terms and conditions as the Warrington
Township Board of Supervisors shall from time to time adopt and prescribe.
Said rules and regulations, when adopted, shall have the same force and
effect as if set at length in this article.
§ 257-11. Failure to connect. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
Warrington Township Board of Supervisors. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. All persons owning a property accessible to the sanitary sewer upon
which a building is later erected shall, upon the time of such erection
and at their own expense, connect such building with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sanitary sewer shall, at their own
expense, connect such building to the sewer system within 60 days
after receipt of notice to do so. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. Upon connection to the sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall
properly disconnect and close any private septic system in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the water and sewer department in
effect at that time.
§ 257-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-11
1:251
§ 257-12. Collection of unpaid bills. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-3]
In the event that any property owner shall fail to pay the assessment as
hereinabove provided, it will be the duty of the Warrington Township Board
of Supervisors' Treasurer to refer to the Warrington Township Board of
Supervisors' Solicitor all such bills remaining unpaid, and the Warrington
Township Board of Supervisors' Solicitor shall thereupon take the necessary
action to effect the collection of such unpaid bills in the manner provided by
law.
§ 257-13. Industrial wastes.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into the sewer system any industrial waste
or other matter whatsoever injurious to the sewage structure, or to the
process of treating sewage, or any drainage resulting from rain, sump
pumps, water, surface water, springs, wells, streams or other groundwater,
or any sewage or drainage containing matter of any sort liable to form a
deposit in the sewer or drain pipes or to create obstruction therein.
§ 257-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The provisions of this article are declared to be for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township; and any person who shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any matter of any sort
liable to form a deposit or create an obstruction or obstructions therein,
or who shall break into or otherwise make connections therewith without
having first procured the permit required by this article; or who shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements of any permit or of this article; or who
A. After the expiration of the periods specified in § 257-7 of this article, if
any owner of an occupied building on property accessible to the sewer
system shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer system
as required by said § 257-7, the Warrington Township Board of
Supervisors may cause to be served on the owner of such property so
failing to connect to said sewer system, and also upon the occupants of
the building in question, a copy of this article and a written or printed
notice requiring such connection to be made, and such notice shall
further state that its requirements shall be complied with within 60
days from the date thereof. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Upon failure of any such owner, who has been duly notified as
hereinabove provided, to comply with the requirements of any such
notice or with the provisions of this article, the Warrington Township
Board of Supervisors shall cause the necessary connection to be made
and, upon completion of the work for the same, shall render a bill
covering the cost of said work to the owner of such premises.
§ 257-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-14
1:252
shall fail to comply with any rule or regulation of the Board of Supervisors
or any rule or regulation of the Warrington Township Board of Supervisors
concerning the manner of making connections with the sewer system or
the use of the same; or who shall violate any provision of this article,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket (citation);
see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for
Certain Offenses.
§ 257-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-14
1:253

ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3 (Ch. 18, Part 1, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 257-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new privies designed to receive and retain
sewage whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of this Township.
§ 257-16. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township, Buck County, Pennsylvania.
§ 257-17. Rights and privileges granted.
The Supervisors shall undertake within the Township the control and
methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and sewage collection and
transportation thereof.
§ 257-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-18
1:255
§ 257-18. Rules and regulations.
The Supervisors shall adopt such rules and regulations concerning sewage
which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes
herein.
§ 257-19. Conformity with applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township,
and all applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 257-20. Rates and charges.
The Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 257-21. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
§ 257-22. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done under the direction and
control of the Township, or its agent, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B. The Township will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Township will retain annual inspection reports for each permitted
tank. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and
the rules and regulations of the agency and any administrative agency
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit the Township or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an annual
basis. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Permit only such person, persons, company or other entity licensed by
the Township to collect, transport and/or dispose of the contents
§ 257-18 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-22
1:256
§ 257-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-2]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 257-24. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 257-22 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
Township, or its designated agent, by either seeking mitigation of the
nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
therein. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
D. Upon request, submit to the Township pumping and disposal records
and/or receipts for the disposal of the contents therein. [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 257-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-24
1:257

ARTICLE III
Grinder Pumps
[Adopted 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-8 (Ch. 18, Part 4, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 257-25. Purpose. [Amended 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-12]
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the installation of
deduct meters and/or grinder pumps and any associated force mains or lowpressure
laterals. It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of this Township.
§ 257-26. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT 537 PLAN — Warrington Township's Official Plan as defined in the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535
(1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 through 750.20a ("Sewage
Facilities Act" or "Act 537").
AUTHORITY — The Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority.[Added
11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-12]
DEDUCT METER — A deduct meter measures the amount of water not
flowing in the sewer system and is typically utilized by customers who
use water for irrigation, to water grass or to fill a swimming pool.[Added
11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-12]
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric motor driven, submersible pump capable
of macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary sewage,
including reasonable amounts of objects, such as plastics, sanitary napkins,
disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry, and pumping this
material through a small diameter discharge.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within Warrington Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the Warrington Township Act
537 Plan to provide for additional or newly identified future or existing
sewage facilities needs, as defined fully in Section 2 of the Sewage Facilities
Act, 35 P.S. § 750.2.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in Warrington Township.
§ 257-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-26
1:259
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to
the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for
domestic water supply or for recreation or any substance which constitutes
pollution under the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001,
as amended.
§ 257-27. Planning requirements. [Amended 11-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-O-12]
The connection of existing properties or proposed new land development to
an existing or proposed sewerage system through the use of sewage grinder
pumps, their associated force mains, or low-pressure laterals shall occur
only after an official plan revision to Warrington Township Act 537 Plan,
approved by both Warrington Township, the Authority and the Department,
designates that the proposed properties be served by such a connection.
§ 257-28. Duties and responsibilities of property owners. [Amended
11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-12]
Any owner of property within the Township who desires to utilize a sewage
grinder pump and any associated force mains or low-pressure laterals shall
make an appropriate application to the Authority for the use of the same,
shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Authority and shall execute
any agreements and pay any fees required by the Authority. The Township
shall bear no responsibility for the purchase, installation, use, operation,
maintenance, service repair or replacement of the grinder pump and/or its
low-pressure force main or lateral.
§ 257-29. Deduct Meters. [Amended 11-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-O-12]
Any owner of property within the Township who desires to install a deduct
meter shall make an appropriate application to the Authority for the use of
the same, shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Authority and
shall execute any agreements and pay any fees required by the Authority.
§ 257-30. through § 257-37. (Reserved)33
33.Editor's Note: Former § 257-30, Duties and responsibilities of others, § 257-31, Easement
to Township, as amended, § 257-32, Reimbursement of costs, § 257-33, No waiver, §
257-34, Remedies of Township, § 257-35, Indemnification, hold harmless and duty to
defend, § 257-36, Abatement of nuisances, and § 257-37, Rules and regulations to be in
conformity with applicable law, were repealed 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-12.
§ 257-26 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-30
1:260
ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Control
[Adopted 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-19 (Ch. 18, Part 3, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 257-38. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy.
(1) This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment systems
for the Warminster Township Municipal Authority and/or
Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department and enables
the Warminster Township Municipal Authority and/or Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Department to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, as well as assist in assuring a
well-operated sewerage system and treatment process. The
objectives of this article are:
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system that will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system that will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere
or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(c) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system that will harm the collection system,
physical facilities, or the health and well being of the operating
personnel.
(d) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system.
(2) This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors of the municipal wastewater system through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for the other users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement of general requirements
for the other user reporting, assumes that existing customer's
capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees
for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein. This article shall apply to the Township of
Warrington and to all persons, municipal authorities, and
municipalities outside the Township of Warrington and served by
the Warminster Township Municipal Authority (WTMA). This article
shall also apply to all persons, municipal authorities, and
municipalities outside the Township of Warrington and served by
the Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department (WTWSD).
§ 257-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-38
1:261
Agreements with extra jurisdictional agencies shall be written or
amended requiring the agency to adopt a control ordinance no less
stringent than the WTMA's or WTWSD's.
B. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act as
amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
AUTHORITY — Warminster Township Municipal Authority.
AUTHORITY MANAGER — The general manager of the Warminster
Township Municipal Authority, who is the person designated by the
Authority to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment
works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this article, including the administration of this article with respect to
the control of industrial waters.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USE — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be: (1) a principal
executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial
user is a corporation; (2) a general partner or proprietor if the
industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; (3) a
duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if
such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the industrial waste discharge originates.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Federal National
Pretreatment Standards as promulgated by the Act.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Warminster Township Municipal
Authority.
CONTROL DEPARTMENT — Warrington Township Water and Sewer
Department (WTWSD).
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DEPARTMENT MANAGER — The manager of the Warrington Township
Water and Sewer Department, who is the person designated by the
Township to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment
§ 257-38 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-38
1:262
works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this article, including the administration of this article with respect to
the control of industrial waters.
DOMESTIC WASTE — The normal water-borne waste from a residential
household, as well as toilet wastes from residences, business buildings,
and institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized officials of said agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure used for or intended
to be used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating,
warehousing, processing, cleaning, or assembling of any product,
commodity or article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solids, liquids or gaseous substances or
form of energy rejected or escaping from an industrial establishment
other than domestic sewage.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes an inhabitation
or disruption of the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge process, or disposal, and which results in a reduction in
the effectiveness of the treatment facilities, and which contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations; Section 405 of
the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including
Title II, more commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA)," and including state regulations contained in a
state of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act,
and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.[Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
MINOR INDUSTRIAL USE — Any industrial user of the Authority's
wastewater system who: (1) has a wastewater discharge flow of less
than 10,000 gallons per average workday; and (2) whose contribution of
any pollutant in any single workday does not consume more than 0.2%
of the POTW's capacity to handle that pollutant.
§ 257-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-38
1:263
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and
which includes the general and specific prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with the section. Where EPA pretreatment standards do not
apply, a new source shall mean a discharge that commenced after the
promulgation of this article.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters
of the United States and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including any increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or other legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial,
municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced negative alteration of
the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water,
including, but not limited to, the addition of material that reduces its
usefulness.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
§ 257-38 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-38
1:264
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes, process changes by the person
producing the pollutant, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment as mandated by the Department/
Authority and contained in this article. These requirements are in
addition to any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and they
shall take precedence over the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards when the ordinance pretreatment requirements are more
restrictive.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is
owned in this instance by the Warminster Township Municipal Authority
or the WTWSD. This definition includes any devices and systems used in
the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage
or industrial waste of a liquid nature. This definition also includes all
Authority- or Department-owned sewers that convey wastewater to the
POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined
in Section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — One or more of the following:
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N.
(1)
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is
designated as such by the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR
403.3(v) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(2)
Chronic violation of wastewater discharge limits, which for this
purpose are defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the
measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the
same pollutant parameter.
(1)
§ 257-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-38
1:265
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
(categorization) of kinds of industrial activities pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutants or combination of pollutants: (1)
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a)
or other Acts; or (2) which has been or can be shown by scientific
experiment to inhibit or disrupt a POTW treatment process,
Warminster's or otherwise, full scale or laboratory scale.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Control Authority's POTW or
Department's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 257-50 of this
article.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations 33% or more of
measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a sixmonth
period equal or exceed the product of the applicable
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH).
(2)
(3) A violation of pass-through or interference.
A discharge of imminent endangerment to human health, welfare,
or the environment, or which required the POTW to use its
emergency authorities under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B).
(4)
(5) Violations of a compliance schedule milestone by 90 days.
(6) Violations of report submittal deadlines by 30 days.
(7) Failure to report noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation deemed significant by the Control Authority.
§ 257-38 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-38
1:266
§ 257-39. General discharge prohibitions.
No users shall contribute, or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass through or interference
with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions
apply to all such users of a POTW. These general prohibitions apply to
all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the
following substances to the POTW:
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
C. Abbreviations.
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
WTMA Warminster Township Municipal Authority
WTWSD Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than
5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of
§ 257-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-39
1:267
the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromides, carbides,
hydrides, and sulfides. Waste streams with a closed-cup flash point of
less than 140° F. or 60° C. (using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21) are also prohibited.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts, animal
tissue or wastes, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone
or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt
residues, residues from glass grinding or polishing wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the
POTW.
D. Any wastewater: (1) containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, pass through the POTW and degrade the receiving
stream; or (2) containing substances in amounts that exceed any
limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or
any limitation in §§ 257-39 through 257-47.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
F. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scum, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section
405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge
use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
G. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
Pennsylvania DEP stream discharge permit, or cause a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving stream.
§ 257-39 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-39
1:268
§ 257-40. Prohibition of clean water discharge to the POTW.
H. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
I. Any wastewater as it enters the Authority's or Department's sewer with
a temperature greater than 50° C. (122° F.) or, when in combination
with other wastewaters, will increase the temperature of the influent to
the POTW treatment plant above 40° C. (104° F.); or which heat will
inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference.
J. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate
five times the average operating flow rate nor contain concentrations or
quantities of pollutants that exceed any moment in time four times the
average operating values.
K. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
L. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.
M. Any wastewater containing any organic chemical from the list hereafter
in any amount whatsoever.34
N. Any hauled or trucked pollutants discharged at points other than those
designated by the POTW.
O. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW-TP in a
wastewater discharge permit. [Added at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Clean water discharges into the POTW unnecessarily consume sewer
and treatment plant capacities as well as reduce the effectiveness of the
wastewater treatment processes and, therefore, the discharge of clean
water is unacceptable to the Authority or Department.
B. Specifically, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted waters such as water from sump pumps, floor drains,
stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, foundation
drainage, or cooling water into the POTW. Stormwater and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers that are
specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer or natural outlet upon the issuance of a permit to do so
from the U.S. EPA or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
34.Editor's Note: The list of organic chemicals is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 257-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-41
1:269
§ 257-41. National categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 257-42. Specific pollutant limitations.
A. Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the National
Standard (located in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471),
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources
in the subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
under this article and shall be incorporated herein by reference. The
Authority or Department Manager shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
B. The Authority or Department may also require, if deemed necessary by
the Authority or Department Manager, that the industrial wastewater
discharged by the industrial user be segregated from sanitary sewage.
This will require the installation of a separate drainage system sewer
line exclusively for industrial wastewaters, and the system shall remain
segregated until passage through a sampling and/or monitoring facility,
at which time it may join the building's sanitary drain for continuation
and connection to the Authority or Department's sewer lateral.
A. The following limits of concentration are given for guidance to all
existing and proposed industrial waste dischargers to the POTW. The
tabulation represents the maximum permissible concentration of each
specific parameter acceptable in an industrial discharge when
averaged over an eight-hour operating period. The acceptable peak
concentration of any substance at any given moment shall not exceed
the concentration limits listed herein. Lower concentrations may be
required of an industrial waste if, in the judgment of the Authority or
Department, it is necessary to do so in order to protect the POTW
processes, its sludge quality, and its effluent quality.
B. The Authority or Department may take, at its sole discretion, materials
that are generally considered compatible with the sewage treatment
plant and its processes; that is, materials that are commonly associated
with domestic wastewater, at concentrations greater than those listed
under the eight-hour limit; however, a surcharge will be applied for the
treatment and/or handling of the unusually strong wastes in accordance
with the formula and rate schedule on file at the administration office of
the Warminster Township Municipal Authority or the Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Department. Wastes having all of its
characteristics at or below the eight-hour limits will not be subject to a
surcharge.
C. Wastewater having any characteristics beyond any limit value, as
shown in the following tables, shall be rejected.
D. Extra strong waste, with surcharge, shall be applicable to BOD, COD,
dissolved solids, suspended solids, phosphates, chlorides, sulfates,
ammonia nitrogen, nitrates nitrogen, organic nitrogen, iron, aluminum,
§ 257-41 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-42
1:270
and oil and grease. Additional and more specific limitations may be
contained within the user's wastewater discharge permit, which shall
be binding control values.
E. The following list is subject to additions and modifications as required
of the Authority or Department by regulatory agencies or as technical
revelations may dictate to the Authority or Department that it is
prudent to revise the values tabulated. As tens of thousands of various
industrial materials exist, the list is not a tabulation of all industrial
substances that are or may be restricted by the Authority or
Department.
Item
Normal Eight-Hour Limit
mg/l
Aluminum 10
Arsenic 0.037
Barium 2
Beryllium 0.51
BOD (5-day) 2,000
BOD (20-day) 3,000
Bromides 25
Cadmium 0.08
COD 5,000
Chlorides 5,000
Chromium, hexavalent 0.1
Chromium, total 2.77
Cobalt 2
Copper 0.7
Cyanide 0.13
Fluorides 20
Hydrogen sulfide 0.1
Iron 10
Lead 0.21
Manganese 2
Mercury 0.0006
Nickel 0.5
Ammonia nitrogen 60
Nitrate nitrogen 20
TKN 100
§ 257-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-42
1:271
§ 257-43. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this article.
§ 257-44. Township's right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish by ordinance more-stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
§ 257-38A of this article.
§ 257-45. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate waste
treatment or waste control to achieve a compliance with the limitations
contained in this article or in any National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the
Township or state.
Item
Normal Eight-Hour Limit
mg/l
Phosphates 64
Selenium 0.01
Silver 0.43
Sulfates 5,000
Sulfides 1
Suspended solids 2,000
Tin 2
Dissolved solids 10,000
Zinc 0.5
Oil and Grease
Animal/vegetable origin 200
Petroleum origin 100
Mixture of oils/grease 100
Boron 0.5
Potassium 2,500
Calcium 2,500
Magnesium 1,000
§ 257-42 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-46
1:272
§ 257-46. Accidental discharges.
§ 257-47. Notice.
A. The industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
to the sewer of prohibited or controlled materials or other substances
regulated by this article. In the application for a wastewater discharge
permit, the applicant shall provide a narrative detailing what facilities
and/or operating procedures are, or shall be, employed to preclude an
accidental discharge. The issuance of a wastewater discharge permit
shall be contingent upon the submission of an acceptable spill control
plan.
B. In case of an accidental discharge, the user shall immediately telephone
and notify the Authority or Department of the incident. During normal
working hours, the user shall notify the Authority Manager, or his
assistant at (215) 343-1800 and during nonoffice hours notify the chief
operator at the sewage treatment plant, telephone number (215)
768-6103. Likewise, during normal working hours the user shall notify
the Department Manager, or his assistant at (215) 343-1800 and during
nonoffice hours notify the chief operator at the sewage treatment plant,
telephone number (215) 343-1800. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. When requested, all industrial users shall develop a slug control plan
which outlines discharge practices (including nonroutine batch
discharges), describes stored chemicals and which contains procedures
both to notify the POTW immediately of slug discharges and to prevent
adverse impacts from accidental spills. The plan must be posted within
the building in such a manner that all employees can see the plan.
Furthermore, the plan must list the following information:
(1) Names and telephone numbers of people to be contacted within the
company.
(2) Names and addresses of people outside the company who may need
to be contacted.
(3) All emergency equipment on hand, the location of such emergency
equipment and the names and telephone numbers of people who
can handle such emergency equipment.
(4) Procedures to follow in case of a chemical spill.
(5) The location of the material safety data sheets (MSDS) which must
be on site for all chemical and products used in the company's
business.
A. Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Authority Manager or the Department Manager
a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
§ 257-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-47
1:273
§ 257-48. Fees.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fees, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
B. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or at the place of operations or other prominent place,
advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer
such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedures.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Authority's or Department's wastewater
disposal system for the implementation of the program established
herein. The applicable changes or fees shall be set forth in the
Authority's or Township's rate schedule as contained in its rules and
regulations, on file at its business office or the Township and
Department office.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Authority or Department may adopt charges and fees which
may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the Authority's pretreatment program.
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(d) Fees for permit application.
(e) Fees for filing appeals.
(f) Fees for consistent removal (by the Authority or Department)
of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment
standards.
(g) Fees for the handling of unusually strong wastes.
(h) Other fees as the Authority or Department may deem
necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Authority or
Department.
§ 257-47 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-49
1:274
§ 257-49. Wastewater discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any industrial wastewater
except as authorized by the Authority or Department in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The Authority or Department at a frequency
of once per year, or more often if conditions indicate a need, require a
user, regardless of whether or not the user possesses a valid wastewater
discharge permit, to complete and submit a certification of wastewater
status report. In it, the user shall state whether or not his discharge
contains industrial waste; if it does, whether or not it complies with this
article and, if not, how and when compliance will be achieved.
§ 257-50. Wastewater discharge permits.
A. General. Any individual user proposing to connect to or contribute
industrial waste to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW
shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the
effective date of this article. Those industrial users not defined as
significant shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days
of being notified to do so by the Authority or Department Manager. All
users, whether permitted or not, must notify the Authority or
Department prior to changing their discharges.
B. Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the Authority or Department an
application35 in the form prescribed by the Authority or Department,
which form shall require all relevant information required by 40 CFR
403.12(b) (as outlined in the fee schedule). Application forms shall be
obtained from the administration office of the Authority or the
Department. The Authority or Department will evaluate the data
furnished by the user and may require additional information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Authority or
Department may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit modifications as the result of federal regulations. As soon as
possible (e.g., within 90 days) following the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit
of existing users subject to such standard shall be revised by the
Authority or Department to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not
previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit
as required by Subsection B, the user shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within a period stipulated by the Authority or
Department, but in no case beyond 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition,
35.Editor's Note: The permit application form is available in the Township office.
§ 257-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-50
1:275
the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit
to the Authority or Department Manager within 90 days after the
promulgation of the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standard a certification of wastewater status report on a form available
at the administrative offices of the Authority or the Department.
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Authority or the Department.
Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
Authority or Department handling of wastewater discharged into
its facilities and to offset the cost of the wastewater control
program.
(2) Limits on the maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulations equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for test and reporting schedule.
(6) Schedule to attain compliance with the subject ordinance and/or
conditions contained in the permit.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see § 257-51); and requirements for signed data accuracy
certifications for all baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports and periodic reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Authority or
Department and affording Authority access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Authority or Department of any
new introduction of wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharge as per § 257-61.
(11)With respect to categorical industrial users, limitations on all
parameters regulated by the applicable categorical standard
including TTO requirements (monitoring and/or certification and
solvent management planning).
§ 257-50 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-50
1:276
§ 257-51. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(12) Requirements for retaining records of monitoring activities and
results for a minimum of three years, or longer in the case of
unresolved litigation or when requested by the Authority or
Department.
(13) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Authority or
Department to ensure compliance with this article.
E. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not
to exceed five years, or may be written to expire on a specific date. The
user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the
permit may be subject to modification by the Authority or Department
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in §§ 257-39 through 257-47 are modified or other just cause
exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit
by the Authority Manager or Department Manager and any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
F. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
Authority or Department. Any succeeding owner or user shall be
obligated to secure his own permit as prescribed herein.
A. Compliance date report and baseline monitoring report. Within 90 days
following the established date for a baseline monitoring report or for
final compliance with an Authority or Department accepted schedule to
attain compliance with the wastewater control ordinance or applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, the
user shall submit to the Authority or Department Manager a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by the
ordinance or the user's permit and the average and maximum daily
flow. The report shall state whether applicable pretreatment standards
or ordinance requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
user into compliance with the applicable standards or requirements.
The statement shall be signed and authorized.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) For a user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, the user shall
submit to the Authority or Department Manger during the months
§ 257-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-51
1:277
§ 257-52. Monitoring facilities.
of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the Authority or Department, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent
which are limited by such pretreatment standard. In addition, this
report shall include a record of the measured or estimated average
daily flow during the reporting period, together with every daily
flow that exceeds the permitted flow and the one-day maximum
daily flow.
(2) Again, for a user subject to a pretreatment standard, the Authority
or Department may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
Subsection B(1) shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports
shall contain the results of the sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the Authority or
Department Manager, or pollutants contained therein which are
limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment
standard.
(3) In the case where a user is not subject to a National Pretreatment
Standard, the Authority or Department may require reports as or
similar to those described in Subsections B(1) and (2) above;
however, any such requirements shall be defined in the user's
wastewater discharge permit.
(4) In the event the user fails to provide reports on his discharge as
specified in Subsections B(1), (2) or (3) above, the failure will
constitute a violation of the permit requirements and the Authority
or Department will initiate enforcement proceedings in accordance
with §§ 257-60 through 257-67 and, to protect the POTW, the
Authority or Department may conduct or cause to have conducted
measurements and analyses of the discharge and charge the costs
against the user's account.
A. The Authority or Department shall require to be provided and operated
at the user's own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal
drainage system. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on
the user's premises, but the Authority or Department may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user,
allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area
and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
§ 257-51 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-52
1:278
§ 257-53. Inspection and sampling.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Authority's or Department's requirements and all applicable local
construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within 90 days following written notification by the Authority
or Department.
A. The Authority or Department shall inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all
requirements are being complied with.
B. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the Authority or Department or its
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
or in the performance of any of their duties. The Authority or
Department and the Approval Authority shall have the right to set up on
the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
C. When the sampling, inspection, monitoring, testing, etc., is being
conducted because the Authority or Department has reason to believe
that the industrial user is in noncompliance, the Authority or
Department shall charge its costs to the industrial user. Furthermore,
after notification to the discharger of his noncompliance, the Authority
or Department may resample, retest, reinvestigate and do whatever is
necessary to evaluate each day's discharge, charging all costs to the
industrial user until compliance is obtained.
D. Permanently installed automatic sampling devices shall be required at
user's cost when, in the opinion of the Authority or Department, they
are necessary to assure compliance with this article. Where a user has
security measures in force which would require proper identification
and clearance arrangements with their security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Authority or
Department will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities.
E. Industrial users must make the records of monitoring activities and
results available for copying by the Authority or Department.
F. All wastewater sampling and analysis must be conducted using the
methods and procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.
§ 257-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-54
1:279
§ 257-54. Pretreatment.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply
with this article and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified in the
permit conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Authority
or Department shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Authority or Department before
construction of the facility, in a form and in an orderly sequence as
prescribed by the Authority or Department. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable
to the Authority or Department under the provisions of this article. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation
shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Authority or Department prior
to the user's initiation of the changes.
§ 257-55. Confidential information.
§ 257-56. Compliance schedule for installation of technology.
The Authority or Department may require compliance schedules for
installation of technology required to meet a pretreatment schedule from all
users, whether permitted or not.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restrictions unless the user specifically requests and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Authority or
Department that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user. However, the EPA has immediate and
unlimited access to all information collected by the Authority or
Department as part of its pretreatment program.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public nor anyone within the
Authority or Department organization without the technical need to
know the information. If at some time it is deemed germane that the
regulatory agencies know that such information exists, they may be
advised that it exists but will be referred to the user to secure
information. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
§ 257-54 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-57
1:280
§ 257-57. Compliance schedule for progress reports.
All compliance schedules must contain milestone dates for implementing
necessary pretreatment required to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards. Within 14 days of a milestone in the compliance schedule and
within 14 days of the final date of compliance, the industrial user must
submit a progress report to the POTW indicating whether or not the
milestone or final compliance date was met and, if not, when compliance
with the increment or progress is expected.
§ 257-58. Notification of hazardous waste discharges.
All industrial users, in writing, must notify the Authority or Department, the
state and the EPA of any discharge which would be considered a hazardous
waste if disposed of in a different manner.
§ 257-59. Test procedures.
All wastewater sampling and analysis for the local pretreatment program
must be conducted using the test procedures and methods provided for in
40 CFR Part 136.
§ 257-60. Enforcement.
§ 257-61. Notification of violation.
If sampling by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Authority
or Department within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user must resample and submit results of this resampling to the Authority
or Department within 30 days. Whenever the user becomes aware that the
A. The Township, The Department and the Authority recognize there are
many industrial users that have many and varied industrial activities on
the sewerage system and that, at times, violations of this article and of
the user's wastewater discharge forms may occur. It is the intention of
the Authority or Department to secure compliance with this article as
expeditiously as reasonably possible and with minimal disruption to the
industrial user's operation. The industrial user should recognize, too,
that the requirements of this article and his permit are important to the
proper operation of the sewerage facilities. The Authority or
Department as an agent of the Township and as a policy shall secure
and assure wastewater discharge compliance through positive
enforcement of this article.
B. The Authority or Department has the power to develop and implement
an enforcement response plan (ERP), indicating how a POTW will
investigate and respond to instances of industrial user noncompliance,
both significant and nonsignificant, as required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5).
Enforcement responses include a variation of the following: notice of
violation, administrative orders, civil litigation, criminal prosecution
and termination of sewer service.
§ 257-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-61
1:281
user has violated or is violating this article and/or his wastewater discharge
permit, either through notice served by the Authority or Department,
analytical reports, knowledge of normal plan activities or through any other
means, the user shall within 14 days submit to the Authority or Department
a full explanation as to the reason for the violation and, for the Authority's or
Department's consideration, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof.
Included with this submission shall be a completed Authority's or
Department's form "Proposed Schedule to Obtain Compliance with the
Wastewater Control Ordinance."
§ 257-62. Administrative hearing.
§ 257-63. Suspension/revocation of wastewater discharge permit.
As the result of the administrative hearing, or in the Authority or
Department Manager's judgment, a user who violates the following
conditions of this article or state or federal regulations pertaining to
wastewater pretreatment is subject to suspension/revocation of his
discharge permit.
A. The Authority or Department may, at its option, order any user who
causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW or has
violated a condition of this article or his wastewater discharge permit to
show cause before the hearing board why enforcement action should
not be taken to end the violation, recover damages and/or assess
penalties. A notice shall have been serviced on the user, specifying the
time and place of the hearing, describing the alleged violation, and it
may contain a statement as to the enforcement action proposed. The
notice of the administrative hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail at least 10 days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent of the user or officer of the corporation.
B. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken shall be
under oath and recorded stenographically. A transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
C. The Hearing Board, within 14 days, shall review the evidence and
achieve the Authority or Department of its findings. If the Board has
concluded that a violation did or does exist, it shall recommend a course
of action consistent with this article to the Authority or Department for
administration. The Hearing Board shall be comprised of the following:
(1) General Manager of the Authority or the Department.
(2) A professional engineer knowledgeable in the area of industrial
waste.
(3) Three members of the Authority appointed by the Board for this
purpose or three members of the Township Board of Supervisors
appointed by the Board of Supervisors for this purpose.
§ 257-61 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-63
1:282
§ 257-64. Severance of sewer connection.
§ 257-65. Legal action.
A. Failure of a user to faithfully and factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge.
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
C. Refusal to allow an Authority's or Department's employee or agent
reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection
or monitoring.
D. Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
E. Violation of § 257-39 of this article, regulating materials that may be
discharged to the POTW.
F. Failure to render payment to the Authority or Department for the
charges and fees outlined in § 257-48B of this article.
A. As the result of an administrative hearing or in the judgment of the
Authority's or Department's Manager when, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, to the
environment, to the receiving stream, or any cause inference to the
POTW or cause the Authority or Department to violate any conditions of
its state and/or NPDES permit, the Authority or Department' Manager
or his or her designated agent may order the user to immediately cease
and desist a discharge and/or waste contribution and, to secure the
termination of the discharge, the Authority or Department shall take
such steps as deemed necessary including seeking injunctive relief and/
or the immediate severance of water and/or sewer service.
B. The Authority or Department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge
permit and/or wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written
statement submitted by the user describing the cause of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence
shall be submitted before reinstatement of service.
A. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the Authority's or Department's wastewater disposal system contrary to
the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the Authority or Department, the
Authority or Department Solicitor may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Bucks County.
B. If any industrial user violates any pretreatment standards or other
nondischarge requirements, the Authority or Department Solicitor may
commence an action for injunctive relief in the Court of Bucks County.
§ 257-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-66
1:283
§ 257-66. Agreements with extra-jurisdictional agencies.
A. This article shall apply to the Township of Warrington and to persons
and/or authorities outside of the Township that are, by contract or
agreement with the Authority, users of the publicly owned treatment
works (POTW). Where the Warminster Authority provides service to a
jurisdictional entity outside of Warminster, such as a neighboring
municipal authority, the entity being serviced shall adopt, within six
months, an ordinance to protect the Warminster POTW, which is no less
restrictive than this document. The entity's ordinance shall incorporate
enforcement procedures to attain compliance that are substantially
identical to those contained herein. The entity shall agree to adopt local
limits for industrial discharges to its collection system which cover at
least the same parameters and are at least as stringent as the
Authority's local limits.
B. The Authority or Department reserves the right to sample and to have
the samples analyzed from industrial dischargers beyond its political
boundary. Said industrial users will be responsible for all costs related
thereto.
C. Intermunicipal agreements shall be written or amended to contain a
provision to allow the Warminster Township Municipal Authority or the
Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department the right to bring
direct enforcement action against an industrial user as agent for the
contributing jurisdiction. The Authority or Department will, if
necessary, bring action against the customer authority for failure of the
authority to enforce its own ordinance by appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief.
D. Furthermore, intermunicipal agreements shall be written or amended
to indicate that the Authority or Department is responsible for updating
contributing jurisdictions' industrial waste surveys. All such
intermunicipal agreements must indicate that the Authority or
Department is responsible for permitting industrial users within the
contributing jurisdiction. If joint permits are used, the agreement must
indicate that the Authority or Department is responsible for preparing
draft permits. Intermunicipal agreements also must indicate that the
Warminster Authority and/or Warrington Township Water and Sewer
Department will have the primary duty to inspect the facilities of the
industrial user. The contributing jurisdiction must acknowledge the
Authority's ability to enter the facilities of industrial users periodically
to verify compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. The
contributing jurisdiction must agree to provide the Authority or
Department with access to all records compiled as part of the
contributing jurisdiction's pretreatment program activities.
E. Under emergency or apparent emergency conditions, the Authority or
Department will attempt to advise the customer authority of the nature
of the emergency and whether or not contact is made, the Authority or
§ 257-66 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-66
1:284
§ 257-67. Publication of lists of industrial users in significant
noncompliance.
The Authority or Department must provide, for annual public notification
in the largest daily newspaper published in the Warminster/Warrington
service area, the names of those industrial users in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements during the
previous 12 months.
§ 257-68. Violations and penalties.
§ 257-69. Falsifying information. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsified, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article,
shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both, and at the discretion
of the Authority or Department, by permanent severance of industrial waste
service.
Department will take whatever steps are necessary to eliminate the
cause of the condition.
A. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Authority and/or
Department or who fails to comply with a provision of this article, and
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be
fined no less than $300 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. All fines and penalties shall be paid
directly to the Authority or Department and are civil in nature. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the Authority or Department
may recover any expenses it may have incurred in determining that the
user is a violator of this article, including, but not limited to, costs
related to investigating the violation and extraordinary sampling and
analyses. Furthermore, the Authority or Department intends to recover
expenses of litigation, including reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
court report's fees, fees of professionals and experts and other
expenses of litigation.
B. In addition to the penalties of this article, the Authority and/or
Department has been empowered by PA Act 9 of 1992 (35 P.S. § 752.4)
to levy civil penalties of up to $25,000 per day for each occurrence.
C. Any user who is found to have willfully or negligently failed to comply
with a provision of this article may be subject to criminal penalties of up
to one year in prison, fines, or both.
§ 257-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-69
1:285

ARTICLE V
Oil and Grease Interceptors and/or Traps
[Adopted 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-11]
§ 257-70. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assist the Bucks County Water and Sewer
Authority with respect to the maintenance and rehabilitation of oil and
grease interceptor trap systems, and to prevent the discharge of certain
grease, fats, grit and the like into the public sewer system; and to establish
penalties for violations of this article.
§ 257-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — An employee of Warrington Township properly
certified pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code and authorized to
conduct inspections of grease interceptors and/or traps within Warrington
Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or any other legal entity.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS — The standards are described
in the Industrial Wastewater Discharge and Pretreatment Rules attached
hereto as Exhibit A.36
§ 257-72. Applicability.
§ 257-73. Permits.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all commercial, industrial,
and institutional establishments located within Warrington Township.
B. The Township agrees to cooperate with the Bucks County Water and
Sewer Authority and conduct such inspections of grease interceptor
and trap systems as may be requested, from time to time, by
representatives of the Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority.
C. Oil and grease interceptor trap systems, except as may be modified by
the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, are required for all
restaurants, food preparation facilities, or other establishments within
the Township that have the potential to discharge oil and/or grease into
the sanitary sewer system.
A. No person shall install, construct or alter an oil and grease interceptor/
trap or occupy or utilize any structure in which an oil and grease
interceptor/trap system shall be installed without first receiving a
36.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 257-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-73
1:287
§ 257-74. Design/inspections.
permit from Warrington Township, which said approval shall identify
the site and approve the plans and specifications so as to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. All oil and grease interceptor/traps shall be available for inspection by
appropriate representatives of Warrington Township.
C. After receipt of all required approvals, any person desiring to construct
permanent oil and grease trap interceptor system shall notify
Warrington Township.
D. When a permit is prepared to be issued and construction is about to
commence, representatives of Warrington Township shall contact the
Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority and advise them of the
proposed installation of an oil and/or grease trap system.
A. Subject to the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code, an oil
and grease interceptor must be the type and capacity approved by the
owner's design professional and must be located for easy accessibility
to clean and inspect.
B. The owner or person utilizing any property connected to the sanitary
sewer system of the Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority shall
permit an authorized agent of the Township:
(1) To enter all properties and facilities for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, and testing to determine compliance with the provisions
of these regulations; and
(2) To examine and copy any all records required to be maintained by
the owner for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of these regulations.
C. Any oil and grease interceptor/trap system may be inspected by an
authorized agent of the Township at any reasonable time.
D. Interceptor/trap system. Such inspection may require a physical tour of
the property, sampling of the oil and grease interceptor/trap, and dyetesting
of the interior plumbing to determine the path and ultimate
destination of the generated wastewater.
E. An authorized agent of the Township shall have the right to enter upon
land for purposes of inspections.
F. An initial inspection may be conducted by an authorized agent of the
Township to determine the type and functionality of each oil and grease
interceptor/trap.
G. A schedule of routine inspections of the Township may be established to
assure proper functioning of the oil and grease interceptor/trap.
§ 257-73 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-74
1:288
§ 257-75. Maintenance.
§ 257-76. System rehabilitation.
H. An authorized agent of the Township shall inspect systems known or
alleged to be malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal the system
is malfunctioning, the authorized agent will order action to be taken to
correct the malfunction.
A. Every person owning a building or structure containing an oil and
grease interceptor/trap system, as well as any person making use of the
oil and grease interceptor/trap system shall have the oil and grease
interceptor/trap pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler within 60 days of
the effective date of this article. Thereafter, all persons required to
pump an interceptor system shall do so at least every quarter. The
owner and/or utilizer of the oil and grease interceptor/trap shall submit
to the Township receipts from the pumper/hauler confirming the
pumping of the oil and grease interceptor/trap within two weeks after
the removal of the accumulated oil and grease.
B. The required pumping frequency may be increased by the Township for
good cause shown.
C. Any person owning a property served by an oil and grease interceptor/
trap, as well as any person making use of the oil and grease interceptor/
trap system, must submit, with each required pumping receipt, a
written statement from the pumper/hauler that the baffles in the oil and
grease interceptor/trap have been inspected and found to be in good
working order. Any person whose oil and grease interceptor/trap baffles
are determined to require repair or replacement must first contact
Warrington Township for approval of the necessary repair.
D. Any person owning a building served by an oil and grease interceptor/
trap, as well as any person utilizing an oil and grease interceptor/trap
system, must follow the operation and maintenance recommendations
of the equipment manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommendations and a copy of the service agreement must be
submitted to Warrington Township within 60 days of the effective date
of this article. In no case may the service or pumping intervals for the
oil and grease interceptor/trap exceed those recommended by the
manufacturer.
A. A written notice of violation may be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property and/or any person utilizing the oil and grease
interceptor/trap system, which is found to be served by a
malfunctioning oil and grease interceptor/trap system or which is
discharging oil and grease without a permit.
B. Within seven days of notification by Warrington Township that a
malfunction has been identified, the property owner and/or the person
utilizing the oil and grease interceptor/trap system, must make
§ 257-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-76
1:289
§ 257-77. Liens.
Warrington Township, upon notice that an imminent public health or safety
hazard exists due to failure of a property owner and/or utilizer to maintain,
repair or replace an oil and grease interceptor/trap system, shall have the
authority to contract to have the work performed. The owner of record of
the property will be charged for the work performed and, if necessary, a lien
will be entered therefore in accordance with the law.
§ 257-78. Oil and grease disposal.
§ 257-79. Violations.
Should any person violate the provision of this article, Warrington Township
is authorized to pursue all legal remedies available to it in order to
effectuate compliance.
§ 257-80. Penalties.
In addition to any other remedies provided to the Township at law, any
person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine in an
amount not exceeding $300.
application to Warrington Township for approval to repair or replace
the malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by
Warrington Township, construction of the permitted repair or
replacement must commence. Within 60 days of the original notification
by Warrington Township, the construction must be completed unless
conditions mandate a longer period, in which case Warrington
Township may set an extended completion date.
C. In the event the modifications do not result in the elimination of the
malfunction of the existing oil and grease interceptor/trap system, the
person owning and/or making use of the interceptor system shall bear
responsibility for the continued malfunction of the system. The owner
and/or utilizer of said system shall be required to take such action as
necessary to eliminate the malfunction.
A. All grease originating within the sewer system intended to flow to the
Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority public sewer system shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by PADEP.
B. Pumpers/haulers of oil and grease operating within Warrington
Township's collection system shall operate in a manner consistent with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97
of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101-6018-1003) and all other applicable laws.
§ 257-76 WARRINGTON CODE § 257-80
1:290
Chapter 280
SOLID WASTE
§ 257-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-80
1:291

ARTICLE I
Filling of Land, Dumping or Burying of Waste
[Adopted 6-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-6 (Ch. 10, Part 3, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 280-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warrington.
WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, trash, debris or other discarded substances
and materials, including wood, plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks,
block, unsegregated concrete and dredging waste.
§ 280-2. Prohibitions.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property or portion of property
within the Township for the filling of land, dumping or burying of any waste,
whether generated within the Township or elsewhere. This prohibition shall
not apply to waste which, pursuant to applicable laws and regulations of
the United States of America or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, is of such
a nature that it may lawfully be used as fill, dumped or buried; provided,
however, that such filling, dumping or burying is in accordance with the
applicable laws and regulations.
§ 280-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 280-4. Other remedies.
In addition to the remedies set forth in this article, any continued violation
of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by proceedings
against the violator by appropriate equitable action in the Court of Common
Pleas.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-4
1:293

ARTICLE II
Collection and Transportation of Waste
[Adopted 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09 (Ch. 20, Part 1, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 280-5. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Warrington Township
Waste Collection and Transportation Ordinance."
§ 280-6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning. For the purpose of this article, the singular shall include
the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
ACT 90 — The Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of 2002 (P.L.
596, No. 90, June 29, 2002).37
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380,
No. 97, July 7, 1980).38
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).39
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable
materials.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or non-processing business, including, but not limited to,
stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
COUNTY — The County of Bucks, Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid
waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted
into the air or is discharged to the waters of this commonwealth. Disposal
facilities include, but are not limited to, municipal waste landfills and
construction/demolition waste landfills as defined by Act 101, Act 97, and/
or PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa. Code, Chapter 271).[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to,
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
37.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 280-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-6
1:295
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — A person who
has written authorization from the PADEP under Act 90 to collect, haul,
transport and dispose of municipal waste.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air-pollution control
facility. The term does not include any source-separated recyclable
materials.
MUNICIPALITY — Any of the 54 minor civil divisions in Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency, or any other
legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty or any
combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities
include but are not limited to transfer facilities, recycling facilities,
composting facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than as
fuel for the generation of energy.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a
processing or disposal facility.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials, including
leaf waste, that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin or
generation for the purpose of recycling.
§ 280-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-6
1:296
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any
time after generation.
§ 280-7. Prohibited activities.
§ 280-8. Standards for collection and transportation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal
waste from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment within Warrington Township without first
securing written authorization from the PADEP in accordance with the
provisions of Act 90.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect and/or transport
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any
sources within Warrington Township in a manner not in accordance
with the provisions of this article, any applicable municipal ordinance,
the Revised County Plan, Act 90, Act 101, the minimum standards and
requirements established in (25 Pa. Code) Chapter 285 of the PADEP
Municipal Waste Management Regulations, any applicable Bucks
County Department of Health regulations, and/or any other federal,
state, or local regulations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are
stored or placed for subsequent collection within Warrington Township
without prior approval from the municipality.
A. All collectors or waste haulers operating within the Warrington
Township must comply with the following minimum standards and
regulations:
(1) All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of
municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials
must comply with the applicable requirements of Act 90, Act 97,
Act 101, and PADEP regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
Act 101, including the Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 285, Subchapter
B, regulations for the collection and transportation of municipal
waste.
(2) All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall be operated and maintained in
a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a hazard to
public health, safety and welfare.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying putrescent municipal waste shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
§ 280-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-8
1:297
§ 280-9. Licensing and registration requirements.
(4) All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste
and/or source-separated recyclable materials shall be capable of
being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
(5) All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall bear signs identifying the
name and business address of the person or municipality which
owns the vehicle and the specific type of material transported by
the vehicle. All such signs shall have lettering at least six inches in
height as required by Act 101.
(6) All collection vehicles and equipment used by collectors or waste
haulers shall be subject to inspection by Warrington Township or its
authorized agents at any reasonable hour without prior
notification.
B. Place of collection.
(1) Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be placed at
ground level, and be made readily accessible to the collector.
(2) Notwithstanding provisions of this article, householders,
commercial establishments, or other persons may, by contract with
collectors, be permitted to place containers at agreed places upon
their premises.
C. Frequency of collections.
(1) Collection days, schedule and time. The authorized collector shall
collect municipal waste, source-separated recycled material and
leaf waste as defined herein, as follows:
(a) Holidays. Collection shall not be made on the following
holidays: January 1, New Year's Day; the last Monday of May,
Memorial Day; July 4, Independence Day; the first Monday of
September, Labor Day; the fourth Thursday of November,
Thanksgiving Day; and December 25, Christmas Day.
(b) Hours. Collections shall be made between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(2) Cleanup and special collections. Authorized collectors shall
cooperate with special cleanup drives or weeks as may be
promulgated by the Township, which shall not exceed three in
number in any one year. At a minimum, collectors shall schedule a
special collection on the first Saturday of November, December and
May for the collection of leaves and yard waste, or such other day
as the Board of Supervisors may designate. See § 280-24.
A. No person shall collect or remove any municipal waste from within
Warrington Township without first obtaining written authorization from
§ 280-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-9
1:298
PADEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 9040 and providing a
copy of such written authorization to Warrington Township. This section
shall not apply to private individuals (e.g., homeowners) who wish
to transport their own household waste to PADEP-approved facilities
or recyclables to appropriate recycling centers, nor to farmers,
landscapers or nurserymen who collect, remove, haul or otherwise
transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with their
respective business activities.
B. For a collector or waste hauler to collect and transport municipal waste
within Warrington Township, a collector or waste hauler shall submit to
Warrington Township a copy of its state-issued written authorization,
and a copy of its Municipal and Residual Waste Transporter
Authorization Application (DEP form 2500 - PM-BWM0015), along with
any of the following information that may be deemed appropriate by the
municipality:
(1) A list of collection vehicles covered under the written authorization
including, as a minimum, the following information for each
vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle
license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification numbers), date and location of most recent vehicle
inspection, and hauling capacity of the vehicle.
(2) The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.
(3) Certificate(s) of insurance evidencing that the waste hauler or
collector has valid liability, automobile and workers' compensation
insurance in the minimum amounts established and required by
separate resolution of the governing body of the municipality.
(4) If they are hauling or collecting source-separated recyclable
materials in the municipality, identify the materials being hauled or
collected and provide the following information for each vehicle:
identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license
number, vehicle registration number, or company identification
numbers) date and location of most recent vehicle inspection, and
hauling capacity of the vehicle.
C. Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and
requirements of this article or is in violation of the provisions of this
article may not lawfully collect municipal waste or source-separated
material in Warrington Township.
D. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall meet the
requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal
Waste Management Plan, and all PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 285).
40.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 280-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-10
1:299
§ 280-10. Reporting requirements.
§ 280-11. Duty of owners and occupiers of property not to
accumulate waste.
A. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers and collectors and
haulers of source-separated recyclable materials operating within
Warrington Township shall participate in the Bucks County Municipal
Recycling Documentation Program. The program will provide a system
for documenting the origin of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable material by municipality and the ultimate disposal point of
said waste and receivables. Each licensed collector and licensed waste
hauler and collectors and haulers of source-separated recyclable
materials operating in Warrington Township shall prepare and submit
an annual report to the municipality on the official Collectors and
Haulers Recyclables Documentation Reporting Form.
B. The report shall be submitted by the PADEP-licensed collector or -
licensed waste hauler and collectors and haulers of source-separated
recyclable materials to Warrington Township by January 31 of each year
and include all of the required information pertaining to the preceding
calendar year.
C. All annual reports submitted to the municipality from licensed
collectors and licensed waste haulers and collectors and haulers of
source-separated recyclable materials shall be combined into a single
report and submitted by the municipality on the official Municipal
Recyclables Documentation Reporting Form to the County by February
28 of the year following the reporting period.
A. No person shall permit any waste to accumulate for a period of longer
than seven days upon property in the Township of Warrington owned or
occupied by said person, provided that owners and occupiers of
residential property are hereby required to comply with the provisions
of this article relative to making accumulated waste available for
collection as scheduled under the terms hereof; however, the provisions
of this subsection are not applicable to owners of farm property.
B. All waste accumulated on any property in the Township of Warrington
shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by an authorized
residential or nonresidential collector in accordance with the provisions
of this article; except that such waste may be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by property owners from their own property for the
intended purpose of depositing such waste in recycling depositories,
provided that they comply with the provisions of this article pertaining
to waste containers and vehicles, and provided that they remove their
waste to a DEP-approved site.
C. Waste collected in any residential dwelling in the Township of
Warrington shall be collected only by an authorized residential waste
hauler for which the owner and/or occupier thereof shall be responsible
§ 280-10 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-11
1:300
§ 280-12. Disposal of waste.
§ 280-13. Waste practices.
for the payment of the fee and payment thereof shall be a matter of
private agreement between the owner and the collector thereof; unless
such collection service is regulated administratively by the Township
of Warrington in which the collection has been performed except as
indicated hereinabove in Subsection B. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. All trade waste and other waste accumulated on nonresidential
properties shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by authorized
nonresidential collector upon the direction of the owner or occupier
thereof, the fee or payment therefor to be a matter of private agreement
between the owners or occupiers and the collector thereof; however,
owners of nonresidential properties may collect, convey and dispose of
privately generated waste by their own containers and/or trucks,
providing they comply with the provisions of this article applicable
thereto.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and dispose of any waste
within the Township of Warrington, except as provided in this article.
F. Accumulation of waste prohibited. Waste containers shall not be placed
at the curb or at any other place for the purpose of collection sooner
than the day before the scheduled collection day.
A. It shall be unlawful to dump, destroy or otherwise dispose of waste
within the jurisdictional limits of the Township of Warrington except at
a PADEP-approved waste disposal site.
B. All disposal regulations at the designated disposal site shall be adhered
to.
A. Preparation of waste.
(1) All waste shall be drained free of liquids before disposal.
(2) Waste shall be placed in suitable containers.
B. Waste containers.
(1) Waste containers shall be NSF approved and made of durable,
watertight, rust-resistant material having close-fitting lids and
handles to facilitate collection.
(2) It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of residue from
liquids, solids or a combination of such materials on the bottoms or
sides of containers, it being the intention of this provision that the
interiors or containers shall be kept clean by thorough rinsing and
draining as often as necessary.
§ 280-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-13
1:301
§ 280-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District
Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this
section, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by any provision of this
article, or the failure to do any act or thing as to which any provision of this
article creates any affirmative duty, shall constitute a violation of this article
punishable as herein stated. Licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers
who shall violate any provision of this article may be reported to the PADEP
by Warrington Township and may be subject to the revocation of the state
authorization to transport municipal waste, as described in Act 90.41
(3) The Township of Warrington specifically reserves the right to
modify and to specifically provide for some other receptacle for the
handling of garbage or other waste which the Board of Supervisors
may at some future time deem to be acceptable, appropriate and
beneficial for handling of said waste material.
41.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 280-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-14
1:302
ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09 (Ch. 20, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 280-15. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Warrington Township Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 280-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to,
stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
CORRUGATED — Cardboard containers, including used corrugated
containers used to ship merchandise and other papers such as grocery bags.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded from this definition and from recycling are
noncontainer glass, plate glass, porcelain, and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Paper composed primarily of bleached
(white) papers that have gone through a printing operation of some type,
including, but not limited to, computer printout paper and copier paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility engaged in
the commercial production and sale of goods and services, including, but
not limited to, manufacturing, assembly and processing.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MIXED PAPER — All types of paper discarded from offices and homes, such
as colored papers, envelopes, magazines and catalogs.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — All garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste"
in the Solid Waste Management Act42 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 280-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-16
1:303
air-pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded from recycling are newspapers which have been soiled.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency, or other legal
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any
combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic containers. Due to the large
variety of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may stipulate specific
types of plastic which shall be recycled or be excluded from recycling.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS/RECYCLABLES — Those materials specified by
Warrington Township to be recycled. The list of materials shall be specified
in the recycling regulations resulting from this article and may be revised,
from time to time, as deemed necessary by Warrington Township.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling from which a
waste hauler collects municipal waste.
STEEL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom, including tin-plated and bimetal cans.
§ 280-17. Recycling objectives.
There is hereby established a policy for the mandatory separation of
recyclable materials and leaf waste from municipal waste by all persons
within the Township of Warrington.
§ 280-18. Separation of recyclables and placement for disposal.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb or other designated
collection point separate from municipal waste. Failure to properly separate
recyclable materials and leaf waste from municipal waste may result in the
noncollection of municipal waste. Failure to properly separate recyclable
materials may result in the noncollection of recyclable materials.
§ 280-19. Collection by unauthorized person(s).
It shall be a violation of this article for any person(s), unauthorized by
Warrington Township, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable material. Each such violation hereof shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 280-16 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-20
1:304
§ 280-20. Enforcement and administration.
The Township Manager or his authorized representative is authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this article by such legal means as are
available, including, but not limited to, the filing of citations, the service of
cease-and-desist orders, the filing of actions at law, and the like. The same
is hereby authorized and directed to develop and submit to the Board of
Supervisors for approval such reasonable regulations as to manner, days
and times for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with the
terms hereof and any other matters required to implement this article. The
Township may change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules
and regulations at any time. All licensed haulers are authorized to enforce
the provisions of § 280-18 of this article concerning the improper separation
of recyclable materials by means of noncollection of said materials. In
addition, all licensed haulers are authorized to tag improperly separated
materials and to report such improper separation to the Township.
§ 280-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 280-22. Alternative collection of recyclable material.
Any persons may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations authorized by Warrington Township in its recycling
regulations. These materials must either be delivered to the individual's or
organization's site, or they may be placed at curbside or other designated
collection point for collection by said individual or organization on days not
established as recyclable material collection days by Warrington Township.
Nothing contained within this article is designed to impede any existing
recycling program assuming said program is consistent with applicable law
and in conformance with the terms and conditions of this article.
§ 280-23. Mandatory recycling program.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
B. No enforcement of §§ 280-17 and 280-18 of this article shall be made for
three months from the effective date of regulations authorized to be
promulgated hereunder.
A. Residential collection. The collection of recyclables (glass containers,
steel containers, aluminum cans, plastic containers, and newsprint)
§ 280-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-23
1:305
from residences in Warrington Township shall be in accordance with
the following:
(1) Recyclables to be separated:
(a) Glass containers. Bottles and jars restricted to clear, green or
brown glass. No other types of glass or ceramics are recyclable
in the program.
(b) Steel containers and aluminum cans. Aluminum cans and steel
containers restricted to beverage and food containers. No
other type of can is recyclable in this program.
(c) Plastic containers. HDPE and PET, Nos. 1 and 2 plastic
containers only. No other types of plastics are recyclable in this
program.
(d) Newsprint. Newsprint not including magazines.
(2) Recycling containers.
(a) Reusable containers shall be supplied by haulers licensed to
collect municipal waste and recyclables in Warrington
Township.
(b) Cardboard boxes shall not be used for recycling.
(3) Packaging recyclables for collection. Glass containers, aluminum
cans, steel containers and plastic containers, as described under
Subsection A(1)(a), shall be commingled (or mixed) in the recycling
container and placed at curbside or other designated collection
point separate from municipal waste for pickup on the recycling
collection service's designated collection day. Newsprint shall be
stacked 12 inches high, tied with twine or placed in double paper
bags (no plastic bags).
(4) Other requirements.
(a) All glass containers, aluminum cans, steel containers and
plastic containers shall be clean; contents, caps and covers
removed; labels may remain.43
(b) Recyclables shall be placed at curbside or other designated
collection point at ground level. They shall not be placed within
the street itself.
(c) Recyclables, as defined herein, may not be included in regular
trash and rubbish disposal under penalty of law.
43.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1D(2), regarding stacking of newsprint, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 280-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-23
1:306
(d) Only collectors licensed in Warrington Township may collect
recyclables; all others are subject to penalty of law.
(e) Collection routes for recyclables and days for collection shall
be as determined by the recycling collection service. Collection
of recyclables shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
(f) Licensed collectors have the right to refuse collection of
recyclables if the material does not conform to these
regulations. Collectors must provide a notification detailing the
reason recyclables were not collected.
(g) Recyclables shall be collected by licensed collectors a
minimum of twice monthly.
(h) Licensed collectors may provide collection services for
recyclables other than those defined herein (e.g., other types of
plastics, corrugated cardboard, etc.).
(i) Any nonprofit organization may collect recyclable materials
only after obtaining a solicitation permit from Warrington
Township. Such collection by nonprofit organizations shall
occur on Saturdays or Sundays only. Any nonprofit
organization which collects recyclable materials shall report to
the Township the total weight by type of recyclable material of
the recyclable material collected.
B. Commercial, municipal and institutional collection. The collection of
recyclable materials from commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments shall be by the establishment-designated collection
service in accordance with the following:
(1) Recyclables to be separated:
(a) High-grade office paper.
(b) Aluminum, cans.
(c) Corrugated paper.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall
separate and store all recyclable material until collection.
(b) All other provisions of this article shall apply to commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments except where a
commercial, municipal or institutional establishment hauls its
own recyclables. If a commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment hauls its own recyclables, the establishment
shall annually provide written documentation to the Township
of Warrington, on a form to be provided by the Township, of the
§ 280-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-23
1:307
total weight, in pounds, of recyclable materials, by type of
recyclable material, recycled. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Multifamily dwelling units' collection. The owner, landlord or an agent
of an owner or landlord of multifamily dwelling units of four or more
units shall establish a collection system for recyclables at each property
and arrange for collection of materials by a designated recycling
collection service in accordance with the following:
(1) Recyclables to be separated:
(a) Glass containers. Bottles and jars restricted to clear, green or
brown glass. No other types of glass or ceramics are recyclable
in the program.
(b) Steel containers and aluminum cans. Aluminum cans and steel
containers restricted to beverage and food containers. No
other type of can is recyclable in this program.
(c) Plastic containers. HDPE and PET, Nos. 1 and 2 plastic
containers only. No other types of plastic are recyclable in this
program.
(d) Newsprint. Newsprint not including magazines.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) The collection system established by owners, landlords or
agents of owners or landlords must include suitable containers
for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations
for the containers and written instructions to the occupants
concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords and agents of owners and landlords who
comply with this section shall not be liable for the
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
(b) All other provisions of this article shall apply to multifamily
dwelling units.
D. Community activities collection. The collection of recyclable materials
at community activities (attended by 200 or more persons) shall be by
the sponsor's designated collection service in accordance with the
following:
(1) Recyclables to be separated:
(a) High-grade office paper.
(b) Corrugated paper.
(c) Aluminum cans.
(d) Glass containers (clear, brown and green).
§ 280-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-23
1:308
§ 280-24. Mandatory separation of leaf waste.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of sponsors of all community
activities to inform all employees as well as users (patrons) of
the recycling program.
(b) Sponsors of all community activities shall provide for
containers for recyclable materials. The containers shall be
clearly marked with both the recycling symbol and the type of
material to be deposited in the container.
(c) All other provisions of this article shall apply to community
activities.
E. Delivery of recyclable materials to landfills or incinerators.
(1) All recyclable materials must be delivered by a licensed collector to
a recycling center or market for the purpose of recycling.
(2) It is unlawful for any licensed collector of recyclable materials to
deliver such materials to a landfill or incinerator for the purpose of
disposal.44
A. Leaf waste shall mean leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings, including holiday trees, and similar material, but not
including grass clippings.
B. All persons shall separate leaf waste from all other waste for collection
by their private waste hauler on the first Saturday of November,
December and May, or such other day as the Board of Supervisors may
designate. On other months, leaf waste may be dropped off on the first
full week of the month at a Township site(s) to be determined. Grass
clippings may be disposed with other trash.
C. Leaf waste shall be placed in kraft (brown paper) bags or other
container acceptable to the hauler.
D. Haulers shall deliver the leaf waste to facilities approved by the PADEP
to process such waste.
E. Penalties for violation. Any violation of this section, following conviction
in a summary proceeding, shall be punishable by the fines set forth in
§ 280-21 of this article.
44.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 6, Penalties for violation, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 280-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-25
1:309
§ 280-25. Injunctive powers.
The Warrington Township may petition the Bucks County Court of Common
Pleas for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce
any of the provisions of this article.
§ 280-25 WARRINGTON CODE § 280-25
1:310
Chapter 288
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 181.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 257.
Subdivision and land management — See Ch.
305.
Water — See Ch. 353.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 280-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-25
1:311

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 288-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Neshaminy Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Ordinance" (a.k.a. "Neshaminy/Little
Neshaminy Stormwater Management Ordinance").
§ 288-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development and redevelopment throughout a watershed
increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and
manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare
and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 288-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-3
1:313
§ 288-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the Neshaminy Creek watershed by maintaining the natural
hydrologic regime and by minimizing the harms and maximizing the
benefits described in § 288-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed
to:
§ 288-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff, surface water and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority
of:
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flows.
C. Minimize impervious surfaces.
D. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
F. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
G. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and
to otherwise protect water resources.
H. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
I. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
J. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
K. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer System (MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
L. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are
implemented in the municipality.
A. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.45
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 288-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-4
1:314
§ 288-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
§ 288-6. Exemptions.
B. The Second Class Township Code (Act 69 of 1933, P.L. 103; 53 P.S.
§ 65101, as amended).
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth-disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. Regulated activities include but are not limited to:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivisions.
(3) Prohibited or polluted discharges.
(4) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(5) Construction or reconstruction of or addition of new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.),
except for reconstruction of roads where there is no increase in
impervious surface.
(6) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(7) Redevelopment.
(8) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
(9) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) or appurtenances thereto.
A. Regulated activities that create impervious surfaces smaller than or
equal to 1,000 square feet do not have to apply the volume control
requirements of this chapter. Regulated activities of this size are
exempt from the peak rate control requirements and the SWM site plan
preparation located in Article IV. If the activity is found to be a
significant contributor of pollution to the waters of this commonwealth,
the municipality may enforce any of the above requirements.
[Amended 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-08]
B. Regulated activities that create impervious surfaces between 1,001
square feet up to and including 5,000 square feet are exempt only from
the peak rate control requirements of this chapter.
(Refer to Appendix I, which contains the small project SWM site plan for
small, regulated activities creating impervious surface between 1,000
square feet up to and including 5,000 square feet.46 The small project
46.Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-6
1:315
SWM site plan provides small regulated activities with the opportunity
to submit a SWM site plan without having to hire professional services.)
Table 106.1
Impervious Surface Exemption Thresholds for the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed [Amended 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-08]
Proposed Impervious Surface
Ordinance
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
0 to 1,000
square
feet
1,001 to
5,000
square feet
5,000 +
square feet
Article IV,
SWM Site Plan
Requirements
All
development
Exempt Not exempt
(except
residential
activity)
Not exempt
§ 288-12,
Volume control
requirements
All
development
Not
applicable
Not exempt Not exempt
§ 288-13, Peak
rate control
requirements
All
development
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Erosion and
sediment
pollution
control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pa.
Code and any other applicable state, county, and
municipal codes. PADEP requires an engineered postconstruction
SWM plan with projects proposing earth
disturbance greater than one acre.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the peak rate control requirements
and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided
that the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25
Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the peak
rate control requirements and SWM site plan preparation requirements
of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed according to
the requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
E. Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Township is
exempt.
F. The use of land for landscaping or gardening for home consumption is
exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
G. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 288-10D through L.
H. Additional exemption criteria.
§ 288-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-6
1:316
§ 288-7. Compatibility with other ordinance or legal requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) Drainage problems. Where drainage problems are documented or
known to exist downstream of or are expected from the proposed
activity, the municipality may deny exemptions.
(3) Exemptions are limited to specific portions of this chapter.
(4) HQ and EV streams. The municipality may deny exemptions in
high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value (EV) waters and source
water protection areas (SWPAs).
§ 288-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-7
1:317

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 288-8. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 288-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
ALLUVIAL SOIL —
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
Deposits of unconsolidated materials, such as gravel, sand, clay, and
various mixtures of these, deposited by running water. The following
soils in Warrington Township are alluvial:
(1) Bowmansville-Knauers silt loam (Bo).
(2) Hatboro silt loam (Ha).
A.
§ 288-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:319
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious as the result of changing the land cover, including the water,
vegetation and bare soil.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activity defined in § 288-5 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the qualified professional at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater;
the sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from
water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human
activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this chapter, "nonstructural
BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include but are not limited to a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
(3) Rowland silt loam (Ro).
Soils are described and delineated in the most recent version of the
Bucks County Soil Survey in effect, as published electronically by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from time to
time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:320
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream (see "top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include but shall not be limited to natural and man-made
watercourses, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes that convey
continuously or periodically flowing water.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Bucks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure, with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
CURVE NUMBER — The value used in the Soil Cover Complex Method. It
is a measure of the percentage of precipitation which is expected to run off
from the watershed and is a function of the soil, vegetative cover, and tillage
method.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP).
DESIGNEE — An agent of Bucks County, the Bucks County Conservation
District, and/or an agent of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect or registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event, measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:321
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in § 288-5 is planned, conducted, or maintained.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix F, Disconnected Impervious Area.47
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth-disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility,
designed to transport stormwater runoff, that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the SWM
site plan has been approved.
EARTH-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
that disturbs the surface of land, including but not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber-harvesting activities, road-
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or
other point of interest.
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water, such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second. See also "peak
discharge."
B.
47.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:322
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass a peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands, or
diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan
identifying BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. For
agricultural plowing or tilling activities, the erosion and sediment control
plan is that portion of a conservation plan identifying BMPs to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — An undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the groundwater.
EXISTING RESOURCES AND SITE ANALYSIS MAP — A base map which
identifies fundamental environmental site information, including
floodplains, wetlands, topography, vegetative site features, natural areas,
prime agricultural land and areas supportive of endangered species.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers and other waters of the
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or as delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest land. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:323
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GOVERNING BODY — Elected municipal officials of municipalities (e.g.,
Township Supervisors).
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This
model was used to model the Neshaminy Creek watershed during the Act
167 Plan development and was the basis for the standards and criteria of
this chapter.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having a quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activity generates highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater. Typical pollutant loadings in stormwater may
be found in Chapter 8, Section 6, of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006). More information concerning
hotspots may be found in § 288-15A of this chapter.
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils classified as hydric in map unit descriptions located
in the most recent version of the Bucks County Soil Survey, as electronically
published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from
time to time.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains the
quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff-potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of excavation.
B.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:324
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include but are not limited to streets,
sidewalks, pavement roofs or driveway areas. Any surface areas designed
to be pavers, gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious
surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that
remain undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban
or densely developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing
infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer or other
public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INITIAL ABSTRACTION (IA) — The value used to calculate the volume or
peak rate of runoff in the Soil Cover Complex Method. It represents the
depth of rain retained on vegetation plus the depth of rain stored on the soil
surface plus the depth of rain infiltrated prior to the start of runoff.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:325
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit, together with the required open spaces.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will
minimize proposed conditions' runoff rates and volumes, which will
minimize needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in the Neshaminy Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — (See "hydrologic regime.")
NONPOINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including a farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
B.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:326
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — The Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service).
OUTFALL — "Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
model developed at the Pennsylvania State University.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream which contains water at all times except
during extreme drought.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that allows the infiltration of water into
the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Warrington
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit,
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — The period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
functioning and all proposed improvements in the approved land
development plan are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — (See "existing conditions.")
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before
they enter the system but not necessarily designed to meet the volume
requirements of § 288-12.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:327
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer reviews the contractor's as-built drawings against his/her own
records for completeness and then either turns these over to the client or
transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the
client's permanent records. Record drawings are not the same as record
plans submitted for recording with the county in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).48
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to
be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not considered
redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width, including
shoulders, is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth-disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92; 25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 102; or the Clean Streams Law.49
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions' peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet but will include an
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:328
emergency spillway or similar device. The retention basin must infiltrate
stored water in four days or less.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The probability an event will occur in any given year,
typically displayed as a whole number, e.g., twenty-five-year event, and
represents the inverse of the frequency of that event. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall gives the probability 1/25, or 4%, for
which that size storm will occur in any given year.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth-disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; Chapter 305
of the Code.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water. More information on seepage
pits may be found in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, December 2006,
Chapter 6, Section 4.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:329
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)."
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREA (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated in Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, as exceptional-value (EV) or highquality
(HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.50
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Abbreviated as "BMPs" or "SWM BMPs" throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include but are not limited to detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan, known as the
"Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan," for
managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff
quality and quantity and that would impact the Neshaminy Creek
watershed, adopted by Bucks and Montgomery Counties as required by the
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER SWM SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant or
his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
particular site of interest according to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:330
STREAM — Any stream, channel, or stream protection area for conveyance
of surface water, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent
flow. Streams shall be classified as follows:
STREAM BANK EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting
of channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.")
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess of
100 feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development, provided
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
TYPE I — Area along a water-conveyance facility supported by
stormwater runoff from a watershed area of 100 acres or more. The
width of each stream shall be determined by the more-extensive limits
of the following:
Floodplain: the 100-year flood line and/or elevations as delineated
in the Flood Insurance Study for Warrington Township, as prepared
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development/Federal Insurance Administration.
(1)
(2) Alluvial soils.
Calculated flood limit: the line and/or elevation as established by
analysis of the drainage areas using approved USDA Soil
Conservation Service or United States Army Corps of Engineers
methods for a 100-year-frequency storm event.
(3)
A.
TYPE II — A water-conveyance facility supported by stormwater runoff
from a watershed area of less than 100 acres. The width of each stream
shall be determined by the more-extensive limits of the following:
(1) Alluvial soils.
Calculated flood limit: the line and/or elevation as established by
analysis of the drainage area using approved USDA Soil
Conservation Service or United States Army Corps of Engineers
methods for a 100-year-frequency storm event.
(2)
B.
§ 288-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:331
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system to be used for a given development site, the contents of which are
established in § 288-17.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — The highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
VEGETATED SWALE — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface
water.
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET BASIN — A pond for urban runoff management that is designed to
detain urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas. Wetland areas
demonstrate hydric characteristics of soils, vegetation, and/or water table
as specified by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 288-9 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-9
1:332
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 288-10. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the Neshaminy Creek
watershed that do not fall under the exemption criteria shown § 288-6
shall submit a stormwater management (SWM) site plan consistent with
the Neshaminy Creek Watershed SWM Plan to the municipality for
review. The SWM criteria of this chapter shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required. No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
Article IV, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP), approve measures for meeting the
state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not
conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean Streams
Law.
D. For all regulated earth-disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earthdisturbance
activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various
BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§ 288-12 of this chapter is required.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-10
1:333
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces (i.e., disconnected impervious
areas, DIAs) by directing runoff to pervious areas wherever
possible. See Appendix F for detail on DIAs.51
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees,
reducing area of impervious surface, cluster development, and
protecting open space) described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006), as
amended from time to time. See Appendix E for a summary
description.52
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize the use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize the risk of adverse effects.
K. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 hours and
not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
L. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
51.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Township offices.
52.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-10 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-10
1:334
§ 288-11. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 288-12. Volume control.
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov./hdsc/
pfds/.
M. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,53 and the Storm
Water Management Act.54
N. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (Pennsylvania BMP
Manual).
A. Volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect stream
channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and contribute to
water quality improvements. Stormwater runoff volume control
methods are based on the net change in runoff volume for the two-year
storm event.
B. Volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method
in Subsection B(1) or the Simplified Method in Subsection B(2) below.
For regulated activities equal to or less than one acre, this chapter
establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the
applicant may select either methodology on the basis of economic
considerations, the intrinsic limitations of the procedures associated
with each methodology, and other factors. All regulated activities
greater than one acre must use the design storm method.
(1) Design Storm Method (any regulated activity). This method
requires detailed modeling based on site conditions. For modeling
assumptions, refer to § 288-14A.
(a) Post-development total runoff should not be increased from
predevelopment total runoff for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
(b) The following applies in order to estimate the increased
volume of runoff for the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation event:
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-12
1:335
[1] To calculate the runoff volume (cubic feet) for existing site
conditions (predevelopment) and for the proposed
developed site conditions (post-development), it is
recommended to use the Soil Cover Complex Method as
shown below. Table B-3 in Appendix B is available to guide
a qualified professional and/or an applicant to calculate
the stormwater runoff volume.55 The calculated volume
shall be either reused, evapotranspired, or infiltrated
through structural or nonstructural means.
[2] Soil cover complex method:
Step 1: Runoff (inches) = Q = (P - 0.2S)2/(P + 0.8S)
Where:
P = 2-year rainfall (in inches).
S = (1,000/CN) – 10, the potential maximum
retention (including initial abstraction, Ia).
Step 2: Runoff Volume (cubic feet) = Q (inches) x Area
(square feet) x (1 foot/12 inches)
Where:
Q = Runoff (in inches).
Area = SWM area (in square feet).
(2) Simplified Method (regulated activities less than or equal to one
acre).
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture the runoff volume from at
least the first two inches of runoff from all new impervious
surfaces.
Volume (cubic feet) = (2 inches runoff) * (1 foot/12 inches) *
Impervious Surface (square feet)
(b) At least the first inch of runoff volume from the new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of the
commonwealth. The calculated volume shall be either reused,
evapotranspired or infiltrated through structural or
nonstructural means.
Volume (cubic feet) = (1 inch runoff) * (1 foot/12 inches) *
Impervious Surface (square feet)
(c) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate the
first half-inch of the permanently removed runoff.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-12
1:336
(d) No more than one inch of runoff volume from impervious
surfaces shall be released from the site. The release time must
be at least 24 hours but not more than 72 hours.
(3) Stormwater control measures. The applicant must demonstrate
how the required volume is controlled through stormwater best
management practices (BMPs), which shall provide the means
necessary to capture, reuse, evaporate, transpire or infiltrate the
total runoff volume.
(a) If natural resources exist on the site, the applicant who is
required to submit an SWM site plan shall determine the total
acreage of protected area where no disturbance is proposed.
The acreage of the protected area should be subtracted from
the total site area and not included in the stormwater
management site area acreage used in determining the volume
controls.
Stormwater Management Site Area = [Total Site Area (for
both pre- and post-development conditions) - Protected Area]
Natural resource areas shall be calculated using the methods
set forth in § § 370-13 and 370-14 in Chapter 370, Zoning.
For additional reference, see Chapter 5, Section 5.4.1, of the
Pennsylvania BMP Manual.
(b) Calculate the volume controls provided through nonstructural
BMPs. Table B-5 in Appendix B is recommended as guidance.56
(c) Volume controls provided through nonstructural BMPs should
be subtracted from the required volume to determine the
necessary structural BMPs.
Required Volume
Control (cubic
feet)
-
Nonstructural
Volume Control
(cubic feet)
=
Structural
Volume Control
(cubic feet)
(d) Calculate the volume controls provided through structural
BMPs. Table B-6 in Appendix B57 is recommended as guidance.
See the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, Chapter 6, for a
description of the BMPs.
(e) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed
areas shall be selected based on the suitability of soils and site
conditions (see Table B-6 in Appendix B58 for a list of
infiltration BMPs). Infiltration BMPs shall be constructed on
soils that have the following characteristics:
56.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-12
1:337
[1] A minimum soil depth of 24 inches between the bottom of
the infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or seasonally
high water table.
[2] An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and dewater completely as determined by
field tests. A minimum of 0.2 inch per hour (in/hr) should
be utilized; and for acceptable rates a safety factor of 50%
should be applied for design purposes (e.g., for soil which
measured 0.4 in/hr, the BMP design should use 0.2 in/hr to
ensure safe infiltration rates after construction).
[3] All open-air infiltration facilities shall be designed to
completely infiltrate runoff volume within three days (72
hours) from the start of the design storm.
(f) Soils. A soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. All regulated
activities are required to perform a detailed soils evaluation by
a qualified design professional which, at a minimum, addresses
soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The
general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
[1] Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas
of suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where
development on fill material is under consideration,
conduct geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability;
infiltration may not be ruled out without conducting these
tests.
[2] Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate
hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not
recommended for design purposes.
[3] Design the infiltration structure based on field-determined
capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface
and based on the safety factor of 50%.
[4] If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be
demonstrated to the municipality that the soils are
conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
[5] An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins
where the possibility of groundwater contamination exists.
A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by
the municipality.
§ 288-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-13
1:338
§ 288-13. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
Peak rate controls for large storms, up to the 100-year event, are essential
in order to protect against immediate downstream erosion and flooding.
The following peak rate controls have been determined through hydrologic
modeling of the Neshaminy Creek watershed.
A. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Neshaminy
Creek watershed for the two-, five-, ten-, fifty-, and 100-year design
storms are shown in Table 124.1. Development sites located in each of
the management districts must control proposed development
conditions' runoff rates to existing conditions' runoff rates for the
design storms in accordance with Table 124.1.
Table 124.1
Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by Stormwater
Management District in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
(includes Little Neshaminy Creek)
District
Design Storm Post-
Development
(Proposed Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment
(Existing Conditions)
A 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
1-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
B 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
1-year
2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
§ 288-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-13
1:339
Table 124.1
Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by Stormwater
Management District in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
(includes Little Neshaminy Creek)
District
Design Storm Post-
Development
(Proposed Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment
(Existing Conditions)
C 2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
2-year
5-year
10-year
25-year
50-year
100-year
B. General. Proposed conditions' rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map (Appendix D)59 and in this section
of this chapter.
C. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on official maps and are available for inspection at
the municipal office and county planning offices. A copy of the map is
included in Appendix D. The exact location of the stormwater
management district boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part
of the SWM site plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the
management district criteria for the district in which the discharge is
located.
E. Off-site areas. When calculating the allowable peak runoff rates,
developers do not have to account for runoff draining into the subject
development site from an off-site area. On-site drainage facilities shall
be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development
site.
59.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-13
1:340
§ 288-14. Calculation methodology.
F. Site areas. The stormwater management site area is the only area
subject to the management district criteria. Nonimpacted areas or
nonregulated activities bypassing the stormwater management
facilities would not be subject to the management district criteria.
G. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions as
determined by Warrington Township:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 124.1 and § 288-13A
through F; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
A. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used to determine the existing conditions' runoff volume and
flow rate shall be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." A site is classified as wooded if a continuous canopy
of trees exists over 1/4 acre.
(b) All nonforested pervious areas of the site (agriculture, bare
earth, lawn, and fallow ground) shall be considered as
"meadow in good condition," unless the natural ground cover
generates a lower curve number (CN) or rational "c" value (i.e.,
woods) as listed in Table B-4 or B-7 in Appendix B.60
(c) Twenty percent of all existing impervious area shall be
considered "meadow in good condition."
(2) For redevelopment sites, the ground cover used to determine the
existing conditions' runoff volume and flow rate for the developed
portion of the site shall be based upon actual land cover conditions.
If the developed site contains impervious surfaces, 20% of the
impervious surface area shall be considered "meadow in good
condition" in the model for existing conditions.
B. Stormwater runoff peak discharges from all development sites with a
drainage area equal to or greater than 200 acres shall be calculated
using a generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the
NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method. Table 125.1 summarizes acceptable
computation methods. The method selected by the design professional
60.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-14
1:341
shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The municipality, at its sole discretion,
may allow the use of the Rational Method (Q = CIA) to estimate peak
discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres.
Q = CIA
Where:
Q = Peak flow rate, in cubic feet per second (cfs).
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover.
I = Design rainfall intensity, in inches per hour.
A = Drainage area, in acres.
C. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return-period storms according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 rain data corresponding
to the Doylestown rain gage, seen in Table B-1 in Appendix B.61 The SCS
Type II rainfall curve from NOAA is found on Figure B-1 in Appendix B.
This data may also be directly retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14
website: hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/orb/pa_pfds.html. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours.
Table 125.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in TR-55
(this is the preferred method
for use in Warrington
Township)
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
61.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-14 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-14
1:342
Table 125.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres
if approved by the
municipality and/or Municipal
Engineer; all applicants must
consult with the Municipal
Engineer prior to utilizing this
method
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1. Timesof-
concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be based on Table
B-4 in Appendix B.
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be consistent with Table B-7 in Appendix
B.
G. Runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil will not have the same
runoff conditions as the site under existing conditions because of soil
compaction, even after topsoiling or seeding. The proposed conditions'
"CN" or "C" shall increase by 5% to better reflect proposed soil
conditions.
H. The Manning Equation is preferred for one-dimensional, graduallyvaried,
open channel flow. In other cases, appropriate, applicable
methods should be applied; however, early coordination with the
municipality is necessary.
§ 288-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-14
1:343
§ 288-15. Other requirements.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using the
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method of the
municipality.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve
the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation
technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the
volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
A. Hotspots.
(1) The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hotspot land use areas.
Examples of hotspots are listed in Appendix G.62
(2) Stormwater runoff from hotspot land uses shall be pretreated. In no
case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of
pretreatment is located in Appendix G.
B. West Nile guidance requirements. All wet basin designs shall
incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance
found in Appendix H.63
62.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Township offices.
63.Editor's Note: Appendix H is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-14 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-15
1:344
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 288-16. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any
building or occupancy permit, the commencement of any earth disturbance
or activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant or his/
her agent has received written approval of an SWM site plan from the
municipality and an approval of an adequate erosion and sediment (E&S)
control plan review from the municipality or County Conservation District.
§ 288-17. SWM site plan requirements.
A. The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project,
including calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer
to the associated computations and E&S control plan by title and date.
The cover sheet of the computations and E&S control plan shall refer to
the associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall
be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise,
legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall
not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant.
B. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) General:
(a) A general description of the project, including plan contents
described in Subsection B(2).
(b) A general description of proposed SWM techniques to be used
for SWM facilities.
(c) Complete hydrologic and hydraulic computations for all SWM
facilities.
(d) All reviews and letters of adequacy from the Conservation
District for the erosion and sedimentation plan as required by
Warrington Township, county or state regulations.
(e) A general description of proposed nonpoint-source pollution
controls.
(f) The SWM site plan application and associated fee for all
regulated activities not already paying fees by/under the
SALDO regulations (Appendix C-1).64
(g) The SWM site plan checklist (Appendix C-2).
64.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-17
1:345
(h) Appropriate sections from the Warrington Township Code of
Ordinances, as amended from time to time, shall be followed in
preparing the SWM site plan.
(2) Plans. SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) A determination of natural site conditions and stormwater
management needs. This shall include but not be limited to:
[1] Site features:
[a] The location of the project relative to highways,
municipal boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
[b] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities,
sanitary sewers, and water lines on site and to within
50 feet of property lines.
[c] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings.
[d] The total tract boundary and size, with distances
marked to the nearest hundredth of a foot and
bearings to the nearest second.
[e] Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including
drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and
swales. At a minimum this should include pre- and
post-drainage area maps, an overall post-construction
stormwater management plan, stormwater details
sheets, and landscape plans (if proposing bioretention
facilities, low-impact development, bioretention, or
vegetative basins).
[f] The locations and minimum setback distances of
existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and
water supply wells.
[g] The location of all erosion and sediment control
facilities.
[h] The location of proposed septic tank infiltration areas
and wells in cases where groundwater recharge
measures such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are
proposed.
[2] Natural site conditions:
[a] An existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including
but not limited to:
§ 288-17 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-17
1:346
[i] Steep slopes.
[ii] Ponds.
[iii] Lakes.
[iv] Streams.
[v] Wetlands.
[vi] Hydric soils.
[vii] Hydrologic Soil Groups A and B.
[viii] Vernal pools.
[ix] Stream buffers.
[x] Open channels.
[xi] Existing recharge areas.
[xii] Floodplains.
[b] The area of each of these sensitive areas shall be
calculated and should be consistent with the runoff
volume calculation in § 288-12B(3)(a).
[c] A detailed site evaluation for projects proposed in
areas of frequent flooding, karst topography, and
other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields and source water protection areas.
[d] Existing and proposed contour lines (two feet).
[e] The total extent of the drainage area upstream from
the site and all downgradient receiving channels,
swales and waters to which stormwater runoff or
drainage will be discharged.
[3] Stormwater runoff design computations and
documentation as specified in this chapter, or as otherwise
necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable
measures have been taken to meet the requirements of
this chapter, including the recommendations and general
requirements in § 288-10.
[4] The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and
aquatic features and on any existing stormwaterconveyance
system that may be affected by the project.
(c) The format of the plan shall include the following:
[1] The expected project time schedule.
§ 288-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-17
1:347
§ 288-18. Plan submission.
The municipality requires submission of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter.
[2] The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or
firm preparing the plan.
[3] The date of submission.
[4] A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more
than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall
be one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
[5] A North arrow.
[6] An access easement around all stormwater management
facilities is required that would provide ingress to and
egress from a public right-of-way. The size of the easement
shall be commensurate with the maintenance and access
requirements determined in the design of the BMP.
[7] A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond
the property boundary that would be affected by the
project.
[8] A note on the plan indicating the location and
responsibility for maintenance of stormwater management
facilities. All facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
[9] The following signature block for the design engineer: "I,
(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the SWM site plan meets all design standards
and criteria of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
[10] A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that
any revision to the approved SWM site plan must be
approved by the municipality and that a revised E&S plan
must be submitted to the Conservation District.
(d) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(e) The SWM site plan shall include an operations and
maintenance (O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical
stormwater management facilities, as well as schedules and
costs for O&M activities. This plan shall address long-term
ownership and responsibilities for O&M.
§ 288-17 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-18
1:348
§ 288-19. SWM site plan review.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. Six paper copies of the SWM site plan and two digital (e.g., PDF on
compact disks) copies of the SWM site plan, accompanied by the
requisite municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter, shall be
submitted to Warrington Township. The Township shall distribute the
SWM site plan as indicated below:
(1) Two paper copies and one digital copy to the municipality.
(2) Two paper copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One paper copy and one digital to the Township Engineer.
(4) One paper copy to the County Planning Commission/Department if
the regulated activity is also required to submit a subdivision and/
or land development plan to the County Planning Commission in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.65
C. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
D. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
PADEP.
A. The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer on
behalf of the municipality for consistency with the provisions of this
chapter. After review, the Township Engineer shall provide a written
recommendation for the municipality to approve or disapprove the
SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM site plan,
the Township Engineer shall state the reasons for the disapproval in
writing. The Township Engineer also may recommend approval of the
SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable
conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and
recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code66 for reviewing subdivision plans.
B. The municipality will notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
65.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 288-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-19
1:349
§ 288-20. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this Article
IV.
§ 288-21. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this Article IV. The applicable review fee must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 288-22. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan
is not completed according to this section within the term of validity, the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 288-21 of this
chapter.
period is 90 days. If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by
the municipality. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the
municipality shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.
§ 288-19 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-22
1:350
ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 288-23. Inspections required.
A. The municipality shall inspect all phases of the installation of the best
management practices (BMPs) and/or stormwater management (SWM)
facilities as deemed appropriate by the municipality.
B. During any stage of the work, if the municipality determines that the
BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the municipality shall
revoke any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease-anddesist
order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved,
as specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
shall be conducted by the municipality to confirm compliance with the
approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
D. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for providing asbuilt
plans of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan.
The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies from the
plans which were reviewed and received approval by the municipality
shall be submitted to the municipality. The municipality shall forward
the as-built plans and explanations of discrepancies to the Township
Engineer for review and comment. All plans must be satisfactory to the
Township Engineer.
E. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional retained by the applicant verifying
that all SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved
plans and specifications. If any qualified professionals contributed to
the construction plans, they must sign and seal the completion
certificate.67
67.Editor's Note: Original Subpart F, Fees and Expenses, of the 1995 Code of Ordinances,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-05.
§ 288-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-23
1:351

ARTICLE VI
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 288-24. Performance guaranty.
§ 288-25. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance (O&M)
of stormwater facilities and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guaranty to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management (SWM) facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required controls; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality shall require a financial
guaranty from the applicant.
A. The owner of any land upon which stormwater facilities and BMPs will
be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the stormwater
facility and BMP O&M plan, shall record the following documents in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County within 14 days of
approval of the stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan by the
municipality:
(1) The O&M plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) O&M agreements under § 288-27; and
(3) Easements under § 288-28.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
C. The following items shall be included in the stormwater facility and
BMP O&M plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks
County, which shall be submitted on sheets no larger than 24
inches by 36 inches. The contents of the map(s) shall include but
not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of stormwater
facilities and BMPs.
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
§ 288-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-25
1:353
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate.
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area.
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved.
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines on site and within 50 feet of property
lines of the project site.
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added.
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(i) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
facilities and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each stormwater facility and BMP will be
operated and maintained and the identity and contact information
associated with the person(s) responsible for O&M.
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the facility owner, acknowledging that the
stormwater facilities and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
D. The stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing O&M of all stormwater
facilities and BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater facilities and
BMPs may also be offered for dedication to and maintained by the
municipality.
(2) If a plan includes O&M by single ownership, or if sewers and other
public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, the
O&M of stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility
of the owner or private management entity.
E. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
O&M responsibilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or
§ 288-25 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-25
1:354
§ 288-26. Municipal review of stormwater facilities and BMP O&M
plan.
§ 288-27. O&M agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities
and BMPs.
§ 288-28. Stormwater management easements.
reject the O&M responsibility for any or all of the stormwater facilities
and BMPs.
F. Facilities, areas, or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or conservation easements that run with the land.
G. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
H. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of Article VI.
A. The municipality shall review the stormwater facilities and BMP O&M
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan is approved.
C. The municipality shall require a record drawing of all stormwater
facilities and BMPs as described in § 288-23.
A. The owner shall sign an O&M agreement with the municipality covering
all stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The
O&M agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership. The
agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement in
Appendix A.68
B. Other items may be included in the O&M agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory O&M of all stormwater controls
and BMPs. The O&M agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipality.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform
the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
A. The owner must obtain all necessary real estate rights to install,
operate and maintain all stormwater facilities in the SWM site plan.
68.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 288-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-28
1:355
B. The owner must provide the municipal easements, or other appropriate
real estate rights, to perform inspections and maintenance for the
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas.
§ 288-28 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-28
1:356
ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 288-29. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of the commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources, including waterline flushing;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air-conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(9) Lawn watering;
(10) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges [per Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) requirements];
(11) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(12)Water from individual residential car washing; and/or
(13) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or
PADEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 288-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-30
1:357
§ 288-30. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs and, to the maximum extent practicable, satisfy the criteria for
disconnected impervious areas (DIAs).
§ 288-31. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any stormwater
management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs), facilities,
areas, or structures unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program and written approval of the municipality has been obtained.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater facility or BMP or within a drainage easement which
would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater facility or BMP
without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 288-30 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-31
1:358
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 288-32. Right of entry.
§ 288-33. Inspections.
Stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs) shall
be inspected for proper operation by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 288-34. Enforcement.
All inspections regarding compliance with the stormwater management
(SWM) site plan and this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
municipality.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater facilities or
best management practices (BMPs) in regard to any aspect governed by
this chapter.
B. Landowners with stormwater facilities and BMPs on their property
shall allow persons working on behalf of the municipality ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance
with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater facility or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater facilities or BMPs.
A. Annually for the first five years;
B. Once every three years thereafter;
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm; and/or
D. As specified in the operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
§ 288-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-34
1:359
§ 288-35. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater facilities and best management
practices (BMPs); and
(7) Operation and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality, and the expense may be charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified may subject a violator to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from pursuing any
and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by
the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life, health, or
property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
stormwater facilities and BMPs or the elimination of the hazard or
nuisance; and
(2) The municipality is satisfied that all applicable violations in this
chapter have been corrected.
C. Any permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
§ 288-34 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-36
1:360
§ 288-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 288-37. Appeals.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties that may range from liens against the property to fines for
each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense, and the applicable fines
are cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. As per the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Section
909.1(9), any person aggrieved by any action pursuant to this chapter
may appeal to the Warrington Township Zoning Hearing Board within
30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Warrington Township
Board of Supervisors relevant to the provisions of this chapter may
appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the
activity has taken place within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 288-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-37
1:361
Chapter 294
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 330.
§ 288-37 WARRINGTON CODE § 288-37
1:362
ARTICLE I
Street Excavations
[Adopted 12-5-1955 by Ord. No. 7-55 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 294-1. Definitions.
§ 294-2. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the street rights-of-way in the Township of Warrington without
first securing a road occupancy permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 294-3. Application for permit. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the
street rights-of-way in the Township of Warrington shall make application
to the Township Manager, in writing, for this purpose. Such application
shall be made on forms and blanks to be furnished by the Township and
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed
opening or excavation, and the approximate size and depth thereof, and
shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall
be done in full compliance with ordinances of the Township and the laws
of the commonwealth in relation thereto, and that the applicant shall well
and truly save, defend, and keep harmless the Township from and indemnify
it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges
for or by reason of the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages
to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom, or occurring in
the prosecution of the work connected therewith, or from any other matter,
cause or thing relating thereto.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
STREET — The entire legal right-of-way of any public street, avenue,
road, lane, alley or highway or other public place located within and
maintained by the Township of Warrington and established for the use
of vehicles.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 294-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-4
1:363
§ 294-4. Fees. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street right-ofway
in the Township, the applicant shall pay to the Township the sums, to
be established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,
to cover the costs of inspection and other incidental services in connection
therewith.
§ 294-5. Defects. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Board of Supervisors or its agents shall inspect during and at the
completion of the excavation and may reinspect the work not more than
two years after its completion, and if any settlement of the road surface
or other defect appears in the work contrary to the conditions, restrictions
and regulations of the Township, the Board of Supervisors may enforce
compliance therewith. Any person who shall open or excavate any improved
or unimproved street in the Township shall be responsible to the Township
for any defects which shall appear within a period of two years after the
surface is replaced. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the cost
of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving caused or resulting from
defective backfilling operations.
§ 294-6. Specifications.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel and approved by
the Township Manager.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as to not interfere with
water mains, sewers, or any other subsurface lines or constructions
until permission of the proper authorities in connection with such
subsurface lines or constructions shall have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Township Manager and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit.
The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be done in a manner
approved by the Township Manager.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with suitable
materials and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which shall not
exceed six inches in depth. On improved streets, the backfilling shall be
placed to within 10 inches of the surface.
F. On improved streets, a temporary paving of suitable stone materials or
modified stone, thoroughly bound and compacted, shall be installed
§ 294-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-6
1:364
flush with the surface of the adjoining paving. The Township Manager
may require the surface patching to be made with asphaltic materials.
G. During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices and
all excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express
condition that the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify
and save and keep harmless the Township of Warrington from any loss
in damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be occasioned
at any time by the said excavation, or by any leak, explosion or other
injury from any pipe, conduit, apparatus or any other matter placed in
the said excavation or around the same.
H. The applicant shall notify the Township Manager when the opening or
excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done and
when the work is completed by proper backfilling in the case of
unimproved streets and by temporary paving in the case of improved
streets.
I. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Township Manager, be unsatisfactory and the same
shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within the
time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Township
Manager, the Township may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any such work not completed, and charge the cost
thereof, plus 20% to the applicant.
J. All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by
the applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the
Township Manager.
K. No permit shall be issued to perform an opening or excavation of any
Township highway, roadway, alley or other public right-of-way that was
constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than three years prior
to application for a permit under this chapter unless the applicant
agrees, in writing, to overlay or pave the surface of the public right-ofway,
from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, to the
satisfaction of the Township. The Township may grant an exception to
this section in the case of an emergency in which the exigencies of
public health or safety require such an exception. [Added 12-17-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-O-18]
L. Each person issued a permit shall submit to the Township, not later
than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part
thereof, if required by the Township), two paper copies and one
electronic copy of an as-built map or maps and engineering
specifications as set forth by the Township depicting and certifying the
§ 294-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-6
1:365
§ 294-7. Accidents. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than
the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of this article
are fully complied with. If the owner or person responsible fails to rectify
any such emergency condition which presents an immediate or imminent
safety or health problem within 48 hours or any other defect within 60 days
after written notice from the Board of Supervisors to do so, the Board of
Supervisors or its agents may do the work and impose upon such owner or
person the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%.
§ 294-8. Approval of plans.
No new water or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed and no
existing water or gas main shall be extended in any of the streets of the
Township until the exact location thereof and the plan therefor shall have
been first approved by the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township.
§ 294-9. Surface drainage.
Every private lane, road, alley, driveway, drive or entrance road connecting
with any street of the Township of Warrington shall be so constructed or
altered that the water and surface drainage shall not be blocked or diverted
from the course of the gutter, and that the surface drainage from such
private lane, road, alley, driveway, drive or entrance road shall flow into
the gutter of said street and not upon the roadway or roadbed thereof.
Any person desiring to connect any such private lane, road, alley, driveway,
drive or entrance road with any public street shall be required to apply
for Township approval for such work and submit specifications for said
proposed work to the Township Manager or Township Engineer for
approval. No charge shall be made for such approval. Culvert pipes may be
installed by applicant but only after specific approval as to size, type and
method of installation by the Township Manager or Township Engineer. All
existing pipes and culverts shall be maintained in a satisfactory condition by
the owner. In the event the pipe or culvert is determined to be not properly
maintained or installed or of an insufficient size for effective drainage, the
location of the facilities constructed. Such engineering specifications
and electronic and paper maps shall be submitted in a format and
includes the information required by the Township. If the maps are not
provided electronically in the required format, then the person shall
reimburse the Township for the cost of converting paper maps into
electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another
format into the required format. [Added 12-17-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-18]
§ 294-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-9
1:366
Township may replace the pipe or culvert with the proper type and size and
all material charges resulting from such work shall be chargeable to the
property owner or owners served by such pipe or culvert.
§ 294-10. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for all persons owning or occupying property along
any public street of the Township of Warrington to drain or allow to drain
or to allow the flow into or upon any street or gutter by pipes or any
other channel, either natural or artificial, any water or drainage from sinks,
bathtubs, washstands, lavatories, water closets, swimming pools, laundry
tubs, washing machines, privies, pools, septic tanks or cesspools of any kind
or nature whatsoever, or allow any other foul or offensive water or drainage
to percolate into or upon said streets or gutters.
§ 294-11. Payment for work done by Township.
Payment for all work done by the Township under the provisions hereof shall
be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof
within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the Township.
Upon failure to pay such charges within such times, the same shall be
collectible by the Township in the manner provided by law for the collection
of municipal claims.
§ 294-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 294-13. Public utilities. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Public utilities which are required by the provisions of the Second Class
Township Code,69 as amended from time to time, to obtain a permit from
the State Department of Transportation shall be exempt from the provisions
of this article, provided the permit issued by the State Department of
Transportation is exhibited to the Township Manager prior to the
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 294-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-13
1:367
commencement of any work or construction upon or in any portion of a
Township road within the Township of Warrington.
§ 294-14. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or
to the planting of poles.
§ 294-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-14
1:368
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks and Roofs
[Adopted 4-7-1970 by Ord. No. 2-70; amended in its entirety
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1995 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 294-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
BUSINESS HOURS — Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
business day.
CARTWAY — Portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — Natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — Portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a cartway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 294-16. Responsibility for removal from sidewalks.
A. Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting
or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be
removed or cleared away, snow and/or ice from a path of at least 30
inches in width from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts
on said building or lot of land.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 12 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
C. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection B hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe; and shall, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path in said
sidewalk of at least 30 inches in width.
§ 294-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-17
1:369
§ 294-17. Responsibility for removal from roofs.
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of
snow and ice on said building or other structure which is liable to fall on
any sidewalk, roadway, or other public way. Such work shall be completed
within a reasonable time, but not later than 12 hours after the cessation of
any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain.
§ 294-18. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on
or immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or
loading and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that
snow and ice may be mounded by the Township of Warrington on public
cartways incident to the cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to
the clearing of sidewalks in business districts.
§ 294-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This article may be enforced initially by violation ticket
(citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II,
Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 294-17 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-19
1:370
ARTICLE III
Construction, Reconstruction and Repair of Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 294-20. Owners responsible for maintenance and repair.
Every owner of property in Warrington Township which abuts on any
sidewalk, curb or gutter shall maintain such abutting sidewalk, curb and
gutter and shall keep same in good repair and in a safe and passable
condition.
§ 294-21. Construction and repair required.
Warrington Township may require owners of property abutting on any street
to construct, pave, repave and/or repair the sidewalk, curb and gutter
along such property, at such grades and under such regulations as may be
prescribed by the Township Engineer.
§ 294-22. Notice to do work and failure to perform. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Notice to construct, pave, repave and repair sidewalks, curbs or gutters
shall be given by registered or certified mail to abutting property owners,
and such owners shall have 90 days to comply with said notice in conformity
with any construction specifications prescribed by the Township Engineer.
Failure to comply with an order of the Township to perform work shall result
in the Township completing the work and filing an assessment against the
property owner pursuant to § 294-26 of this article for the costs incurred
in performing the work. This article may be enforced initially by violation
ticket (citation); see Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures,
Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
§ 294-23. Inspection.
At any time during the performance of the required work, the Township
Engineer may inspect the work to determine whether construction
specifications are being observed.
§ 294-24. Construction, reconstruction and repair by the Township.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
The Board of Supervisors may require the construction, reconstruction or
repair of any sidewalk and curb in Warrington Township.
§ 294-25. Expense. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
When the Board of Supervisors requires the construction, reconstruction
or repair of any sidewalk or curb pursuant to this article, the expense
§ 294-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-25
1:371
thereof shall be paid by the abutting property owners in proportion to their
frontage, but no owner shall be liable for the cost of construction of the
sidewalk or curb in an amount greater than 15% of the assessed valuation of
the abutting property. Any expense above the maximum liability of abutting
property owners shall be paid by Warrington Township.
§ 294-26. Filing of assessments.
All assessments for costs levied under this article shall be filed with the
Township Treasurer and collected pursuant to the following regulations:
A. The Township Treasurer shall give 30 days' notice that the assessments
are due and payable. The notice shall state the due date to each party
assessed and shall be served by mailing it to the owner of the property.
B. If any assessment remains unpaid after 90 days after the due date, it
shall be turned over to the Township Solicitor for collection by means of
an action in assumpsit for recovery or a municipal lien filed against the
property of the delinquent owner for the amount of the unpaid
assessment, plus 1 1/2% interest per month from the date the
assessment was due. If an owner has two or more lots against which
there is an assessment for the same year, the lots shall be embraced in
one claim.
C. Upon receipt of payment of assessments, the Township Treasurer shall
deposit the assessments in a separate account, to be paid out only for
expenses incurred in providing the construction, reconstruction or
repair of sidewalks or curbs. Each special assessment account shall be
audited by the Board of Auditors of Warrington Township.
§ 294-25 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-26
1:372
ARTICLE IV
Right-of-Way Management
[Adopted 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-18 (Ch. 21, Part 4, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 294-27. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Warrington Township Right-of-Way
Management Ordinance."
§ 294-28. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall have the following meanings. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, terms not defined in this article shall be
construed consistent with Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not
defined therein, with their common and ordinary meaning.
AERIAL FACILITIES — Poles, wires, cables, equipment and other facilities
located above the surface of the ground, including their underground
supports and foundations. Such term does not include private driveways,
newspaper vending machines, street banners, canopies or other minor
obstructions located in the rights-of-way.
AFFILIATE — A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with
another person.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended
by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as hereafter amended (47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as hereafter amended).
CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — Right-of-way use authorization
required pursuant to the Cable Act and the Township Code for any cable
franchise issued by the Township.
CABLE FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE — Right-of-way use authorization
pursuant to this article authorizing a person to own, construct, operate and
maintain a cable system to provide cable service within the Township.
CABLE OPERATOR — A person providing or offering to provide cable
service over a cable system within the Township as that term is defined in
the Cable Act.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM —
Facilities consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to
provide cable service, which includes video programming and which is
A.
§ 294-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-28
1:373
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.
§ 151 et seq., as amended and as hereafter amended.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
FACILITY(IES) — Conduit, pipes, cables, wires, lines, towers, optic fiber,
poles, associated equipment and appurtenances, and any other facilities
located in the right-of-way and designed, constructed, and/or used, by
telecommunications providers, public utilities, or other persons, for
transmitting, transporting, or distributing communications,
telecommunications, electricity, natural gas or manufactured gas, oil,
gasoline, steam, or any other form of energy, signal or substance. The
term "facility" or "facilities" does not include "wireless telecommunications
facilities," as defined below.
FRANCHISE — A right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this article that
authorizes a person to own, construct, operate and maintain a cable system
to provide cable service within the Township.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A cable franchise agreement.
provided to multiple subscribers within the Township; but such term
does not include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
(1)
(2) A facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)] to the extent
such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on-demand services;
(3)
(4) An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
(5)
B. A reference to a cable system refers to any part thereof.
This definition of "cable system" shall in no way be deemed to
circumscribe or limit the valid authority of the Township to regulate or
authorize the facilities and/or services of any other telecommunications
provider or other person that owns, constructs, operates, or maintains
facilities in the right-of-way.
C.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
§ 294-28 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-28
1:374
FRANCHISEE — A person that is issued a franchise by the Township.
INFORMATION SERVICE — The offering of a capability for generating,
acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making
available information via telecommunications (whether over a cable system,
telecommunications system, open video system, or any other type of
facilities), and includes electronic publishing, but does not include any
use of any such capability for the management, control, or operation of a
telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications
service.
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All nontower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Nontower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas and related equipment.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM or OVS — Facilities consisting of a set of
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide video programming services, cable
service, and/or services similar to cable service to multiple subscribers
within the Township and which the Federal Communications Commission
or its successor has certified as compliant with Part 76 of its Rules, 47
CFR, Part 76.1500 et seq., as amended from time to time; provided that
an open video system is not a system of telecommunications facilities and
does not provide telecommunications service to the extent that it provides
only video services; and provided, further, that an open video system means
only those facilities that are operated by a person authorized to provide
video services pursuant to Section 653 of the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 573, where such person is properly certificated
to provide such services pursuant to applicable Federal Communications
Commission regulations.
PERMITTEE — The recipient of a right-of-way use permit, cable franchise or
other right-of-way use authorization that is issued by the Township pursuant
to this article, and persons holding existing franchises, special ordinances,
or other authorizations that are subject to the transitional provisions set
forth in § 294-31.
PERSON — Corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock companies,
firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, and other entities;
municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and other
authorities and corporations established pursuant to statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and individuals, provided that "person"
does not include or apply to the Township or to any department or agency
of the Township.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The written regulations, standards,
operations and/or courses of action established by the Township to
implement the provisions of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION or PUC — The state administrative
agency, or lawful successor thereto, authorized to regulate and oversee
public utilities and telecommunications providers and telecommunications
§ 294-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-28
1:375
services in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the extent provided by
law.
PUBLIC UTILITY or UTILITY — Shall be defined as that term is defined
in the Pennsylvania Code as of the effective date of this article, and as
hereafter amended.70
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT or ROW USE AGREEMENT — Written
agreement required and entered into pursuant to this article giving a
person the nonexclusive right to own, construct, operate and maintain
facilities in any right-of-way in the Township for the specific purposes set
forth in the agreement.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AUTHORIZATION or ROW USE AUTHORIZATION —
A right-of-way use permit or cable franchise issued pursuant to this article.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT or ROW USE PERMIT — A right-of-way use
permit issued pursuant to this article.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW — The surface of and space above
and below any real property in the Township in which the Township has a
regulatory interest or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests
now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways,
avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or
any other public place, area or property under the control of the Township,
and any unrestricted public or utility easements established, dedicated,
platted, improved or devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands other
than streets that are owned by the Township. The phrase "in the right(s)-ofway"
means "in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way."
SERVICE(S) — Any telecommunications service, cable service, video
programming service, information service, utility service (including, but not
limited to, electric, gas, water, or steam service), or other form of service
provided by means of facilities located in the right-of-way.
STREET — A strip of land or part thereof within the right-of-way, whether
dedicated or not, that is intended or used for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. The phrase "in the (a) street(s)" means "in, on, over, along, above
and/or under the (a) street(s)."
STREET OPENING PERMIT — A permit for excavation of a street for the
construction or installation of facilities in any right-of-way in the Township,
including, but not limited to, installation of underground conduit, ducts,
manholes, handholes, and/or appurtenances thereto, or any other type of
underground facilities; for construction or erection of poles; for installing
fiber-optic or other cable(s) in already installed conduit or ducts; for
maintenance activities that involve such construction, installation, or
erection; or otherwise for the installation or construction of facilities in any
right-of-way.
SYSTEM — Any cable system, telecommunications system, or integral part
thereof.
70.Editor's Note: See 52 Pa. Code § 56.2.
§ 294-28 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-28
1:376
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — The plant, equipment and
property within the Township used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide
or offer telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — A person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system that offers
telecommunications service.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, monopoles, and hub facilities for distributed antenna
systems.
TOWNSHIP CODE — The Code of the Township of Warrington, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The person engaged by the Township to perform
engineering services on behalf of the Township.
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY — All real property now or hereafter owned by the
Township, whether in fee ownership or other interest.
TOWNSHIP WORK — All construction work performed by the Township or
any of its departments, either with its own personnel or under contract,
including repair, alteration, replacement, or maintenance of facilities
owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the Township or for which
the Township is responsible.
TRANSFER OF INTEREST — As applied to a right-of-way use permit and/
or the facilities authorized thereby: the assignment, transfer, or other
disposition, directly or indirectly, by sale, lease, merger, consolidation, or
other act, by operation of law or otherwise, of any interest, in whole or
in part, in the ROW use authorization, including, but not limited to, actual
control over the ROW use authorization. Any transaction (whether between
affiliated entities or unaffiliated entities) which results in any change, in any
manner, of the ownership or control (including, but not limited to, financial
control and actual control) of the permittee, the facilities authorized
thereby, or the capacity, transmission capacity, or bandwidth of the facilities
or system, or such ownership or control of any affiliated entities having
ownership or control of the permittee, where such ownership or control is
25% or more of the total ownership or control interest, shall be considered
a transfer of interest.
§ 294-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-28
1:377
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES — Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for aerial facilities.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY(IES) — The antennas,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless telecommunications
services.
§ 294-29. Use authorization.
§ 294-30. Use permit.
A. Right-of-way use authorization. Except as otherwise provided in this
article, no person shall own, construct, operate and/or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way of the Township to provide or to enable
others to provide services to persons or areas in the Township or
outside the Township without a right-of-way use authorization. The
types of right-of-way use authorization are a right-of-way use permit
and a cable franchise.
B. Right-of-way use agreement. No ROW use authorization shall be
effective, nor shall the applicant receive any rights, benefits, or
privileges pursuant to the authorization, unless or until the applicant
and the Township have executed a right-of-way use agreement which is
substantially the same as Exhibit A and sets forth the particular terms
and conditions under which the authorization will be issued. (ROW use
agreement attached as Exhibit A.71) A form of ROW use agreement shall
be submitted to the applicant consistent with this article and applicable
law. The ROW use agreement shall be deemed to be incorporated in and
made a part of the ROW use authorization upon execution by the
applicant and the Township. A cable franchise agreement shall satisfy
the requirement for a ROW use agreement with respect to cable
operators or OVS operators in the Township.
C. Permit required. Pursuant to this article, all persons that own, construct
and/or maintain facilities in any public right-of-way shall obtain a rightof-
way use permit. If any such person is subject to a cable franchise
agreement, the permittee shall not be required to remit both a cable
franchise fee and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the
Township. Such permittee shall pay the higher amount of the two fees
to the Township.
A. Permit required; term and scope of permit.
(1) No person, other than a franchisee, may own, construct, operate
and/or maintain facilities that occupy the right-of-way without first
obtaining a ROW use permit. Any ROW use permit shall be subject
71.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 294-28 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-30
1:378
to such conditions as the Township may from time to time establish
and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this article and
applicable law. A ROW use permit shall be for a term of five years. A
ROW use permit and the rights, benefits and permissions conferred
thereby shall apply to the entire geographic area of the Township.
(2) Any person wishing to construct, operate and/or maintain wireless
telecommunications facilities, such as tower-based WCFs or
nontower WCFs, that occupy the rights-of-way is not required to
obtain a ROW use permit pursuant to this article but is required to
comply with all of the applicable terms and conditions of the
Township's Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Ordinance,
codified at Article XXXVIII, Wireless Communications Facilities, in
Chapter 370, Zoning.
B. Approval by Township. A ROW use permit shall be authorized only by
the Township and shall not become effective unless or until so
authorized. In addition to the other requirements contained herein, the
applicant shall demonstrate:
(1) That it has a history of compliance with applicable law and
regulation relating to the management, construction and
maintenance of facilities in streets and rights-of-way, wherever
located.
(2) That it possesses all licenses, permits, authorizations, and other
permissions required by the Federal Communications Commission,
the PUC, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Township as a
condition of its using the right-of-way and furnishing the services
and operating the facilities proposed by the applicant.
C. Security. Each permittee shall furnish to the Township, at the
permittee's expense, a bond or other form of financial security, in such
form as required by the Township in consultation with the Township
Solicitor. Such bond shall be executed by a reputable surety company
licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
letter of credit or other form of financial security shall be in the amount
of $50,000. The security shall be a continuing obligation during the
entire term of the right-of-way use permit.
D. Insurance. Each permittee shall, at all times during the entire term of
the right-of-way use permit, maintain and require its contractors and
subcontractors to maintain insurance, with a reputable insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. Best rating (or equivalent) no less
than "A-," indemnifying the Township from and against any and all
claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of permittee's system or facilities in the rightsof-
way. The amounts of such coverage shall be as determined by the
Township by regulation. The Township shall be designated as an
§ 294-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-30
1:379
additional insured under each of the insurance policies required by
this section. The permittee shall not cancel any required insurance
policy without obtaining alternative insurance in conformance with this
section. The permittee shall provide the Township with at least 30 days'
advance written notice of any material changes or cancellation of any
required insurance policy.
E. Indemnification. Each permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and
all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees or contractors
arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of permittee's system or facilities in
the rights-of-way. Each permittee shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that personal
injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the permit
holder's construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of the permittee's system or facilities in the rights-of-way. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not
be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
F. Application for right-of-way use permit.
(1) Application for a ROW use permit shall be in such form and shall
include such information as the Township determines by
regulation. Within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60
days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the
Township shall make a determination approving or denying the
application. Determinations to grant or deny an application shall be
made on a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. If the
application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons
for denial. The application fee, which shall be paid at the time of the
filing of the application, shall be as fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors. The application
fee shall be sufficient to reimburse the Township for the actual
costs of Township staff time and other resources that are required
for the receipt, review, and disposition of the application and may
be adjusted by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) A right-of-way use permit shall not become effective unless or until
the applicant and the Township have executed a right-of-way use
agreement that is substantially the same as that attached as Exhibit
A72 and sets forth the particular terms and conditions under which
the authorization is issued. Such agreement shall be deemed to be
72.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 294-30 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-30
1:380
incorporated in and made a part of the ROW use permit upon
execution by both the applicant and the Township.
G. Renewal of right-of-way use permit. A person desiring to renew a ROW
use permit prior to the expiration of the permit shall file an application
with the Township for renewal of its authorization, which shall include
the information and documents required for an initial application and
other material information required by the Township by regulation. Any
renewal of a permit shall not become effective unless or until the
applicant and the Township have executed a right-of-way use
agreement that is substantially the same as that attached here as
Exhibit A73 and sets forth the terms and conditions under which the
authorization is issued.
(1) PUC-regulated utilities. The Township shall renew the permit of a
PUC-regulated utility unless the PUC has revoked the utility's
certificate of public convenience and necessity and/or the utility
has materially violated a provision of this article and has not
corrected the violation after notice and opportunity to cure
pursuant to § 294-36 of this article. If the renewal application is
denied, the determination shall include the reasons for
nonrenewal. Determinations to grant or deny a renewal application
shall be made on a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral
basis. The Township shall not unreasonably delay or deny the
issuance of a renewal permit.
(2) Non-PUC-regulated entities. The Township shall make a
determination accepting or denying the renewal application. If the
renewal application is denied, the determination shall include the
reasons for nonrenewal. Determinations to grant or deny a renewal
application shall be made on a nondiscriminatory and competitively
neutral basis. The Township shall not unreasonably delay or deny
the issuance of a renewal permit.
H. As-built maps. As the Township controls and maintains the rights-of-way
for the benefit of its citizens, it is the responsibility of the Township to
ensure that such rights-of-way meet the highest possible public safety
standards. As such, the Township needs to be informed regarding the
placement of all facilities within the rights-of-way, including those
positioned aerially and underground. Each person applying for a ROW
use permit shall submit to the Township two paper copies and one
electronic copy of an as-built map or maps and engineering
specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures, depicting and
certifying the location of all its existing facilities within the right-of-way.
Such electronic and paper maps and engineering specifications shall be
submitted in a format and include the information required by the
Township in the policies and procedures and shall be submitted with
the application. If the maps are not provided electronically in the
required format, then the person shall reimburse the Township for the
73.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 294-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-30
1:381
cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of
converting electronic maps in another format into the required format.
Such maps are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's
Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
I. Right to inspect.
(1) PUC-regulated utilities. Pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of
public convenience and necessity by the PUC, the Township shall
conduct inspections of all PUC-regulated facilities in order to
ensure that the permittee's facilities conform to the standards set
forth by the Public Utilities Commission. Such inspections shall be
limited to establishing whether facilities meet PUC standards for
construction and maintenance and such Township construction and
design standards as relate to the opening of, construction in, and
closing of Township streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as provided
under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). Upon request of the Township, the
permittee shall furnish a copy of the PUC-approved construction
and maintenance standards that it utilizes in its right-of-way
activities.
(2) Non-PUC-regulated entities. The Township shall have the right to
inspect all of the facilities of the permittee, including aerial
facilities and underground facilities, to ensure health and safety
with respect to such facilities, other facilities, the rights-of-way and
any other public or private property and to determine compliance
with the terms of this article and other applicable laws and
regulations. Permittees are required to cooperate with all such
inspections and to provide information requested by the Township
as part of the inspection.
J. Use authorized. No ROW use permit shall confer any exclusive right or
privilege to occupy or use the right-of-way for any purpose; or explicitly
or impliedly preclude or affect the Township's right to authorize use of
the right-of-way by other persons to own, construct, operate, maintain,
and/or provide the same or different facilities or services, or for any
other purposes as the Township determines appropriate; or affect the
Township's right to construct, operate or maintain any type of facilities
itself or offer any type of services in the right-of-way; or authorize, or
excuse any person from securing such further easements, leases,
permits or other approvals as may be required by applicable law or
regulation to occupy and use the right-of-way; or convey any right, title
or interest in any right-of-way greater or other than an agreement only
to use and occupy the right-of-way for the limited purposes and terms
provided in the ROW use permit and the right-of-way use agreement; or
be construed as any warranty of title.
K. Owner's consent. No ROW use permit expressly or impliedly authorizes
a permittee to provide any services to, or install any facilities on, any
private property without the owner's consent, or to use publicly or
§ 294-30 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-30
1:382
§ 294-31. Transitional provisions.
privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement
with the owners thereof for such use. It is an affirmative violation of this
article to post bills, signs and other advertisements upon utility poles or
private property without the owner's consent.
L. Substantially similar terms. ROW use permits and renewals entered
into after the effective date of this article shall contain substantially
similar terms which, taken as a whole upon consideration of all of its
material terms and upon consideration of the nature of the services to
be authorized and other relevant characteristics of applicants, do not
provide substantially more or less favorable terms and conditions than
those required of other permittees.
A. Persons already authorized to use the right-of-way. Any person holding
a permit or other authorization from the Township to own, construct,
operate, and/or maintain facilities in the right-of-way to provide
services may continue to conduct those activities expressly authorized
until the earlier of the following: (A) the conclusion of the present term
of its existing authorization, or (B) 120 days after the effective date of
this article; provided that, in the case of a cable franchise, such
authorization shall continue until the expiration of the current term of
the cable franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such persons (with
the exception of cable franchisees) shall apply for a superseding ROW
use permit pursuant to this article within 90 days after the effective
date of this article and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of
this article.
B. Pending applications. Applications for an authorization to occupy or use
the right-of-way that are pending on the effective date of this article
shall be subject to this article. A person with a pending application shall
submit additional information to comply with the requirements of this
article and applicable regulations of the Township governing
applications within 30 days from the effective date of this article.
C. Persons operating without right-of-way use authorization. Any person
that owns or operates any facilities currently located in the right-of-way,
the construction, operation, or maintenance of which is not currently
authorized, but is required to be authorized under this article, shall
have 90 days from the effective date of this article to file one or more
applications for a ROW use authorization. Any person timely filing such
an application shall not be subject to penalties for failure to hold such a
ROW use authorization, provided said application remains pending.
Nothing herein shall relieve any person of any liability for its failure to
obtain any permit or other authorization required under other
provisions of this article, or Township ordinances or regulations, and
nothing herein shall prevent the Township from requiring removal of
any facilities installed in violation of this article or Township ordinances
or regulations.
§ 294-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-32
1:383
§ 294-32. Cable franchise.
§ 294-33. Alteration or modification of existing facilities.
§ 294-34. Construction in the rights-of-way.
A. Franchise required.
(1) No person may own, construct, operate or maintain a cable system
or open video system within the Township, provide cable service
over a cable system, or provide OVS service over an OVS without a
cable franchise or OVS franchise, whichever is applicable, issued
by the Township.
(2) To the extent permitted by law, facilities used to provide
telecommunications service, information service, or any form of
services similar to cable service, or OVS service, that are also used
to provide cable service or OVS service shall be subject to this
article and shall also require a right-of-way use permit pursuant to
this article.
B. Effect of authorization.
(1) A cable franchise shall not confer any authority to provide any form
or type of telecommunications service or information service in
addition to the cable service authorized by the franchise. To the
extent permitted by law, a separate right-of-way use permit
pursuant to this article, in addition to the cable franchise, shall be
required before any franchisee is permitted to use facilities in the
right-of-way to furnish any form or type of telecommunications
service or information service.
(2) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and a
cable franchise agreement in effect on the effective date of this
article, the provisions of the cable franchise agreement shall
govern.
A. Alteration or modification of existing facilities. The permittee must
notify the Township upon material alteration or modification of existing
facilities within the rights-of-way. The permittee must additionally
provide an updated facilities map if facilities have been removed from,
or added to, the rights-of-way.
B. Change in information. If there are any changes in information provided
in the original permit application, the permit holder has an obligation to
notify the Township within 60 days of such changes.
A. Street opening permits. No person shall perform any street excavation
in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit and
paying a permit fee pursuant to Article I of this chapter. No person shall
perform curb and/or sidewalk construction replacement or repair
without first obtaining a permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to
§ 294-32 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-34
1:384
§ 294-4. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be
necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction
affects Township streets; it shall not apply to any construction or
excavation activities on state roads.
B. Construction standards.
(1) PUC-regulated utilities. Construction standards shall include those
determined by the Public Utilities Commission, as well as such
Township construction and design standards as relate to the
opening of, construction in, and closing of Township streets, curbs,
and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). All PUCregulated
utilities must provide the Township with documentation
evidencing the Public Utility Commission's approval of all proposed
construction plans within the rights-of-way. Upon request of the
Township, the utility must provide the PUC-approved construction
guidelines pursuant to which it operates.
(2) Non-PUC-regulated entities. All construction, installation,
maintenance, and operation of facilities in the ROW shall conform
to the requirements of the following publications, as from time to
time amended: the Pennsylvania Township of Transportation
Publication Form 408, the Township of Warrington Streets and
Sidewalk Regulations, the National Electrical Code, and the
National Electrical Safety Code (collectively, the "Township of
Warrington ROW Construction Standards"). In the event of conflict
between the ROW construction standards and this section, this
section shall govern as of the effective date of this article.
C. Security. Each person performing construction in the ROW shall obtain
a performance bond in the amount and as required by the policies and
procedures and regulations of the Township.
D. Right to inspect facilities.
(1) PUC-regulated utilities. The Township may inspect facilities in the
rights-of-way to ensure continuous compliance with the
construction and maintenance regulations of the Public Utilities
Commission, as well as such Township construction and design
standards as relate to the opening of, construction in, and closing
of Township streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as provided under 15
Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). Upon request of the Township, the permittee
shall provide the Township with the PUC-approved construction
and maintenance standards pursuant to which it operates in the
rights-of-way.
(2) Non-PUC-regulated entities. The Township may inspect the
construction or installation of any facilities, including both aerial
and underground facilities, and any construction or repair activity
to ensure health and safety with respect to such facilities, other
facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property
and determine compliance with the terms of this article and other
§ 294-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-34
1:385
applicable laws and regulations. Permittees are required to
cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information
requested by the Township as part of the inspection.
E. Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued
to cut any Township street that was constructed, reconstructed or
resurfaced fewer than three years prior to application for a street
opening permit, unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to overlay or
pave the surface of the street, from curb to curb and intersection to
intersection, to the satisfaction of the Township. The Township may
grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency.
F. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, a permittee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
facilities within the right-of-way, excluding those underground,
whenever the Township, consistent with applicable PUC regulations,
shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Township
or other public improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the
Township or other governmental entity in the right-of-way; vacation of a
street or the release of a utility easement; or an emergency as
determined by the Township.
(1) PUC-regulated utilities. All public utilities must relocate and
remove facilities consistent with the regulations and standards of
the PUC.
(2) Non-PUC-regulated utilities. All entities not regulated by the PUC
must relocate and remove facilities consistent with the applicable
regulations of the Township.
G. Coordination of construction activities. By December 1 of each year,
each right-of-way use permittee shall provide the Township with a
schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each
project) of its planned construction activities for the following year
which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule shall depict all
construction activities the permittee is committed to perform within the
next year.
H. Abandonment. Except as otherwise provided for under this article, a
person may abandon any facilities or property in the rights-of-way only
after receiving written approval of the Township, following written
notice to the Township of the intent to abandon. If the Township
receives notice of intent to abandon from such a person, or if the
Township determines (after investigation, notice to the owner or other
responsible person, and an opportunity to be heard) that facilities or
property are abandoned, the Township may determine that the safety,
§ 294-34 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-34
1:386
§ 294-35. Management fee.
Annual right-of-way management fee. Each permittee that is not a
franchisee, including Township ROW permittees, shall pay an annual fee
to the Township to compensate the Township for its costs incurred in
connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the ongoing use and
occupancy of the right-of-way. The annual right-of-way maintenance fee
shall be determined by the Township and authorized by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the Township's actual
ROW maintenance costs as applied to such permittee. If subject to a cable
functioning or use of the right-of-way and/or other facilities in the rightof-
way will be adversely affected by the abandonment. If the Township
makes this determination, the Township may require the person to
remove the facilities and property by a specified date or the Township
may remove the facilities and property and charge the person for all
costs and expenses associated with such removal.
I. Damage to facilities or property. A permittee, including any contractor
working for a permittee, shall avoid damage to any facilities and/or
public or private property. If any facilities and/or public or private
property are damaged by the permittee, including any contractor
working for the permittee, the permittee shall promptly repair and
restore such property within 10 business days. The permittee shall
utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any disturbance of the
rights-of-way and shall adhere to all other requirements of the
Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act.74
J. Facilities maps. Each person issued a street opening permit shall
submit to the Township, not later than 30 days after completion of the
permitted construction (or any part thereof, if required by the
Township), two paper copies and one electronic copy of an as-built map
or maps and engineering specifications, as set forth in the policies and
procedures depicting and certifying the location of the facilities
constructed. Such engineering specifications and electronic and paper
maps shall be submitted in a format and include the information
required by the Township in the policies and procedures. If the maps
are not provided electronically in the required format, then the person
shall reimburse the Township for the cost of converting paper maps into
electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another
format into the required format. Such maps are exempt from public
disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et
seq. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
K. Field marking. Each permittee shall field mark the locations of its
underground facilities upon request by other permittees or the
Township, consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania One
Call System and at no cost to the Township.
74.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 294-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-35
1:387
franchise agreement, the permittee shall not be required to remit both a
cable franchise fee amount and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to
the Township; such permittee shall pay the higher of the two fees to the
Township.
§ 294-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 294-37. Miscellaneous.
A. Penalties. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall
also constitute a separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made that a
person has violated any provision of this article, a right-of-way use
permit or a right-of-way use agreement, such person shall be provided
written notice of the determination and the reasons therefor. Except in
the case of an emergency, the person shall have 30 days to cure the
violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully
cured within such time period, the Township may, in its reasonable
judgment, extend the time period to cure, provided the person has
commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the
violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the Township may
take any and all actions authorized by this article and/or Pennsylvania
law and regulations.
A. Proprietary information. If a permittee considers information it is
obligated to provide to the Township under this article to be a business
or trade secret or otherwise proprietary or confidential in nature, and
desires to protect the information from disclosure, then the permittee
shall mark such information as proprietary and confidential. Subject to
the requirements of the Right to Know Law of 2008, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et
seq., as amended, and other applicable law, the Township shall exercise
reasonable good faith efforts to protect such proprietary and
confidential information that is so marked from disclosure. The
Township shall provide notice to the permittee in the following
circumstances: (A) if the Township receives a request for disclosure of
such proprietary and confidential information and the Township
Solicitor determines that the information is or may be subject to
disclosure under applicable law; or (B) if the Township Solicitor
determines that the information should be disclosed in relation to its
enforcement of this article or the exercise of its police or regulatory
§ 294-35 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-37
1:388
powers. In the event the permittee does not obtain a protective order
barring disclosure of the information from a court of competent
jurisdiction within 30 days following receipt of the Township's notice,
then the Township may disclose the information without further notice
to the permittee.
B. Leased facilities. Subject to the provisions of this article and with prior
written approval of the Township, a permittee shall have the right to
furnish any facilities for which it has the applicable authorization in the
right-of-way to another person for the latter's use in constructing or
operating its own facilities in the right-of-way, provided that:
(1) The permittee furnishing its facilities to another shall first deliver
to the Township written verification that there is a fully signed and
executed lease, rental agreement, or other agreement with such
other person pursuant to which the facilities are to be furnished.
(2) The person to which the facilities are furnished shall comply with
all of the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and
policies and procedures.
C. Duty to provide information. Within 10 days of a written request from
the Township, each permittee shall furnish the Township with
information sufficient to demonstrate the following: that the permittee
has complied with all requirements of this article; that all fees and taxes
due the Township in connection with the services and facilities provided
by the permittee have been properly paid by the permittee; and any
other information reasonably related to the permittee's obligations
pursuant to this article.
D. Right to inspect records. The Township shall have the right, upon 30
days' written notice and during normal business hours, to inspect all
documents, records, maps and other pertinent information maintained
by the permittee with that relate directly to the terms and conditions of
this article.
E. No substitute for other required permissions. No ROW use
authorization or ROW use permit includes, means, or is in whole or part
a substitute for any other permit or authorization required by the laws
and regulations of the Township for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the Township or any permit or agreement
for occupying any other property of the Township.
F. No waiver. The failure of the Township to insist on timely performance
or compliance by any permittee holding a right-of-way use authorization
shall not constitute a waiver of the Township's right to later insist on
timely performance or compliance by that permittee or any other
permittee holding such a right-of-way use authorization. The failure of
the Township to enforce any provision of this article on any occasion
shall not operate as a waiver or estoppel of its right to enforce any
provision of this article on any other occasion, nor shall the failure to
enforce any prior ordinance or Township charter provision affecting the
§ 294-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-37
1:389
right-of-way, any facilities, or any user or occupant of the right-of-way
act as a waiver or estoppel against enforcement of this article or any
other provision of applicable law.
G. Policies and procedures. The Township is authorized to establish such
written policies and procedures consistent with this article as the
Township deems necessary for the implementation of this article.
H. Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any
other action pursuant to this article, does not waive, reduce, lessen or
impair the lawful police powers vested in the Township under
applicable federal state and local laws and regulations.
I. Effective date. This article shall become effective on the 30th day
following enactment by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 294-37 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-37
1:390
ARTICLE V
Street Trees
[Adopted 11-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-15]
§ 294-38. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall have the following meanings, whether or
not the terms are capitalized. Unless otherwise expressly stated, terms not
defined in this article shall construed consistent with their common and
ordinary meaning.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area of any public street, road, highway or other
publicly held thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the Township that
has been designated by law as a public right-of-way.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving an intersection. The extents of sight triangles shall
be determined by using the most stringent requirements contained in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, Warrington Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, or Warrington Township Zoning Ordinance, as
applicable.
STREET TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant, which is planted in
any right-of-way, or has at least half of trunk, branches or roots extending
into any right-of-way.
§ 294-39. Maintenance.
A. The maintenance, care or removal of any tree, and required compliance
with any provision of this article shall be the responsibility of the
property owner on whose property the tree is located. The Township is
responsible for the maintenance, care or removal of street trees.
B. No person, without first obtaining permission from the Township, shall
plant a street tree within any public right-of-way.
C. All mature street trees shall be kept trimmed to a minimum branching
height of 10 feet where they overhang any public walk or public street.
However the Township may require greater height clearances to
eliminate traffic and other hazards. All trees standing on private
property and having branches projecting over a public walk or street
shall be kept trimmed by the owner of such private property so that the
lowest branches shall have a minimum height of 10 feet where they
overhang any public walk or public street.
D. Whenever, in the opinion of the Director of Code Enforcement, a health
or safety hazard is caused by a tree on private property that overhangs
a public walk or street, the Director of Code Enforcement may issue a
written order to the responsible property owner to take action to
correct the condition within 10 days of the date of the order. If after
§ 294-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-39
1:391
§ 294-40. Removal.
written notification, the responsible property owner fails to take
corrective action, the Director of Code Enforcement shall have the
required work accomplished to correct the health and safety condition
and shall bill the responsible property owner. Failure of the responsible
property owner to pay the bill shall result in a lien upon the property
which shall be filed and collected in the same manner as municipal
claims are filed and collected.
E. Whenever, in the opinion of the Director of Code Enforcement, any
vegetation or object located on private property obstructs the sight
distance of motorists in the sight triangle, the Director of Code
Enforcement may issue a written order to the responsible property
owner to take action to correct the condition within 10 days of the date
of the order. If after written notification, the responsible property
owner fails to take corrective action, the Director of Code Enforcement
shall have the required work accomplished to correct the health and
safety condition and shall bill the responsible property owner. Failure of
the responsible property owner to pay the bill shall result in a lien upon
the property which shall be filed and collected in the same manner as
municipal claims are filed and collected.
A. The Director of Code Enforcement may, upon concluding that a tree
located on private property is diseased and dying, or damaged beyond
recovery of health or poses a threat to property or safety, order the
responsible property owner to remove the tree. The responsible
property owner shall have 10 days from the date of the order to take
action. If after written notice, the responsible property owner fails to
take corrective action, the Director of Code Enforcement shall have the
tree removed and shall bill the responsible property owner. Failure of
the responsible property owner to pay the bill shall result in a lien upon
the property which shall be filed and collected in the same manner as
municipal claims are filed and collected.
B. In an emergency where a tree poses an immediate threat to health,
property or safety, the Director of Code Enforcement may order the
immediate removal of a tree. Prior to the removal of the tree, the
Director of Code Enforcement shall document how the tree poses an
immediate threat to health and safety. Prior to removal, the Director of
Code Enforcement shall make a good faith effort to notify the
responsible property owner. After removal, the Director of Code
Enforcement shall bill the responsible property owner for the cost of
removal. Failure of the responsible property owner to pay the bill shall
result in a lien upon the property which shall be filed and collected in
the same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
§ 294-39 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-41
1:392
§ 294-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and
may be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs; and/or
undergo imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 294-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-41
1:393
Chapter 305
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and Sewer Department — See Ch. 78.
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 181.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 257.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 294.
Water — See Ch. 353.
§ 294-41 WARRINGTON CODE § 294-41
1:394
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 305-101. Title. [Amended 1-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1; 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards governing
subdivision and land development within the Township, setting forth the
procedures to be followed by the Township Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors in administering these rules, regulations and
standards, and setting forth the penalties for the violation thereof as
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 305-102. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Warrington Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance."
§ 305-103. Purpose. [Amended 1-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision and
land development within Warrington Township, in order to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 305-104. Intent. [Amended 1-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1; 7-19-1988
by Ord. No. 88-11]
It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the subdivision and land
development in Warrington Township to ensure that:
A. The layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land development and
all other characteristics of the subdivision or land development shall
conform to the Comprehensive Plan for Warrington Township, as may
be amended from time to time, and shall further the orderly and
appropriate use of the land.
B. Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated with existing streets, parks, and other features of the
Township's Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, and shall be of such
widths and grades and in such locations as deemed necessary to
accommodate and regulate flows of prospective traffic from within this
development.
C. Adequate easements or rights-of-way shall be provided for drainage and
utilities.
D. Adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light, air and effective
drainage shall be provided in subdivisions and land developments, and
reservations, if any, by the developer of any area designed for use as
public grounds shall be of suitable size and location for their designated
uses.
§ 305-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-104
1:395
§ 305-105. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above stated purposes and intents. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other
ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where
the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater
restrictions than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance, or regulation shall prevail.
E. Land which is subject to flooding or subsidence shall either be made
safe for the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used or shall
be set aside for uses that will not endanger life or property or further
aggravate or increase the existing menace.
F. Adequate facilities for transportation (including streets, walkways,
curbs, gutters and streetlights), water, fire hydrants, sewage, storm
sewers, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public facilities will be
installed in the subdivision or land development.
G. Adequate provisions for safety from fire, panic, and other dangers have
been provided for in subdivisions and land developments.
H. Proper distribution of population has been provided for.
I. Land which contains environmentally sensitive areas or which is
adjacent to such sensitive areas shall be protected and used in a
manner that is not detrimental to the environment, or shall be set aside
from use such that the development will not require changes to existing
conditions.
§ 305-104 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-105
1:396
ARTICLE II
Glossary of Terms
§ 305-201. Application and interpretation.
§ 305-202. Definition of terms. [Amended 1-15-1988 by Ord. No.
85-1; 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings herein indicated:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, unless a contrary intention clearly
appears, the words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The words "person," "subdivider" and "owner" include a
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership or other legal
entity, as well as an individual engaged in the subdivision of land
and/or land development.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The word "Commission," the words "Planning Commission," and
the words "Township Planning Commission" always mean the
Warrington Township Planning Commission.
(6) The words "Township," "Supervisors," and "Board of Supervisors"
always mean the Warrington Township Board of Supervisors.
(7) The words "Zoning Ordinance" always mean the Warrington
Township Zoning Ordinance. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(8) The words "County Planning Commission" always mean Bucks
County Planning Commission.
(9) The words "should" and "may" are permissive; and the words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory and directive.
(10) References to "Form 408" shall include, as applicable, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation's Form 408 Specifications, as
amended, Form 409 Specifications, as amended, and Roadway
Construction Standards, Series RC (RC Standards), as amended.75
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06.
§ 305-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:397
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Deposits of unconsolidated materials, such as gravel,
sand, silt, clay and various mixtures of these, deposited by running
water.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — A source of energy generated from solar, wind,
geothermal or a similar renewable energy source, capable of adding energy
and utility provisions to a permitted use.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-15]
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — A private facility capable of converting
alternative energy sources into a viable energy source and utility provisions
for a permitted use. Such facilities may include solar panels, windmills,
wind turbines, geothermal systems and/or other similar renewable energy
technologies.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
ANAEROBIC DIGESTION — A process in which microorganisms break
down biodegradable material (biomass) in the absence of oxygen. It can
be used for industrial or domestic purposes to manage waste and/or to
release energy for cooking, heating or electric generation. All such facilities
shall be prohibited as an alternative or emerging energy facility.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
ATTACHED ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative or
emerging energy facility that is physically mounted, attached and/or
connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted
principal building in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and
building code requirements.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2014-O-15]
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) COUNT — The vehicular traffic generated
on a particular street by the homes on that street plus any through traffic.
ADT counts should be considered in a cumulative effect.
BLOCK — A parcel of land bounded on all sides by one or any combination of
the following: streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way excluding sidings
and spurs, corporate boundaries of Warrington Township.
The following soils in Warrington Township are alluvial:
(1) Bowmansville-knauers silt loam (Bo).
(2) Hatboro silt loam (Ha).
(3) Rowland silt loam (Ro).
A.
Soils are described and delineated in the most recent version of the
Bucks County Soil Survey in effect, as published electronically by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from time to
time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B.
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:398
BOLLARD — A fixed vertical column of wood or concrete extending no less
than 3 1/2 feet above parking grade and five feet below grade placed for
purposes of controlling vehicular traffic and protecting pedestrians.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, supported by columns, piers
or walls, including tents, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars,
mobile homes, or other structures on wheels, or having other supports
and any unroofed platform, terrace, or porch having a vertical face higher
than three feet above the level of the ground from which the building is
measured. A building may include more than one dwelling unit.
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard or setback required for the
district in which the lot is located, to be measured from the ultimate rightof-
way, the setback line.
CARTWAY — Actual improved or unimproved traveling surface commonly
understood as that area set aside for the passage of motor vehicles. Edge of
cartway where no curb exists shall be defined as curbline. Cartway widths
and classifications shall be those specified in this chapter.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with one end open for vehicular and
pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
soon after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall
event.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a major
subdivision or land development including a plat of subdivision, all
covenants relating to use, location, and bulk of buildings and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, driveways,
walks and parking facilities, common open space, and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this chapter shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, pipe, culvert, storm sewer, or structure
designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface
water from, or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way,
parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or land
development.
DWELLING —
A building, any portion of which is used or intended to be used for living
or sleeping by human occupants.
A.
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:399
EASEMENT — Granted right-of-use by one landowner over the land(s) of
another, without profit or ownership of the soil.
EMERGING ENERGY — A source of energy generated from technology
advancements in renewable energy sources, other than solar, water, wind
or geothermal sources, including but not limited to hydrogen fuel cells,
biomass or low-head hydro capable of providing energy and utility
provisions to a permitted use.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2014-O-15]
EMERGING ENERGY FACILITY — A private facility capable of converting
emerging energy sources into a viable energy source and utility provisions
for a permitted use.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
ENGINEERING CONSIDERATIONS — For the purpose of clearly identifying
the extent of the Township Engineer's responsibility in the review of
subdivisions and land developments, the following engineering
considerations are defined. The Engineer shall make recommendations
indicating approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision or land
development based upon the various engineering considerations identified
below as they are reflected in the submitted plans:
Any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a
single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
B.
A. Relative layout and design of lots and parcels.
B. Dimensions and areas of lots and parcels.
C. Soil conditions.
D. Surface and subsurface drainage conditions and plans.
E. Lighting plans.
F. Utility plans.
G. Landscape and buffer plans.
H. Location and design of entrance and exit accessways.
I. Road specifications, cross-sections, and profiles.
J. Land profiles.
K. Sewage disposal.
Conformance of the plans in all respects with Chapter 370, Zoning, of
the Code of the Township of Warrington.
L.
Improvements required — materials, construction methods,
workmanship.
M.
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:400
ENVIRONMENTAL RESTRICTION OVERLAY — An area or areas of special
restriction based on environmental sensitivity of the natural features, in
addition to those protected by existing zoning.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — Those portions of a site,
excluding resource protection areas as defined and regulated by Chapter
370, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, which are
environmentally sensitive, but the degree of sensitivity will be dependent
upon site location, type of development, alternative and mitigating
protective methods and similar parameters related to a specific site or
project. Sensitive areas which must be recognized, evaluated and addressed
include:
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having a financial interest in the
alternative and/or emerging energy facility, including their successors and
assigns.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or as delineated by the applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area.[Amended 4-26-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
FLOODWAY RESTRICTION OVERLAY — An area or areas of special
restriction in addition to those of existing zoning based on flood hazards as
delineated on the Township Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map.
FREESTANDING ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative or
emerging energy facility that is not physically mounted, attached and/or
connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted
principal building. All such facilities shall be considered a separate or
accessory structure that has the ability to convert and convey energy to the
principal use in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and building
code requirements.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY — Energy generated due to variations in the
subsurface temperature of soil, and/or use of hot springs, ground- or surface
water temperature gradients. There are two basic types of geothermal
systems, closed loop and open loop. Closed-loop systems that take
advantage of soil temperature gradients can be either horizontal or vertical
and utilize piping buried at different depths in the earth's soil. Open-loop
systems utilize either ground- (well) or surface (lake/stream) water as the
heat exchange medium, taking advantage of water temperature gradients
in the earth or in bodies of surface water. Open-loop systems are strictly
A. Streams, Type II.
B. Water bodies, Type II.
C. Transition areas.
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:401
prohibited in Warrington Township.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2014-O-15]
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY FACILITY — A passive or mechanical energy
generation facility, whose main purpose is to convert geothermal energy
into thermal energy to a permitted use. Such facilities may use closed
loop piping, heat exchangers, and mechanical infrastructure and related
appurtenant facilities.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils classified as hydric in map unit descriptions located
in the most recent version of the Bucks County Soil Survey, as electronically
published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from
time to time.[Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04; amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces include but
are not limited to streets, sidewalks, pavement roofs, or driveway areas.
Any surface areas designed to be pavers, gravel, or crushed stone shall
be regarded as impervious surfaces.[Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-04]
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township, county,
or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which has an
approved surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations, and changes,
such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sewers, drainage facilities,
public utilities, and other appropriate items required to render land suitable
for the use proposed.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
(1)
C.
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:402
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contact or purchase (whether or not such option
or contact is subject to any condition), a lessee having a remaining term of
not less than 40 years, or other person having a proprietary interest in land,
shall be deemed to be a landowner for the proposes of this chapter.
LOT — A parcel of land on which a main building and any accessory
buildings are or may be placed, together with the required open
spaces.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
LOT AREA, GROSS — The gross site area defined by the deed line.
LOT AREA, NET — Deeded lot area remaining after subtracting rights-ofway.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — Lot(s) fronting on two adjacent or parallel
streets.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot; a property line.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land or part
thereof into three or more lots, tracts or parcels of land which will require
improvements for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or of building development. Division of land for agricultural
purposes shall be exempted for parcels of more than 10 acres not involving
new streets or easements of access.
MANAGER — The Township Manager appointed as such by the Township
Board of Supervisors.
MINIMUM AVERAGE FOOTCANDLE — The lowest permitted average
measurement of illumination falling on a horizontal surface at ground level.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract, or parcel of land
into two lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership or of building development, providing the
proposed lots, tracts, or parcels of land thereby created have frontage on
an improved public street or streets and providing further that there is not
created by the subdivision any new street or streets, the need for required
improvements, easements or the need therefor. Any additional subdivision
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:403
of a lot created within 10 years of the date of the approval of a minor
subdivision shall be considered and deemed to be a major subdivision for
the purposes of this chapter and shall follow the procedures as outlined in
§§ 305-502 and 305-509.[Amended 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-05]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy or use as an office or place of assembly that is
contained in one unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing. Such a dwelling
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and is constructed so that it
may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park
owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MOBILE HOME PERMIT — Written approval issued by the Township
authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home or a mobile
home park under the provisions of this chapter.
NONPARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — Any landowner except those on
whose property all or a portion of an alternative and/or emerging energy
facility is located pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 370,
Zoning.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
OCCUPIED AREA — The total of the areas of all buildings on a lot. The
area of each building is the area of a horizontal section of such building on
any floor at or above ground level taken at its greatest outside dimensions,
including all structures except fences.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A building located on a parcel of land utilized
as a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 370,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.[Amended 6-24-2015
by Ord. No. 2014-O-15at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
OPEN AREA — Area or space at ground or any floor level which is open to
the sky.
OPEN SPACE — Shall be as defined in Chapter 370, Zoning, of the Code of
the Township of Warrington. Refer to Chapter 370 for types of open space
and methods of ownership.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the alternative and/or emerging energy facility.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:404
PARKING BAY — A length of parking stalls measured along the narrow
dimension, whether contiguous or not, along which residents or patrons
must walk to get to residential or commercial uses.
PARKING LOTS —
PARKING SPACE — That area defined by paint stripes or some other means
of delineation which is meant solely for the occupation of a motor vehicle.
Further, in calculating impervious coverage area required by parking
requirements, 450 square feet shall be allotted for each car. This figure
includes space assigned to moving lanes, access drives, and patron loading
and unloading areas. It does not include areas allotted for commercial
loading and unloading. These areas shall be calculated based on actual
designed areas. It does not include green areas left as a result of parking
area and circulation road designs.
PARKING STRUCTURE — Any structure of more than one level designed
for the storage of vehicles and which may contain access ramps. "Parking
structure" shall include the term "parking garage."
PARTIALLY UNUSABLE LAND (PUL) — That portion of the resource
protection area containing land which has environmental features making it
only partially usable for development and including the following:
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS — All walkways or sidewalks, not including
street sidewalks and walks directly accessing a building or group of
buildings, and onto which a number of walks or sidewalks converge.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created, from time to
time, under the provisions of Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended.76
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PRIVATE ENERGY AND UTILITY PROVIDER — A principal use owned,
operated and/or maintained by a private or independent utility company
for the purposes of providing energy within a defined service area or grid
system in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility
PRIVATE PARKING LOT — Any outdoor area or space where more than
three motor vehicles may be parked or kept without any charge.
A.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — Any outdoor area or space where motor
vehicles may be parked or kept for a charge, fee or other consideration.
B.
A. Areas with slopes greater than 8%.
B. Forest areas.
76.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Planning Department," added 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-01, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-06.
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:405
Commission and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered by the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
PUBLIC UTILITY — A private or municipal corporation organized and
existing for the distribution and sale of water, electricity, or gas or the
collection and disposal of sanitary waste or sewage in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate governing
body.
RENEWABLE ENERGY — Energy that comes from resources which are
continually replenished, such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves,
hydroelectric, biomass, hydrogen and geothermal heat.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS — That portion of the gross site area
which contains certain natural resources subject to environmental
limitations which must be protected as required by Chapter 370, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of Warrington. The land includes areas of a
site which are either totally or partially unusable land as a result of the
existence of certain environmental features and includes such areas as:
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet. The retention basin must
infiltrate stored water in four days or less.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-04]
RIGHT-OF-WAY —
A. Streams, Type I.
B. Water bodies, Type I.
C. Wetlands.
D. Steep slopes.
E. Forest.
A description of use; a type of easement with a defined location which
may be owned.
A.
A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, sanitary or storm sewer, stream, drainage ditch, or for
another special use. The use of the term "right-of-way" for land plotting
purposes in the Township shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final record plan is to be separate and
B.
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:406
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge after a fall of
rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface
water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of an area of the watershed located upstream from any subject
tract, as permitted by current or proposed zoning or the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the required
minimum distance between any building to be erected and the adjacent
ultimate right-of-way. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the
front street ultimate right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which
the building is located and shall be parallel to the ultimate right-of-way line.
SIGNIFICANT EXISTING VEGETATION — As determined by the Township
Engineer or a qualified horticulturist to be a stand of mature trees of sixinch
caliper or more or single trees or groups of individual trees of eightinch
caliper or more.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical distance in feet per 100 feet
of horizontal distance.
SOLAR ENERGY — Energy that is derived from the sun and typically
involves the use of photovoltaic (PV) panels to directly convert sunlight to
electrical energy, flat-panel thermal collectors used for hot water, space
heaters, swimming pools and greenhouses, and high-intensity mirror
collection systems for heating of fluids to temperatures sufficient to power
steam electric-generating facilities. Mirror solar collection systems are
specifically prohibited from use in Warrington Township.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — A passive or mechanical energy generation
facility whose main purpose is to convert solar (sun) energy into electrical
or thermal energy to a permitted use. Such facilities may use PV or thermal
distinct from lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not
included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The present legal right-of-way as
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other
appropriate governing body and currently in existence.
(1)
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal street, the area or public
way owned or acquired by the Township at the time of subdivision
by dedication; that line from which all future property setbacks are
measured; the street line.
(2)
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:407
collectors and include mechanical or electrical infrastructure and related
appurtenant facilities.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
STREAM — Any stream, channel, or stream protection area for conveyance
of surface water, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent
flow. Streams shall be classified as follows:
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private and also providing
access to abutting properties.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the ultimate right-ofway.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TOTALLY UNUSABLE LAND (TUL) — That portion of the resource
protection area containing land which cannot be developed and including
the following:
TYPE I — Area along a water conveyance facility supported by
stormwater runoff from a watershed area of 100 acres or more. The
width of each stream shall be determined by the more extensive limits
of the following:
FLOODPLAIN — One-hundred-year flood line and/or elevations as
delineated in the Flood Insurance Study for Warrington Township,
as prepared by United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development/Federal Insurance Administration.
(1)
(2) Alluvial soils.
CALCULATED FLOOD LIMIT — Line and/or elevation as
established by analysis of the drainage areas using approved USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service or United States Corps of
Engineers methods for a one-hundred-year frequency storm event.
(3)
A.
TYPE II — A water conveyance facility supported by stormwater runoff
from a watershed area of less than 100 acres. The width of each stream
shall be determined by the more extensive limits of the following:
(1) Alluvial soils.
CALCULATED FLOOD LIMIT — Line and/or elevation as
established by analysis of the drainage area using approved USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service or U.S. Corps of Engineers
methods for a one-hundred-year frequency storm event.
(2)
B.
A. Streams, Type I.
B. Water bodies, Type I.
C. Wetlands.
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:408
TRANSITION AREA — That portion of a site between the proposed use and
site improvements and the totally unusable land portion of the resource
protection areas of the site. Transition areas shall be measured from the
boundary of totally usable land and shall represent environmentally
sensitive areas of a site.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.[Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
UNIFORMITY RATIO (STREETLIGHTING) — The term normally applied to
streetlighting uniformity by the Illuminating Engineering Society. Given in
a ratio, e.g., of three to one, it means that the point of lowest footcandle
measurement cannot be less than 1/3 of the specified minimum average
footcandle level established in § 305-314 of this chapter.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
WATER BODY — Body of water, either natural or artificial such as a lake,
pond, etc., which retains surface water year around and has a normal water
level in excess of six inches in depth. Water bodies shall consist of the
following two types:
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas. Wetland areas
demonstrate hydric characteristics of soils, vegetation, and/or water table
as specified by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.[Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A mechanical energy or electric-generating
facility whose main purpose is to convert wind to mechanical energy or
supply electricity to a permitted use. Such facilities may include windmills,
wind turbines, blades, spirals, helixes and accessory structures, which may
also include buildings, pumping stations, grinders, substations, electrical
infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant facilities. Use of
such facilities shall be restricted to the RA District and with a minimum lot
size of three acres.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a generator, which may include
TYPE I — Water body with one acre or more of standing water. The
limits of this water body as regulated by this chapter shall be the top of
bank or a minimum horizontal dimension of five feet from the maximum
water service elevation.
A.
B. TYPE II — Water body with less than one acre of standing water.
§ 305-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-202
1:409
a nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer pad, and supporting energy and
transmission apparatus.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
WINDMILL — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy
into mechanical work, which may include a tower, rotor, gears, shafts,
axles and supporting mechanical energy conversion devices. Windmills may
be of the horizontal or vertical type.[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2014-O-15]
WINDMILL HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the
tower foundation to the highest point of the windmill rotor plane for vertical
windmills, and the distance from the surface of the tower foundation to the
highest point of the vertical shaft hub supporting the rotor for horizontal
windmills.77[Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-O-15]
YARD — The following type of yards are hereby established:
FRONT YARD — In residential districts, the required open space, across
the full width of the lot, extending from the street line to the nearest
structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, gutters or
cornices.
A.
SIDE YARD — The required open space extending from the required
front yard to the required back yard, except as provided for accessory
buildings, extending from the side line of the lot to the nearest
structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, gutters, or
cornices. The width of the side yard shall be measured at right angles
to the side line of the lot.
B.
REAR YARD — The required open space, the full width of the lot except
as provided for accessory buildings, extending from the rear line of the
lot to the nearest structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging
eaves, gutters or cornices. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured
at right angles to the rear line of the lot, or if the lot is not rectangular
then in the general direction of the side yard line.
C.
77.Editor's Note: The original definition of "wood-fired boiler," as amended 6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-15, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 305-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-202
1:410
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 305-301. Application.
The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered
minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 305-302. General.
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public
lands, or adjacent private lands shall be prohibited unless their control
is definitely placed with the Township under conditions approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. In general, lot lines shall follow Township boundary lines rather than
cross them.
D. Every possible means shall be provided to preserve trees, groves,
waterways, scenic points, historic spots, or other community assets and
landmarks that are located within a proposed subdivision or land
development.
E. Subdivisions or land developments shall be properly designed in order
to prevent the necessity for excessive cut or fill.
F. Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or property and
land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be subdivided or
developed for residential occupancy or for such other uses as may
endanger health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazards
until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the final plans. Such
land within a subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the
plan for uses that will not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
G. Where flooding is known to have occurred in the area shown on the
plan, such area shall be clearly marked "subject to periodic flooding,"
and no building or street shall be permitted in this area.
H. Subdividers are requested to give careful consideration to the
desirability of providing adequate rights-of-way and paving on existing
streets, and reserving areas and easements for facilities normally
required in residential sections, including churches, libraries, schools,
and other public buildings, parks, playgrounds, and playfields;
shopping and local business centers, rights-of-way and easements for
storm and sanitary sewer facilities in those areas that cannot be
§ 305-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-302
1:411
§ 305-303. Streets. [Amended 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 90-9;
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
immediately joined to the existing storm and sewer systems of the
Township.
I. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping, and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed. The Board of Supervisors
reserves the right to accept or refuse offers of dedication for public
uses.
J. All design and construction specifications which are not specifically
listed in this chapter shall be those specified in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation's Form 408 and Form 409,
Specifications, as amended, and RC Standards, as amended.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, grade and location of streets shall
conform to this chapter and the Township's Comprehensive Plan and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets.
B. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision or land development shall
either provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas, or conform to a plan for the
neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board of Supervisors to meet
a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make
continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
C. Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
D. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed expressway, arterial or collector street, the Board of
Supervisors, with a review by the Planning Commission and
professional consultants, may require either marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting along the rear property line,
extra-deep lots with rear service roads, or such other treatment as may
be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic. [Amended 2-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
E. Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing
streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall
not be repeated, and all street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
F. If the lots resulting from the original subdivision are large enough for
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable
access to street openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
§ 305-302 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-303
1:412
§ 305-304. Street classifications and requirements. [Amended
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
G. Where the subdivision or development adjoins unsubdivided acreage,
stub streets shall be provided to the boundary lines with temporary
easements for turnarounds equal to a width of 50 feet and a length of 75
feet.
H. Whenever an applicant proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication and not required to be offered for dedication, he
shall submit a copy of a statement signed by the Township Solicitor that
he has made an agreement on behalf of his heirs and assigns with the
Township. Said agreement shall be subject to the approval of the Board
of Supervisors and shall be recorded with the subdivision plan. Said
agreement shall establish the conditions under which the street may
later be offered for dedication, and stipulate, among other things, the
following:
(1) That the street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by the
Township Engineer or that the owners of the lots along it agree to
include with the offer of dedication sufficient money, as estimated
by the Township Engineer, to bring the street into conformance
with Township specifications.
(2) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the street
as a whole.
(3) That the method of assessing repair costs shall be as stipulated.
(4) The agreement to offer the street for dedication by the owners of
more than 50% of the lot road frontage shall be binding on owners
of the remaining lots.78
I. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a state
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Permits Office,
Doylestown, Pennsylvania.
J. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a
Township road is required to obtain a road occupancy permit from the
Township Manager after approval by the Township Engineer (see
Appendix D, Exhibit 3, of this chapter).79
K. Roads intended for dedication to the Township shall meet all
requirements necessary to be eligible for an allocation of state liquid
fuels tax funds, as administered by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Municipal Services.
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9, regarding meetings with significant traffic generators,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01.
79.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-304
1:413
A. Street classifications.
(1) Arterial streets and highways are those which are primarily for
throughways which carry fast-moving and heavy traffic, or may be
considered to handle interstate or transcontinental traffic. Such
streets or highways are generally restricted to limited access, and
for the most part the authority for control of access or construction
within their rights-of-way is vested within the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Public Roads, or the
United States Department of Commerce, or both. Average daily
traffic (ADT) of 3,001 or more.
(2) Collector streets are those which carry traffic from other collector,
primary or secondary streets into the system of arterial or major
highways. ADT of 1,001 to 3,000.
(3) Primary street are those which carry traffic from the secondary
streets to the system of collector streets. ADT of 501 to 1,000.
(4) Secondary street are those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties and generally serve only internally developed
areas. ADT of 201 to 500.
(5) Residential streets are those service areas of low population
density where abutting properties are of one acre or more in area.
Roads of this class may be considered a part of the master
development plan of the Township, but shall not be included in any
subdivision plan under this classification. ADT of zero to 200.
(6) Cul-de-sac streets are those which are closed at one end, and in
general shall not be more than 500 feet long terminating in a
turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and an
outer paving radius of 50 feet. The minimum right-of-way width
shall be 50 feet and the minimum cartway width shall be 30 feet.
ADT of zero to 200.
(7) Marginal access streets are minor streets of the secondary class
which are laid out parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and
highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
B. Minimum street requirements shall be:
Pavement Widths
Class
Guide
ADT
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Curbs
(feet)
No Curbs
(feet)
Sidewalk
Required
Curb
Required
Shoulder
(feet)
Arterial 3,000+ — —
Easton
Road
120 — — Yes3 Yes No
§ 305-304 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-304
1:414
Pavement Widths
Class
Guide
ADT
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Curbs
(feet)
No Curbs
(feet)
Sidewalk
Required
Curb
Required
Shoulder
(feet)
All others 100 — — Yes3 Yes No
Collector 1,001 to
3,000
60 36 28 Yes Yes2 61
Primary 501 to
1,000
60 30 26 Yes3 Yes2 61
Secondary 201 to
500
50 26 24 Yes3 Yes2 61
Residential 0 to 200 50 26 24 Yes3 Yes2 61
Cul-de-sac 0 to 200 50 26 24 Yes3 Yes3 61
Marginal
access
— 50 26 — Yes3 Yes2 61
NOTES:
1 The curb requirements for these street classifications may be waived in whole or in part when
it has been satisfactorily demonstrated to the Township there will be no danger from vehicles
or storm drainage.
2 When the curb requirements of this chapter have been waived, a stabilized shoulder of
the dimension specified shall be used on both sides of the proposed street. Construction
standards shall be those specified in § 305-312 of this chapter or a substitute approved by the
Township Engineer.
3 The sidewalk requirements for these street classifications may be waived in whole or in part
when it is satisfactorily demonstrated to the Township that sufficient interior development
pedestrian pathways connecting recreational, residential, commercial and transportation
center have been provided to accommodate expected pedestrian volumes.
4 The final determination of average daily traffic count (ADT) shall be set by the Township.
C. The following are considered to be minimum street construction
standards; more-restrictive standards may be applied if conditions
warrant:
§ 305-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-304
1:415
§ 305-305. Street arrangement.
Street
Prepared
Subgrade
Subbase
(inches) Base Course
Wearing
Surface
Arterial
streets
Yes 4 10 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Bituminous
surface course:
ID-2A, 2 1/2
inches (1-inch
wearing course in
1 1/2-inch binder)
Collector
streets
Yes 4 10 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Primary
streets
Yes 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Secondary
streets
Yes 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Residential
streets
Yes 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Cul-de-sac
streets
Yes 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Marginal
access
streets
Yes 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Driveways
and parking
areas
No 3 8 inches of
crushed
aggregate
Same as above
Bituminous
sidewalks
No No 4 inches of
stone
2 inches ID-2A
D. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing
street of inadequate right-of-way width, a future right-of-way width
shall be indicated on the plan to conform to the standards shown in
§ 305-504B.
E. Where there are present streets, the Board of Supervisors may grant
such reasonable exceptions to the requirements for grading and width
of cartway provided for in this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest, subject to conditions necessary to ensure adequate
streets and other public improvements.
§ 305-304 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-305
1:416
§ 305-306. Street alignment.
A. Streets shall be arranged in conformity to the Township Comprehensive
Plan adopted and approved by the Township Board of Supervisors.
B. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation or
approximate projection of existing collector or primary streets in
surrounding areas.
C. Secondary streets shall be so laid out that through traffic will be
discouraged. In general, the intersection interval of secondary streets
from opposite directions shall be located at not less than 125 feet, from
the center line to center line, of the next nearest intersection point of
the entering street from the opposite side.
D. Streets of the primary or secondary class shall not intersect with
collector streets at intervals of less than 800 feet from the game side of
the collector street.
E. Marginal access streets shall be provided when a development adjoins
a major highway or arterial route. Such streets shall provide immediate
access to all abutting lots, and prevent immediate lot access to major
highways and arterial routes.
F. The center-line profile of streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the
land so as to produce usable lots and streets consistent to reasonable
grade, alignment, drainage, and future municipal sanitary facilities.
G. The rights-of-way shall be graded to their full width as deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors to provide suitable finished
grades to the tolerances herein specified. In no case shall the rights-ofway
be less than that specified in § 305-304B, Minimum street
requirements.
H. Provision for additional street width may be required by the Board of
Supervisors in specific cases for:
(1) Public safety and convenience.
(2) Parking in commercial or industrial areas and in areas of highdensity
residential development.
(3) Widening existing streets where the minimum width outlined in
these specifications does not meet with the specific requirements
of the individual street.
A. The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector streets
shall be 500 feet, for primary streets, 350 feet, and for secondary,
residential and cul-de-sac streets, 150 feet.
B. Street superelevations.
§ 305-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-306
1:417
(1) Street superelevations shall only be required on collector and
arterial streets. All curves shall be superelevated in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part 2, Highway Design, as amended.
(2) On all types of pavement or all subbase construction, curves to be
superelevated shall conform to the requirements set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual, Part 2,
Highway Design, as amended. The crown will be removed and the
slope will be uniform from the inside to the outside of the
pavement. Full superelevation will be attained at the point of
curvature (PC) and the point of tangency (PT) with runouts as
indicated in the Design Manual. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) The normal grade of the inside edge of the pavement or the center
line of the pavement will be held as a baseline from which all
superelevation will be applied. The method to be used shall be as
directed by the Township.
C. Proper sign distances shall be provided for both horizontal and vertical
alignment, measured along the center line. Minimum sight distances
shall be 500 feet for collector streets, 400 feet for primary streets, and
250 feet for secondary streets. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at
all intersections. Measured along the center line, there shall be a clear
sight triangle of 75 feet from the point of intersection for fifty-foot
rights-of-way and 130 feet for sixty-foot rights-of-way. This sight line
shall be indicated on all plans of street alignment. No existing or
proposed structures or planting, the highest point of which is two feet
above road center line, shall be permitted in this area.
D. Intersections shall be approached from all sides by leveling areas. Such
leveling areas shall have a minimum length of 50 feet measured from
the edge of pavement of the transverse street within which no grade
shall exceed 4%.
E. At changes in grade of more than 1%, vertical curves shall be used. The
length of the curve shall be a minimum of 100 feet on collector and
primary streets and a minimum of 50 feet on secondary streets for
every 1% change in grade. Vertical alignment shall conform as much as
practical to the existing contour of ground within the limitations herein
stipulated.
F. In horizontal alignment of streets, a minimum tangent length measured
at the center line of 100 feet shall be provided on collector and primary
streets between the P.T. of the first curve and the P.C. of the second
curve, unless otherwise approved by the Township. In no case shall two
curves in reverse direction be joined together without the minimum
one-hundred-foot tangent length provided for the above two
classifications of streets. Secondary streets shall be excepted from the
§ 305-306 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-306
1:418
above stipulated requirement of minimum tangent lengths between
curves and shall be as required or approved by the Township.
G. A minimum grade of 1% shall be established on all primary or
secondary streets and a minimum grade of 0.5% shall be established for
all collector, residential, and cul-de-sac streets upon prior approval by
the Township.
H. Maximum grades of 5% shall generally apply. In exceptionally hilly
areas, a maximum grade of 6% on collector and primary streets, and
10% on secondary, residential and cul-de-sac streets for a maximum
distance of 1,500 feet will be permitted, subject to approval by the
Township.
I. Maximum grades within 100 feet of the outer perimeter of a turnaround
shall not exceed 4% as measured along the center line of the street.
J. A combination of minimum radius horizontal curves and maximum
grades will not be approved.
K. A normal crown shall be provided on all streets, not superelevated, of 5/
16 inch per foot straight slope extending in cross section from edge of
pavement to center line or from edge of pavement to medial edge,
whichever will apply, symmetrical to the center line.
L. Whenever practicable, right-of-way lines shall intersect at right angles.
When secondary streets intersect primary or collector streets or when
secondary, residential, or cul-de-sac streets intersect with one another,
the angle of intersection of the street center lines shall not be less than
60°.
M. Whenever practicable, right-of-way lines shall intersect at right angles.
When secondary streets intersect primary or collector streets or when
secondary, residential, or cul-de-sac streets intersect with one another,
the angle of intersection of the street center lines shall not be less than
60°.
N. When applicable, street curb intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet for secondary,
residential, or cul-de-sac streets and 30 feet for intersections which
incorporate primary or collector streets.
O. Dedication of half streets at the perimeter of a new subdivision is
prohibited. If circumstances render this impracticable, adequate
provision of the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the
street must be furnished by the subdivider. Where there exists a half
street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided
by the proposed development.
P. Reserve strips controlling ingress and egress are prohibited. When the
subdivision adjoins unsubdivided acreage, new streets shall be
provided through to the boundary lines of the development at locations
§ 305-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-306
1:419
§ 305-307. Cul-de-sac streets.
reviewed by the Township Planning Commission and approved by the
Board of Supervisors with temporary easements for turnarounds.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Q. Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing
named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. All street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
R. Whenever curbs are to be constructed across private driveways within
residential areas or driveway approaches of ingress or egress from
abutting industrial or commercial properties, the curb shall be as
follows: the minimum longitudinal length of depressed curb for private
driveway crossings shall be 12 feet and the maximum longitudinal
length for driveway crossings in commercial or industrial areas shall be
35 feet. When required, and approved by the governing authorities,
separated driveway approaches may be constructed for entrance and
exit to abutting properties. Such individual driveway approaches shall
not exceed the maximum longitudinal length of 35 feet of depressed
curb at each driveway approach and a standard curb section shall be
constructed as a separating curb between the driveways. Depressed
curbs shall conform to the dimensions and details of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 Specifications and RC
Standards, as amended.
S. A long-radius curve shall be preferred in all cases to a series of short
curves and tangents.
A. A cul-de-sac permanently terminated will not be approved when a
through street is practicable. The subdivider shall have the burden of
showing the impracticability of the through street in order to justify a
cul-de-sac.
B. A cul-de-sac permanently or temporarily exceeding 500 feet in length
may be approved by the Board of Supervisors if conditions of the land
so warrant.
C. A cul-de-sac permanently terminated according to the subdivision plan
shall be provided with a circular turnaround with a minimum right-ofway
radius of 60 feet and an outer paving radius of 50 feet.
D. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed with a paved turnaround of
fifty-foot radius within the approved right-of-way. Drainage structures
for such temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed and located in
consideration of future through streets.
E. Where possible, all storm drainage, whether surface or subsurface,
shall be directed toward the open end of the cul-de-sac.
§ 305-306 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-307
1:420
§ 305-308. Alleys.
Alleys are not permitted.
§ 305-309. Driveways.
§ 305-310. Automobile parking facilities. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-12]
F. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line, and
a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the
property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street
into the adjoining street. At such time as the street is extended, the area
created by the turnaround shall revert ownership to the property owner
fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.
A. Driveways shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide a
reasonable sight distance at intersections with streets. A stopping area,
measured 20 feet behind the right-of-way line, shall be provided not to
exceed a 4% grade. Driveways shall not interfere or be inconsistent
with the design, maintenance and drainage of or the safe passage of
traffic on Township or state roads.
B. Driveways, where provided, shall be located not less than 40 feet from
the intersection corner of corner lots and shall provide access to the
street of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of
two different classifications as herein defined.
C. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a state
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Permits Office,
Doylestown, Pennsylvania [see Appendix D, Exhibit 380].
D. Two copies of subdivision preliminary plans shall be submitted to the
District Engineer, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, for
review of traffic considerations, driveways, and the discharge of any
water on the road right-of-way.
A. Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off street in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended.
B. At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be permitted along the
public streets. All parking lots and bays permitting parking other than
perpendicular shall be reviewed in depth by the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors with special attention to
circulation and access. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
80.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-310
1:421
C. All parking areas, drives or access and circulation roads shall be
physically defined by one or more of the following methods: concrete
curbing, wood or concrete bollards, railroad ties, or concrete tire stops.
All of the above shall be to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications. Bituminous curbing may be approved for use in areas
where traffic volumes are low and there is little or no potential for
damage.
D. No one single parking line shall exceed 12 cars. Lines exceeding 12
cars shall be separated by a planting strip equal to the width of one
parking stall.
E. Where parking areas exceed 350 feet in length (measured along the
narrow stall dimension), the parking areas shall be separated from one
another by ten-foot planting strips or pedestrian walkways or both. In
areas where there are multiple parallel parking areas, the pedestrian/
planting strip shall be required on every other parking area starting
with areas adjacent to access or circulation roads. Such planting strips
may be used in calculating optional landscape reserve areas as defined
in the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, § 370-3402B(3). [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
F. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following
table.
Parking Stall Driveway
Angle of
Parking
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 9.5 18.5 22 22
60° 9.5 18.5 17 18
45° 9.5 18.5 13 13
30° 9.5 18.5 12 11
Parallel 8 22 12 11
G. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup
area for the end stalls of the parking lot.
H. Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed
to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the
moving of any other motor vehicle.
I. No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all
curblines in all parking areas.
J. Except at entrance and exit drives, all parking areas shall be set back
from the ultimate right-of-way line at least 15 feet. The distance
between this required setback and the future right-of-way shall be
maintained as a planting strip. See Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended,
§ 305-310 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-310
1:422
§ 305-311. Sidewalks.
for each district's specific requirements, and § 305-325, Landscaping,of
this chapter.
K. The construction of all automobile parking areas shall be in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Specifications, as amended.
L. The required number of parking spaces shall be in accordance with
requirements for each zoning district as specified in Chapter 370,
Zoning, as amended.
A. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets classified as
secondary streets or greater in all districts except in Residential
Agricultural (RA) Districts, where sidewalks will be required in
developments of five homes or more. Sidewalks may also be required at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors along residential streets and
culs-de-sac where foot traffic volumes warrant. [Amended 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
B. In lieu of sidewalk requirements, as an alternate, sidewalks or
pedestrian walkways may be located within the development common
open space when connecting various areas of the development with
recreation, commercial, or transportation centers.
C. The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet. There shall be a
minimum four-foot planting strip between the curb and sidewalk.
Combination sidewalks and curbs are not permitted in residential
areas. A greater sidewalk width may be required in multifamily,
commercial or industrial areas when, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, it is needed for emergency access, maintenance, or police
patrols. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
D. The grades and paving of the sidewalk shall be continuous across
driveways except in cases where safety considerations or storm
drainage requirements dictate otherwise.
E. At corners and pedestrian street crossing points, sidewalks shall be
extended to the curbline with an adequate apron area for anticipated
pedestrian traffic.
F. Sidewalks adjacent to angle-type parking areas shall have a minimum
of three feet of additional width to permit pedestrian movement beyond
the bumper overhang area.
G. Sidewalks shall be of concrete construction except, when considered
appropriate by the Township, bituminous concrete may be used.
H. Sidewalks shall be built in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408 Specifications, as amended.
§ 305-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-312
1:423
§ 305-312. Curbs.
§ 305-313. Street signs.
Street signs will be installed by the Township and paid for by the developer.
§ 305-314. Lighting. [Amended 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13;
3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4; 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-11]
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all streets as stipulated in
§ 305-304B of this chapter.
B. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development
abuts (hereinafter called "boundary streets"), curbs shall be
constructed and the existing paved cartway shall be widened to the
curb. The location of curbing along a boundary street shall be
determined by the width of the required cartway of the street as
specified in § 305-304 of this chapter.
C. All curbs shall be constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 Specifications, as amended.
Also see § 305-310C of this chapter.
D. Stabilized shoulder of no less than six feet in width shall be used on all
streets when approval has been given for no curbs, and shall be
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Form 408 Specifications, as amended.
A. Lighting shall be provided along public streets and within parking
facilities and recreational facilities as required by the Warrington
Township Board of Supervisors. A lighting plan shall be prepared by the
developer in accordance with Article V of this chapter.
B. All parking areas, walkways, and passageways serving commercial and
residential land developments shall be illuminated to the satisfaction of
the Warrington Township Board of Supervisors and Township lighting
consultant.
C. Where streetlights are not required by the Board of Supervisors within
residential subdivisions and land developments, individual driveway
lampposts, with photo-cell, automated power switches, shall be
installed at the ultimate right-of-way line for all single-family dwelling
lots.
D. Where required by the Board of Supervisors, streetlights and all
accessory equipment shall be provided at the expense of the developer,
at all intersections, ends of culs-de-sac, and between all intersections at
spacing approved by the Township lighting consultant. As a minimum,
all residential developments (or other, as required by the Board of
Supervisors) shall be constructed with a minimal number of
connections (to the power source), underground streetlight wiring
system (wire protected by conduit), including all accessory equipment
§ 305-312 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-314
1:424
required for future installation of streetlights (and foundations) by
others. A plan for lighting and underground wiring system (energizing
plan) shall be prepared by the developer and submitted for review and
approval by the Township lighting consultant at the time of preliminary
plan submission.
E. All streetlights, where required by the Board of Supervisors, shall have
a high-pressure sodium vapor lighting source (pole-mounted) which
supplies a minimum maintained footcandle (fc) level of 0.30 fc. All
lighting and accessory equipment shall be standard equipment as
approved by the Township lighting consultant or variations as approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
F. Streetlights shall be energized at the time of 50% occupancy of the
development. All fees for connection and operation of such lights shall
be the responsibility of the developer until Warrington Township
formally accepts dedication of public improvements. Warrington
Township shall coordinate energizing of lights in accordance with the
approved energizing plan. Requests for electrical connection shall be
made by the Warrington Township lighting consultant after obtaining
written permission from the Township Zoning Officer. Warrington
Township shall pay all associated connection and operation fees (to the
electrical utility), for which the developer shall reimburse the Township
for connection fees and operation fees under the appropriate rate, on a
monthly basis, including appropriate administration fees. This payment
arrangement shall continue until formal acceptance of dedication of
public improvements, at which time Warrington Township shall assume
these responsibilities. The developer shall warrant all parts and
associated labor for the streetlighting system until 18 months from the
date of formal acceptance of public improvements by the Township.
G. Upon completion of streetlight installation, the developer or his
designated representative shall notify the Township lighting consultant
and Township Engineer, in writing, of completion of lighting facilities. A
copy of the electrical underwriter's certificate shall also be included
with this notification.
H. All other proposed site lighting, such as building lights, sidewalk/
walkway/pathway illumination, driveway illumination, signs, or other
ornamental lighting, shall be shown in sufficient detail on the lighting
plan to allow determination of the effects on adjacent properties, traffic
safety, and overhead sky glow.
I. Unless stated herein or otherwise required by the Board of Supervisors,
all lighting systems shall utilize high-intensity discharge sources.
Minimal maintained intensity of illumination shall be no less intense
than 1.00 fc and no more intense than 3.00 fc. The incident light spilloff
at the development boundaries shall not exceed 0.10 fc along off-street
areas and 0.30 fc along public roadways.
§ 305-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-314
1:425
§ 305-315. Blocks.
J. For freestanding lighting, all fixtures shall utilize appropriate full-cutoff
luminaires. Shielding shall be provided to screen light sources at angles
above 72° from the vertical. The maximum height of freestanding
fixtures shall not exceed 30 feet. Fixture heights shall be measured
from the bottom of the fixture to ground level.
K. For building-mounted lighting, shielding shall be provided so as to
screen the light source at angles above 72° from the vertical. In all
cases, lighting will not be permitted along the outline of a building(s) or
along rooflines.
L. For canopy lighting, all fixtures shall be recessed in the canopy with no
lens lower than the canopy surface. Recessed fixtures shall be shielded
so that the light source is screened at angles above 90° from the
vertical.
M. Maximum pole heights shall be determined by the use of the lights and
shall not exceed the pole heights shown in the table below:
Use
Maximum Pole Height
(feet)
Residential uses 15
Nonresidential uses
Commercial 30
Industrial 30
Institutional 30
Athletic fields
Baseball, softball, football, soccer 80
Tennis, basketball 40
Other sports 40
N. Lighting design for properties situated in the Corridor Overlay District
shall comply with the supplemental regulations for the Corridor Overlay
District. When the Corridor Overlay District regulations differ from this
section, the more-stringent requirements shall apply.
A. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
regard to:
(1) The planned use of the land.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot size, dimension, and minimum lot
area per dwelling unit.
(3) Need for convenient access.
§ 305-314 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-315
1:426
§ 305-316. Lots.
(4) Control and safety of street traffic.
(5) The limitations and opportunities of the topography.
B. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum length of at
least 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,600 feet.
C. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to provide two
tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the applicable zoning
classification, except in the case of lots along a major thoroughfare,
where the lots front on an interior street.
D. Modifications of the above requirements are possible in multifamily,
commercial, and industrial developments.
E. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with a concrete
paving not less than four feet wide shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities.
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 370,
Zoning, as amended.
C. All lots shall have access to a public street of at least a fifty-foot width,
except multifamily use, which may have access to a deed-restricted
parking area and access road but shall be accessible from a public
street. Lots where the front and rear property lines abut streets shall be
prohibited, except in the case of reverse frontage along major
thoroughfares.
D. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances whatsoever.
E. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line.
F. The depth and width of lots reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial uses shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking
generated by the use.
G. Lots excessively deep in relation to width, or lots excessively irregular
in shape are to be avoided. A proportion of 2 1/2 in depth to one in
width is generally accepted as a proper maximum.
H. House numbers shall be assigned by the Township Engineer and shall
be indicated on the final plan.
I. Existing buildings. The following regulations shall apply as they affect
tracts upon which buildings exist at the time of the subdivision:
§ 305-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-316
1:427
§ 305-317. Easements.
(1) Nonconforming yard requirements. The subdivision of a tract
which creates nonconforming side and/or rear yards for existing
buildings will not be approved. Nonconforming front yards may be
approved if necessary to obtain proper street alignment.
(2) Alterations and replacements will be permitted within the existing
structure, but exterior extensions of the building must conform to
the requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended.
(3) Conversions. In cases where the principal building use has not
been as a dwelling, its conversion to a dwelling shall comply with
all of the requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended, and
the Township's Building Code.81
A. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided as
necessary for utilities or drainage, either existing or proposed.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
C. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the
area of an easement necessary for access and maintenance on any
utility or drainage way contained within that easement. Where such
easements contain existing vegetation, i.e., trees and/or ground cover,
as much as possible of the existing vegetation shall be maintained in its
natural state to preserve the natural appearance and stabilize soil
conditions. Where such vegetation exists, clearing plans shall be
approved by the Township before clearing commences.
D. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse
or drainageway, there shall be provided a drainage easement or rightof-
way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and
of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage but not
less than 20 feet, or as may be required or directed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The subdivision owner shall
properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open ditches when it is
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors. Within the restrictions
of this section, the Board of Supervisors may permit or require such
drainageway improvements to effectively improve the quality and
character of such drainageway. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01]
E. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within the
subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in
concentrated volumes over lands within or beyond the boundaries of
the subdivision or land development, the applicant or subdivision owner
shall reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected thereby; such
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes.
§ 305-316 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-317
1:428
§ 305-318. Clearing, grading and drainage.
easements shall be adequate for such discharge of drainage and for
the carrying off of such water and for the maintenance, repair, and
reconstruction of the same, including the right of passage over and
upon the same by vehicles, machinery, and other equipment for such
purposes, and which shall be of sufficient width for such passage and
work. The subdivision owner shall convey, free of charge or cost, such
easements to the Township upon demand.
F. The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township and at the
owner's sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted, set or put
(with or without knowledge of this regulation) within the area of any
easement.
G. No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the
approved plan.
A. Clearing. Proposed clearing in areas of significant existing vegetation
(to be determined by the Township) shall not commence without review
and approval by Township agencies. A building location plan(s) locating
trees over six inches in diameter with common name and proposed
grading when existing topography exceeds 8% must be submitted for
review with final plan submission. In addition, a site inspection of the
uncleared lots with building locations staked is required before building
permits will be issued for the individual lot or lots. Clearing for
agricultural uses shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Grading and drainage.
(1) Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away
from buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface
waters to the nearest practical and adequate street, storm drain, or
natural watercourse. Subdividers must carry surface waters to the
nearest practical storm drain or natural watercourse. The
subdivision owner, at his expense, shall construct and/or install
such drainage structures and/or pipes as are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off such surface waters.
(3) No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper than 45°,
except under one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of 45°
and passing through any portion of the cut face will be entirely
inside of the property lines of the property on which the
excavation was made.
(b) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than one horizontal to one
§ 305-317 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-318
1:429
vertical, and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer
and approved by him. The statement shall state the site has
been inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified
hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or damage to
property.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall is provided to support the
face of excavation, designed in accordance with the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials'
Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 1973, and
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Form 409 Specifications, as amended.
(4) No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in
slope than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or
more of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a civil engineer licensed by the
commonwealth and experienced in erosion control, certifying
that he has inspected the site and that the proposed deviation
from the slope specified above will not endanger any property
or result in property damage, is submitted to and approved by
the Township Engineer.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall is provided to support the
face of excavation, designed in accordance with the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials'
Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 1973, and
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Form 409 Specifications, as amended.
(5) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of five feet
from property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property.
(6) In view of the need for erosion and sediment control, the Township
Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of
Supervisors may require a review of development plans by the
Bucks County Soil and Water Conservation District and may ask for
technical assistance in determining water runoff and solutions for
solving water problems as they relate to erosion and soil control.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
§ 305-318 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-319
1:430
§ 305-319. Stormwater management. [Amended 1-22-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-1; 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
A. General.
(1) Storm drainage required. A storm sewer system and all
appurtenances shall be required to be constructed by the owner or
subdivider in any area from which the surface or subsurface
drainage could impair public safety or cause physical damage to
adjacent land or public property. The system(s) shall be designed to
collect water at any point where three to five cubic feet per second
is accumulated, at the bottom of all vertical grades, and
immediately upgrade from all street intersections. The system(s)
shall discharge to the nearest practical natural drainage channel or
storm system.
(2) Off-site improvements. Any necessary corrective measures deemed
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors to alleviate any off-street
drainage problem affected by the subdivision or land development
must be undertaken by the developer or subdivider. The costs for
such measures will be borne entirely by the developer or
subdivider.
(3) Total watershed evaluation. The future use of undeveloped areas
upstream as shown on the approved Township Comprehensive Plan
shall be taken into account in the calculation of pipe sizes for storm
sewer system designs. The capacity and maximum anticipated
present flow of the body or system receiving the proposed
system's(s') discharge shall be calculated to verify its capability of
receiving any additional flow caused by the development or
subdivision. The runoff from any proposed development shall be
subject to an evaluation which includes the anticipated runoff from
other existing or proposed developments within the same
watershed. Stormwater management facilities designed to serve
more than one property or development in the same watershed are
encouraged; consultation with the Township is required prior to the
design of such facilities.
(4) Underdrains. All building foundations, grade slabs, and cellar
floors located in soils that have a community seasonal high-water
table within 18 inches of the bottom of the slab or foundation
bottom (as determined by on-site soil exploration) shall be provided
with an underdrain system. This system shall provide for drainage
of the enclosed volume above the slab and relief of subsurface
water to a depth of not less than 18 inches below the slab or
foundation bottom. The system shall consist of a perforated pipe
field of the herringbone or gridiron configuration in coarse gravelfilled
trenches that are in direct contact with the slab or foundation
subbases. The excavation shall provide a minimum of 0.05 foot/foot
slope to the gravel-filled trenches.
§ 305-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-319
1:431
(5) Drainage from nonnatural sources. Water originating from otherthan-
natural sources, such as air-conditioning units, sump pumps,
or other dry-weather flow, shall be discharged into natural
watercourses on the property or connected to the storm drainage
system of the Township as permitted in Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management, of the Warrington Township Code of Ordinances.
Pollutional matter may not be deposited into natural watercourses
or storm drains.
(6) Highway occupancy permit. A highway occupancy permit is
required from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation if
water is to be carried in any way onto the state highway right-ofway
or into the state highway storm drainage system. [See
Appendix D, Exhibit 3.82]
(7) Contribution to comprehensive drainage plan. The developer may
be required to participate in off-site storm drainage improvements
in the drainage basin within which the proposed development is
located. The specific off-site drainage improvements required shall
be those specified by the Township Board of Supervisors as part of
the Township Comprehensive Stormwater Drainage Plan.
B. Stormwater management plan.
(1) A stormwater management plan shall be submitted fulfilling the
requirements contained in Chapter 288, Stormwater Management.
(2) Storm drain pipes and inlets.
(a) Design flow rate.
[1] The storm drain system shall be designed to carry a fiftyyear
peak flow rate. Precipitation data to be used in the
analysis of peak rates of discharge shall be obtained from
the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States Department
of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/. The design fifty-year
peak flood rate into each inlet shall be indicated on the
stormwater drainage plan. All design computations shall
be submitted in tabular form. The fifty-year peak flow rate
shall be determined by the Rational Formula.
Q = CIA
Where:
Q = Peak runoff rate, in cubic feet per second.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-319 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-319
1:432
C = Runoff coefficient equal to the ratio of the
peak runoff rate to the average rate of
rainfall over a time period equal to the time
of concentration.
I = Average rainfall intensity in inches per hour
for a time equal to the time of
concentration.
A = Drainage area in acres.
[2] Appropriate values for runoff coefficients and rainfall
intensities can be found in Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management.
(b) Inlet capacity. All inlets must be designed to accommodate the
fifty-year peak flow rate. The capacity of all C-, M-, or S-type
inlets shall be determined from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design. The
design capacity of all four-foot special inlets shall be 5.5 cubic
feet per second, and all six-foot special inlets shall be 6.5 cubic
feet per second. The capacity of each inlet shall be indicated on
the stormwater drainage plan.
(c) Straight pipe sections. Wherever possible, all storm drain
pipes shall be designed to follow straight courses. No
horizontal curves of a radius of less than 450 feet shall be
permitted in the storm drain pipe system. No vertical curves
shall be permitted in the storm drain pipe system.
(d) Minimum grade and size. All storm drain pipes shall be
designed to maintain a minimum grade of 0.5%; all storm pipes
shall have a minimum inside diameter of 18 inches or a crosssectional
area of 254 square inches, except that pipes under a
twenty-five-foot or greater fill shall not be less than 24 inches
or a cross-sectional area of 453 square inches.
(e) Pipe capacity. The capacity of all pipe culverts shall, as a
minimum, provide the required carrying capacity as
determined by the following sources:
[1] United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular
No. 5, Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway
Culverts. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
[2] United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular
No. 10, Capacity Charts for the Hydraulic Design of
Highway Culverts. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 305-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-319
1:433
[3] United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular
No. 13, Hydraulic Design of Improved Inlets for Culverts.
(f) Pipe arches. Where headroom is restricted, equivalent pipe
arches may be used in lieu of circular pipe.
(g) Allowable headwater depth. At all inlets or manholes, the
maximum allowable headwater depth shall be one foot below
the top of the inlet grate or the manhole cover.
(h) Horizontal pipe deflections. A manhole or inlet shall be
provided at all horizontal deflections in the storm pipe system
exceeding 1°.
(i) Minimum cover. A minimum of three feet of cover shall be
maintained over all storm drain pipes. The top of storm drain
pipes shall be at least six inches below subgrade elevation.
(j) Match crowns. The crowns of all pipes tying into an inlet or
manhole shall be set at equal elevations.
(k) Diversion of runoff. All storm drain pipes shall be designed to
carry the runoff into a detention basin or similar facility
utilized to control the rate of runoff.
(l) Material. All pipe material shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer. All storm drain pipes shall be
reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or elliptical reinforced concrete
pipe (ERCP) conforming to the specifications of the most
recent version of PennDOT Publication 408, as amended. Highdensity
polyethylene pipe (HDPE) conforming to PennDOT
Publication 408 may be used with the approval of the Township
Engineer. Corrugated metal pipe (CMP) may not be used
within the ultimate right-of-way of any road maintained by
Warrington Township.
(3) Runoff control measures.
(a) Runoff control. All stormwater runoff shall conform to the
requirements contained in Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management, in regards to the volume of stormwater runoff,
peak rate of discharge of stormwater runoff, and stormwater
runoff quality.
(b) Design of detention basins. All detention basins shall be
designed in accordance with the procedures developed by the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service in Technical
Release No. 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, or
other methods described in Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management. In addition, detention basis shall be designed to
utilize the natural contours of the land and result in broad,
§ 305-319 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-319
1:434
shallow basins whenever possible. Maximizing a basin's depth
and side slopes, in contrast to the surrounding topography, in
order to obtain additional area for building or lot utilization is
not acceptable.
(c) Basin design criteria. The following design criteria shall be
used in the design of all detention basins in the Township. The
basins shall be designed to detain the quantity of water
resulting from a one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
under full development conditions released at a maximum
outflow rate as allowed in Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management. All flows in excess of the above-mentioned
standard shall flow over an emergency spillway. Storage
capacity shall be calculated between the elevation of the lowflow
orifice for the basin and the crest of the emergency
spillway. Dead storage below the low-flow orifice shall not be
included. Infiltration shall not be included when calculating
volume requirements.
(d) Underground detention basins shall be designed to detain the
post-development volume of water resulting from a onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm totally within the
storage media while discharging at a maximum outflow rate as
allowed in Chapter 288, Stormwater Management. The top of
underground basins shall be at least six inches below the
bottom of the subbase in paved areas and at least 12 inches
below final grade in unpaved areas.
[1] All underground basins and seepage pits shall be provided
with a means of access for inspection and maintenance in
a manner acceptable to the Township Engineer.
[2] Outlet structures for underground stormwater
management facilities (with the exception of seepage
beds) shall be equipped with weirs to function as
emergency spillways. The minimum capacity of the
emergency spillway shall be such that the emergency
spillway shall discharge the post-development peak flow
entering the basin from the one-hundred-year twenty-fourhour
design storm with a minimum of one foot of
freeboard. The principal spillway shall be assumed to be
completely blocked.
[3] The storage volume for underground basins shall be
calculated between the elevation of the low-flow orifice
and the elevation of the top of the storage media. The
assumed void ratio for coarse aggregate shall be 0.4; void
ratios for manufactured storage media shall be verified by
manufacturers' specifications. Regardless of infiltration,
dead storage below the low-flow orifice shall not be
included in the storage volume.
§ 305-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-319
1:435
[4] The storage volume for seepage beds shall be calculated
between the bottom of the bed and the top of the storage
media. The assumed void ratio for coarse aggregate shall
be 0.4; void ratios for manufactured storage media shall be
verified by manufacturers' specifications.
(e) Maximum depth of detention basins. The maximum depth of
water in a detention basin shall be five feet.
(f) Emergency spillway. Whenever possible, the emergency
spillway for detention basins shall be constructed on
undisturbed ground. Emergency spillways shall be constructed
of reinforced concrete, vegetated earth or concrete rubble. All
emergency spillways shall be constructed so that the detention
basin berm is immediately protected against erosion. The
minimum capacity of the emergency spillway shall be such that
the emergency spillway shall discharge the post-development
peak flow entering the basin from the one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm with a minimum of one foot of
freeboard. The principal spillway shall be assumed to be
completely blocked. Linings for emergency spillways shall
extend along the upstream and downstream berm
embankment slopes. The upstream edge of the emergency
spillway lining shall extend to a point at least three feet below
the emergency spillway crest elevation or bottom of the
embankment, whichever is higher. The downstream lining of
the emergency spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe
of the embankment. The emergency spillway shall not
discharge over earthen fill and/or easily erodible material.
(g) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. The antiseep collars and their
connections to the pipe barrel shall be watertight. The antiseep
collars shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside
of the principal pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between
collars shall be 14 times the minimum projection of the collar,
measured perpendicular to the pipe.
(h) Freeboard. Freeboard is the difference between the onehundred-
year design flow elevation in the emergency spillway
and the top of the settled detention basin embankment. The
minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
(i) Slope of detention basin embankment. The maximum slope of
detention basin embankments shall be three horizontal to one
vertical (3H:1V).
(j) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin
berms shall be 10 feet. A cutoff trench (keyway) of impervious
material shall be provided under all embankments that require
§ 305-319 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-319
1:436
fill material. The cutoff trench shall be a minimum of eight feet
wide, three feet deep, and have side slopes of one horizontal to
one vertical.
(k) All basin embankments shall be placed in lifts not to exceed
one foot in thickness, and each lift shall be compacted to a
minimum of 95% of the modified proctor density as established
by ASTM D-1557. Prior to proceeding to the next lift, the
compaction shall be checked by a soils engineer employed by
the applicant/developer. Compaction tests shall be run on the
leading and trailing edge of the berm along with the top of the
berm. Verification of required compaction shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer prior to utilization of any basin for
stormwater management.
(l) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of
the detention basin, a minimum grade of 1% shall be
maintained for all sheet flow. A minimum grade of 1% shall be
maintained for all channel flow. Basins designed for infiltration
may have flat 0% bottoms.
(m) Energy dissipators. Energy-dissipating devices (riprap, end
sills, etc.) shall be placed at all basin outlets.
(n) Where permanent retention (pond) facilities are proposed,
there shall be a safety ledge, three feet wide, at the maximum
water surface level.
(o) All basin outfall pipes shall be watertight Class III reinforced
concrete pipe having O-ring joints. All joints shall be mortared.
To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning, outlet pipes
shall have an internal diameter of at least 18 inches and a
minimum grade of 0.5%.
(p) Landscaping of detention basins. Landscaping and planting in
detention basins shall be provided. It shall be aesthetically
pleasing and compatible with surrounding land uses and
require a minimum of maintenance.
[1] Basin floors. Basin bottoms shall be planted with a growth
of either grasses or a meadow effect of native and
naturalized wildflowers, depending on the desirability of
the basin as a recreation area or as a natural area.
[2] Establishment of grass growth shall include an adjustment
of the soil pH to 6.0-7.0 prior to seeding. In the absence of
a soil test, apply two tons of ground agricultural limestone
per acre (100 pounds per 1,000 square feet). Apply
10-20-20 fertilizer at the time of seeding as needed. In the
absence of a soil test, apply 18 pounds per 1,000 square
feet. NOTE: When hydroseeding, lime and fertilizer may be
included in the mix and need not be applied separately.
§ 305-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-319
1:437
[3] The establishment of a meadow effect of wildflowers may
be required by the Board of Supervisors. This shall be
accomplished through hydroseeding which shall contain
seed, water and fertilizer. A mixture of native plants listed
in Appendix B of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended from time to
time, shall be used for planting.
[4] Basin berms or perimeter. A plan shall be submitted for
Township review and approval which shows the provisions
for landscaping around the perimeter of the basin. The
plan should include both evergreen material and
deciduous material in the minimum sizes outlined in
§ 305-325F(4).
(q) Facilities designed for infiltration stormwater runoff shall meet
the requirements of Chapter 288, Stormwater Management,
and the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, latest edition, as amended from time to time.
(4) Culverts and drainage channels.
(a) Design flow standard. All culverts and drainage channels shall
be designed to carry a flow rate equal to a fifty-year, twentyfour-
hour storm. Precipitation data to be used in the analysis of
peak rates of discharge shall be obtained from the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological
Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas
14 can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
(b) Erosion prevention. All drainage channels shall be designed to
prevent the erosion of the bed and bank areas. The flow
velocity in all vegetated drainage channels shall not exceed the
maximum permissible velocity to prevent erosion. Suitable
bank stabilization shall be provided where required to prevent
erosion of the drainage channels. Where storm sewers
discharge into existing drainage channels at an angle greater
than 30° from parallel with the downstream channel flow, the
opposite bank shall be stabilized by the use of riprap or
masonry and/or concrete walls. The stabilization shall be
designed to prevent erosion and frost heave under and behind
the stabilizing media.
(c) Maximum side slope. Any vegetated drainage channel
requiring mowing of the vegetation shall have a maximum
grade of three horizontal to one vertical on those areas to be
mowed.
§ 305-319 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-319
1:438
§ 305-320. Erosion and sedimentation control. [Amended 4-26-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
(d) Design standard. Because of the critical nature of vegetated
drainage channels, the design of all vegetated channels shall,
as a minimum, conform to the design procedures outlined in
the most recent versions of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection's Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Manual and the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. Several acceptable sources
outlining procedures for nonvegetated drainage channels
include the following:
[1] United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular
No. 5, Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway
Culverts. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
[2] Federal Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering
Circular No. 13, Hydraulic Design for Improved Inlets for
Culverts.
C. Stormwater best management practices (BMP) maintenance and
operation. All stormwater best management practices will be managed
in accordance with the operations and maintenance plan required by
Chapter 288, Stormwater Management.
A. General.
(1) No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, and no
grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees, or
other vegetative cover of the land shall commence until such time
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
processed with and reviewed by the Township Engineer or there
has been a determination by the Township Engineer that such plan
is not necessary.
(2) All subdivisions or land developments involving the disturbance of
1,000 square feet or more of earth (2,000 square feet or more for
in-ground swimming pool construction) shall submit a plan to the
Bucks County Conservation District for review. No approval may be
given without a letter of adequacy from the Bucks County
Conservation District.
(3) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(a) There has been a plan approved by the Board of Supervisors
that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation
consistent with this section, and an improvement bond or other
acceptable security is deposited with the Township in the form
§ 305-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-320
1:439
of an escrow guaranty which will ensure installation and
completion of the required improvements; or,
(b) There has been a determination by the Board of Supervisors
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not
necessary.
(4) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall
be in compliance with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and meet the
standards and specifications contained in the most-recent version
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual. The Township
Engineer shall ensure compliance with the appropriate
specifications.
B. Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be mechanically retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of appropriate best management
practices shown on the erosion and sediment control plan or as
required by the Township Engineer or Bucks County Conservation
District.
§ 305-320 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-320
1:440
C. Grading for drainage. In order to provide more-suitable sites for
building and other uses, improve surface drainage, and control erosion,
the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of runoff without
ponding; and all land within a development shall be graded to drain
and dispose of surface water without ponding, except where
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle
the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such
as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural watercourse. Where
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from
buildings, they shall be sodded or planted as required.
(3) Excavations and fills.
(a) Cut-and-fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Board when handled under special conditions.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut surface of excavations and the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(c) Cut-and-fill slopes shall not endanger adjoining property.
(d) Fill shall be placed and compacted in order to minimize sliding
or erosion of the soil.
(e) Fill shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(f) Fill placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(g) Grading shall be done in such a way that water is not diverted
onto the property of another landowner without the expressed
consent of the Board unless the affected landowner gives
consent.
(h) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control shall be exercised.
(i) Provision shall be made for the installation of temporary
stream crossings where any road crosses a live stream. All
applicable permits must be acquired.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
§ 305-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-320
1:441
person, corporation, or other entity causing such sedimentation
to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems, and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense as quickly
as possible.
(2) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the
developer until such facilities are accepted by the Township or
some other official agency, after which they become the
responsibility of the accepting entity.
(3) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation, or other entity
doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse, or
swale, or upon the floodplain or right-of-way during the period of
activity, to return it to its original or equal condition after such
activity is completed.
(4) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completing on private property is the responsibility of the owner to
their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
(5) No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure, deposit any material or thing, or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any
communal stream or watercourse without having obtained prior
approval from the Township or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, whichever is applicable.
(6) Adequate rights-of-way and/or easements shall be provided for all
drainage facilities and watercourses which are proposed for
acceptance by the Township or other official agency.
(7) Each person, corporation, or other entity which makes any surface
change shall be required to:
(a) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into the nearest natural watercourse or suitable
storm drain in compliance with Chapter 288, Stormwater
Management.
(b) Handle existing off-site runoff through his development by
designing conveyance systems to adequately handle storm
runoff from a fully developed area upstream.
(c) Pay a proportionate share of the total cost of off-site
improvements to the common natural watercourse, based on a
fully developed drainage area.
(d) Provide and install, at the developer's expense, and in
accordance with Township requirements, all drainage and
erosion-control improvements (temporary and permanent) as
§ 305-320 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-320
1:442
required by the erosion and sedimentation control plan, the
Township Engineer, or the Bucks County Conservation District.
(8) It is the responsibility of the Township to keep all major streams not
under the jurisdiction of any other official agency open and free
flowing.
(9) The Township will assume the responsibility for maintaining an
open and free-flowing condition in all minor streams, watercourses
and drainage systems constructed or improved in accordance with
Township design criteria if an adequate right-of-way exists or can
be acquired.
E. Installation and design standards.
(1) The installation and design of any of the required erosion and
sedimentation control measures listed below shall be in accordance
with standards and specifications outlined in the most recent
versions of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual and
the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
(2) Detailed designs for all the appurtenances related to temporary
basins must be supplied, including, but not limited to:
(a) Debris basin.
(b) Grade stabilization structure.
(c) Grassed waterway or outlet.
(d) Mulching.
(e) Sodding.
(f) Temporary cover on critical areas.
(g) Temporary diversion (urban).
(h) Permanent diversion (urban).
(i) Permanent grass and legume cover on critical areas with
prepared seedbed.
(j) Permanent grass and legume cover on critical areas with
unprepared seedbed.
(k) Riser pipes.
(l) Outlet pipes.
(m) Antiseep collars.
(n) Placement of pipes.
(o) Heights and embankments.
§ 305-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-320
1:443
§ 305-321. Bridges and culverts.
(p) Emergency spillway.
(3) Design of the temporary basins can be combined with that for the
permanent basins if the applicant desires.
(4) The use of inlet riser boxes to control sediment prior to its entering
the storm drainage system is strongly recommended. Details of
these riser boxes are available from the Township Engineer.
(5) Diversion berms and swales are the recommended erosion-control
devices for use in lieu of storm drainage pipes. All diversions and
swales must be designed to carry a fifty-year peak flow rate using
precipitation data for Doylestown, Pennsylvania, from the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States Department of Commerce,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies
Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. This data is available at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
(6) Additional controls and requirements will be required during
construction if conditions so indicate, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer or Bucks County Conservation District.
F. Compliance with regulations and procedures.
(1) Approved final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation will
be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as
specified in Appendix A of this chapter.83
(2) The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion
and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the
final plans of a subdivision land development or planned residential
development and become a part thereof.
(3) At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with
the plan as approved. During construction, the Township Engineer
shall inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the
approved plans. Further consultative technical assistance will be
furnished if necessary by the Bucks County Conservation District
and the Township Engineer.
(4) In the event that the developer commences to clear and grade
before recording the approved plans, the Board of Supervisors may
revoke the approval of the final plans.
83.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-320 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-321
1:444
§ 305-322. Community facilities.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 and Form 409 Specifications,
as amended, to support expected loads and to carry expected flows.
They shall be constructed to the full width of the right-of-way or to an
adequate dimension to accommodate special grade conditions.
B. Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Dam Safety Division, is required when the area drained upstream of the
point under consideration exceeds an area of 1/2 square mile.
A. Where a proposed park, playground, school, or other public use shown
in the Township's Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision or land development, the Board of Supervisors may require
the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision or land
development in those cases in which the Board of Supervisors deem
such requirements to be reasonable.
B. Where a planned residential development is proposed under Chapter
370, Zoning, and the open space requirements shall be as stipulated in
Article IX of that chapter. The proposed use of such required area is
subject to the requirements of this section. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Where deemed essential by the Board of Supervisors, upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed, the
Board of Supervisors may require the dedication or reservation of
additional areas or sites of a character, extent, and location suitable to
the needs created by such development for schools, parks, and other
neighborhood purposes.
D. Where a proposed park, playground, or other public use is indicated on
a proposed subdivision or land development pan, the Park and
Recreation Board shall review the plan and submit recommendations to
the Township Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-06]
E. Upon approval by the Township, existing or proposed open space or
recreation areas immediately adjacent to any proposed development
may be substituted for open space areas required by this chapter or
Chapter 370, Zoning. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
F. The following standards shall apply to the provisions of recreation
spaces:
(1) Areas set aside for recreational purposes shall be reasonably
compact parcels designed to serve all parts of the subdivision or
land development and be accessible from a public street.
§ 305-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-322
1:445
§ 305-323. Multifamily developments.
(2) Playgrounds for active sports shall be of adequate size to provide
sufficient area for proposed uses.
(3) In subdivisions or land developments which provide or intend to
provide housing facilities for more than 50 families, suitable open
areas shall be required for recreation. Standards to be used by the
Board of Supervisors in testing the adequacy of space provided
shall be as follows:
(a) Fifty to 300 families: three acres per 100 families.
(b) Over 300 families: nine acres plus 1/2 acre per 100 families
over 300.
A. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed multifamily development. Final approval may be obtained
section by section, but such development sections shall be specified on
the preliminary plan with pertinent statistics such as area and density
regulations for each phase and must be numbered in the proposed
order that they are to be developed. Such order of development must be
adhered to, and if changes are required, plans must be refiled,
reviewed, and approved. Refiled plans will be subject to any changes in
density requirements made by the supervisors since the original filing
date.84
B. Bonding procedures shall be required before final approval of the land
development plan, and shall guaranty the improvements by the builder
of streets, sidewalks, curbs, streetlighting, street trees and other
landscaping, drainage facilities, utilities, and other facilities that the
Board of Supervisors may deem necessary.
C. Arrangement of buildings and facilities.
(1) All of the elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and
efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and shape of
the plot, the character of the adjoining property and the type and
size of the buildings, in order to produce a livable and economical
land use pattern.
(2) Arrangement of buildings shall be in favorable relation to the
natural topography, existing desirable trees, views within and
beyond the site, and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the
site.
D. Access and circulation.
84.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1, related to density, parking, area and building
requirements, which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 305-322 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-323
1:446
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and
other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the occupants.
(2) Access and circulation for firefighting equipment, furniture moving
vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries, and snow removal
shall be planned for safe, efficient, and convenient operation.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building to a street,
driveway, or parking area shall usually be less than 100 feet;
exception to this standard should be reasonably justified by
compensating advantages, such as desirable views and site
preservation through adaptation to topography. In no case shall the
distance exceed 250 feet.
E. Yards. Yards shall ensure adequate privacy, desirable outlook, adequate
natural light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the
dwellings, and other essential uses.
F. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved areas, and
other facilities, to ensure adequate surface drainage, safe and
convenient access to and around the buildings, and conservation of
desirable existing vegetation and natural ground forms.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with
natural topography and to minimize earthwork.
G. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish
principal traffic ways for convenient access to the living units and
other important facilities on the property.
(2) Streets proposed to be dedicated for public use and maintenance
shall conform to § 305-304 of this article and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 Specifications, as
amended.
H. Driveways. Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to the living units, garage, compounds, parking
areas, service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse, and all other
necessary services. Driveways shall conform to those standards of
§ 305-309 of this article.
I. Parking areas.
(1) Paved parking areas shall be provided to meet the needs of the
residents and their guests without interference to or from normal
access and circulation traffic.
§ 305-323 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-323
1:447
§ 305-324. Nonresidential developments. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-12]
(2) Parking areas shall conform to area requirements of Chapter 370,
Zoning, as amended, and § 305-310 of this article.
J. Sidewalks.
(1) Street sidewalks and/or internal development pedestrian pathways
shall be provided for convenience and safe access to all living units
from streets, driveways, parking areas, or garages and for
convenient circulation and access to all project facilities.
(2) Width, alignment, and gradient of walks shall provide safety,
convenience, and appearance for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in
the alignment shall be avoided.
(3) The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water
on or across the walk and to prevent the pocketing of surface water
by walks.
(4) Concrete or bituminous sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with § 305-311 of this chapter and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications, as
amended.
K. Refuse collection.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage
is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located to avoid being offensive, shall
be convenient for both collectors and tenants, and shall be
screened and landscaped.
L. Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other side
features; and additional new plant material shall be added to maintain
privacy, shade, and beauty of buildings and grounds, and to screen out
objectionable features in accordance with § 305-325 of this chapter.
A. Lotting of individual lots for commercial purposes shall be avoided in
favor of a comprehensive design under the Chapter 370, Zoning,
Articles XX through XXVIII and XXX through XXXII, as amended.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for
nonresidential use may be required as deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors to ensure the free flow of through traffic from vehicles
§ 305-323 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-324
1:448
entering or leaving parking areas. Costs incurred from such
improvements shall be the responsibility of the developer.
C. When adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on a collector
or arterial street, the owner may be required to provide a service road
for ingress and egress, or in lieu thereof, the owner may be required to
provide an area adjacent to the proposed lots for off-street parking
purposes.
D. Adjacent residential areas shall be protected from potential nuisance of
the proposed nonresidential developments, including the provision of
extra depths in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential
developments and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip
as required in Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended, in nonresidential
districts.
E. Loading and delivery areas or streets carrying nonresidential traffic
shall not be extended to the boundaries of the adjacent existing or
potential residential areas, or connected to streets intended for
predominately residential traffic.
F. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential or
institutional areas in accordance with the landscape requirements
herein. Grading to depress parking areas or fencing are satisfactory
alternatives that may be used in lieu of landscaping as required above.
The following standards shall apply to all off-street parking facilities
with a capacity of four or more vehicles:
(1) No one row of off-street parking spaces shall exceed 12 spaces.
Raised planting beds shall be located at intervals not to exceed 12
spaces. The planting beds shall be offset on alternating sides of
parking rows. One shade tree shall be planted in each planting bed.
(2) Raised planting islands shall be located at each end of a doubleloaded
parking row and shall be planted with two shade trees per
island.
(3) Raised perimeter planting beds shall be provided around all
parking areas except where the parking area is adjacent to a
building. The planting bed shall be at least 15 feet wide.
(4) All parking areas shall have at least one tree, 2 1/2-inch caliper
minimum, for every six parking spaces in single rows and one tree,
2 1/2-inch-caliper minimum, for every 12 parking spaces in doubleloaded
rows of parking spaces. Trees shall be planted to provide
shade for the parked automobiles. Planting islands are not to be
used to fulfill this requirement.
(5) The surface treatment of planting beds, planting islands and
perimeter planting beds shall be grass, ground cover, lowmaintenance
shrubs or a combination of those. If grass is used,
mower access must be provided.
§ 305-324 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-324
1:449
G. Design requirements for parking structures are as follows:
(1) Parking structures shall not be permitted within the front, side or
rear yards.
(2) Maximum height limitations. Sixty percent of the height of the
tallest principal structure for which the parking structure serves as
an accessory use, but in no event shall the height be greater than
five levels of parking above grade, counting the rooftop as one
level.
(3) Ramps for the movement of vehicles between parking levels shall
be designed to provide optimal movement of vehicular traffic
within the parking structure.
(4) Parking structures shall be so designed to minimize blank concrete
facades through the use of innovative architectural detail. The
design of the exterior of the parking structure shall be compatible
with the exterior design of the principal structure to the extent that
the parking facility is clearly identified with the principal structure.
(5) Any parking structure or group of parking structures containing
300 parking spaces or more in total shall provide a grade-separated
pedestrian walkway connecting the parking facility with the
principal structure or structures.
(6) Parking structures shall be landscaped in accordance with and to
the same extent as the overall landscape plan.
(7) Within an enclosed parking structure or deck, the following aisle
widths and parking space angles shall apply:
Angle of Parking Spaces
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
40° to 60° 18
60° to 75° 22
90° 241
NOTES:
1 May be reduced to 22 feet if the support columns for the deck
are arranged opposite each other.
(8) Parking layouts using 90° parking spaces shall be designed for twoway
travel. Parking layouts using less than 90° parking spaces shall
be for one-way travel only, clearly marked and signed as such.
(9) Parking spaces may be reduced to 9 1/2 feet by 18 1/2 feet in
parking structures. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 305-324 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-324
1:450
§ 305-325. Landscaping. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-7;
1-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-04]
(10) Parking spaces shall be delineated by a double-striped line, closed
at the aisle end.
(11) The parking angle design shall be the same for both parking
structures and surface parking when used in the same
development.
H. All area, design, and parking requirements shall conform to Chapter
370, Zoning, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading,
as amended
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare and overall appearance of the
Township by establishing minimum landscape standards and criteria for
all land development. The environmental benefits to proper landscaping
will limit the removal of trees on property within the Township;
establish minimum standards to ensure the replacement of trees
removed from property within the Township; reduce stormwater runoff;
reduce water pollution; reduce effects of wind and air turbulence;
reduce visual pollution; provide for noise abatement; reduce soil
erosion; reduce levels of carbon dioxide and return oxygen to the
atmosphere; increase groundwater supply; provide shade; provide
habitat for wildlife; create a diverse mix of plant species; conserve and
protect property values and otherwise facilitate the creation of a
convenient, attractive and harmonious community; and generally
preserve and safeguard the ecological, economic and aesthetic
environment.
B. Application.
(1) This section shall apply to the following subdivision and land
developments (in accordance with the specific requirements set
forth for each particular district):
(a) Residential subdivision and land developments:
[1] Single-family detached residential dwellings of more than
five units, except that all single-family residential
dwellings shall provide street trees.
[2] Multifamily residential districts.
[3] Mobile home parks.
(b) Nonresidential land developments:
[1] General office, office/nonmanufacturing and business
campus districts.
§ 305-324 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:451
[2] Shopping center, general commercial, highwaycommercial
and limited commercial districts.
[3] Industrial and planned industrial districts.
[4] All other nonresidential uses not listed above.
(2) The provisions of this section are not intended to restrict existing
residential owners from removing trees from their property or to
restrict the clearing of land for agricultural purposes.
C. Landscape plan submission requirements.
(1) Existing landscape features. Included at the time of preliminary
plan submittal on either a separate plan or on the "existing features
plan," the location of existing live trees with a trunk diameter
(DBH) of six inches or more shall be filed with the Township Zoning
Officer at an appropriate and legible scale of not less than one inch
to 50 feet. DBH is the "diameter of a tree at breast height," outside
the bark, measured 4 1/2 feet from the ground surface. This
requirement may be satisfied by the use of annotated aerial
photographs at a scale as listed above, to include sufficient detail to
allow the quantification of trees. This requirement may also be
satisfied by the use of multiple sample areas of no less than 100
feet by 100 feet (10,000 square feet), each to be used to estimate
the total forest/woodland tree count, when, in the opinion of the
Township Zoning Officer or Township Engineer, the makeup of the
forest/woodland is sufficiently consistent to merit the use of such
samples. Information to be provided shall include the following:
(a) Plan scale, North arrow, property lines and location map, with
zoning district designations for the site and adjacent
properties.
(b) Existing contours per submission requirements.
(c) Individual freestanding trees with trunk diameters (DBH) of six
inches or more shall be shown indicating the location and
diameter of each tree.
(d) Trees in hedge rows or lines with trunk diameters (DBH) of six
inches or more indicating the outer canopy or dripline of the
tree grouping as well as the location of individual trees.
(e) Trees in forest/woodlands or groves with trunk diameters
(DBH) of six inches or more indicating the outer canopy or
dripline of the tree grouping.
(f) Within the plan set, existing trees to remain and existing trees
to be removed shall be designated either by indicating
individual trunk diameters with an "X" for removal or by cross
hatching or similar method to indicate woodlands to be
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:452
removed. Existing trees that are relocated on site shall be
classified as "existing trees to be relocated."
(g) If more trees are removed than allowable under Chapter 370,
Zoning, they shall be replaced as described in Subsection D(8).
(h) The plan shall contain a schedule listing the total number of
trees (DBH) over six inches in trunk diameter. The schedule
shall also list the maximum number of trees allowed to be
removed under Chapter 370, Zoning, § 370-305, the actual
number of trees proposed for removal, the number of excess
trees being removed, and the number of required replacement
trees.
(2) Preliminary landscape plan. The preliminary landscaping plan shall
be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch to 50 feet and shall
contain the following:
(a) Plan scale, date, North arrow, and location map with zoning
district designations for the site and adjacent properties.
(b) Location of all existing and proposed buildings.
(c) Location of all existing and proposed roads, parking, service
areas and other paved areas.
(d) Location of all outside storage and trash receptacle areas.
(e) Sidewalks, berms, fences, walls, freestanding signs and site
lighting.
(f) Locations, common names, quantity and sizes of all proposed
trees, shrubs and areas for lawns or other ground cover (see
Subsection F, Preapproved plant materials).
(g) Locations of existing freestanding trees and woodlands to
remain.
(h) Sight triangles and sight distance lines.
(3) Final landscape plan. The final landscape plan shall contain a final
version of all the plan requirements stated in Subsection C(2)
above and shall further contain the following:
(a) A plant schedule indicating the botanical and common names,
height, spread, caliper, quantity and any special remarks for all
plant material proposed.
(b) If not provided on a separate plan, a list of existing trees to be
removed, existing and proposed water bodies and significant
natural features.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:453
(c) Details for the planting and staking of trees, the planting of
shrubs and any other details which depict other related
installation.
(d) Existing and proposed underground and aboveground utilities,
such as site lighting, transformers, hydrants, manholes, valve
boxes, storm, sanitary and water lines, etc.
(e) All existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals; and in
order to determine the relationship of planting and grading,
areas with slopes in excess of three horizontal to one vertical
(33.3%) will be indicated on the plan and seeded, sodded or
planted with ground cover.
(f) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
planting areas to be devoted to lawns. Such information shall
convey the proposals for seeding, sodding, ground cover,
mulching and the like.
(g) A detailed cost estimate shall be attached to the final
landscape plan submission, showing the value of all proposed
landscaping and trees to be relocated, and to include all labor,
materials and guarantee.
(4) Submission procedure.
(a) The preliminary landscape plan and existing conditions or
features plan shall be submitted at the time the preliminary
plan is filed. The final landscape plan shall be submitted at the
time the final plan is filed.
(b) The landscape plan shall be signed and sealed by a landscape
architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) The landscape plan shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer.
D. Existing vegetation and natural features.
(1) For the purposes of this section, the term "natural features" shall
mean such vegetation, soils, surface streams and ponds, plantings,
trees, and topography which exist on the site proposed to be
developed prior to any development activity. These requirements
are in addition to § 305-327, Environmental performance
standards.
(2) In cases where existing natural features (to remain) duplicate the
planting requirements of Subsection E, any or all of such
requirements may be waived by the Township Supervisors.
(3) The Township Engineer may require the developer to verify the
presence of existing trees on a site through use of an aerial
photograph taken not more than one year prior to the submission of
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:454
the landscape plan or through a field survey as described in
Subsection C(1) above.
(4) During the construction of any site, all trees to be retained within
25 feet of a construction area, including disturbance for roads and
parking, shall be protected by four-foot-high plastic webbed
construction fencing, snow fencing or equivalent staked every 10
feet to ensure that there is no encroachment within the area of the
tree dripline by changing grade, trenching, stockpiling of building
materials or topsoil, or the compaction of the soil and roots by any
motor vehicle. The location of temporary tree protection fencing
shall be indicated on the grading or erosion and sedimentation
control plans for the application, and the installation of fencing
shall be specifically noted in the construction sequence. (Note
Chapter 370, Zoning, § 370-3622.)
(5) Trees that are proposed for removal and are located within 15 feet
of trees to remain shall be cut flush to grade and then ground to a
minimum of 12 inches below grade. Damage to roots of trees to
remain shall be avoided.
(6) Protection of topsoil.
(a) Each lot shall have at least six inches of topsoil cover, after
settlement, over all of the site's exposed earth surfaces. More
than six inches may be required if the Township Engineer
determines that a greater amount is needed for the long-term
viability of certain plantings.
(b) Topsoil moved and stockpiled by grading operations shall be
redistributed and stabilized following the completion of a
project or project phase. All exposed earth surfaces shall be
stabilized within the time frame specified by 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
(c) All disturbed topsoil on site is to be redistributed on site in
areas not covered by impervious surfaces. No removal of
topsoil from a site is allowed unless approved by the
Warrington Township Manager or Zoning Officer.
(7) Credit for preservation of existing trees.
(a) The requirements for trees in the following Subsection E(6)(b)
and (f), Softening buffer and Screen buffer, and Subsection
E(10), Individual lot landscaping requirements, can be met by
preserving existing trees, and, to that end, the number of trees
required in those sections may be reduced by a credit for
approved preserved trees computed as follows:
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:455
Diameter* of Tree Trunk of
Approved Preserved Trees
(inches)
Number of 3-Inch-Caliper
Tree Credits
36 or greater 6
30 to 35 5
26 to 29 4
20 to 25 3
13 to 19 2
6 to 12 1
NOTE:
* DBH is the "diameter of a tree at breast height," outside
the bark, measured 4 1/2 feet from the ground surface.
(b) A tree shall be deemed to be preserved when the plan provides
for it to be maintained in such manner that 3/4 of the ground
area within the dripline of the tree shall be maintained at the
existing grade level in either vegetative landscape material or
pervious surface cover.
(c) Trees designated for approval as preserved trees shall be
preserved as specified in the Guidelines for Tree Preservation
and Protection by the Association of Consulting Arborists. At
the direction of the Township Engineer, existing trees that have
not been adequately protected during construction or that die
within the guarantee period are to be removed and replaced
using the appropriate quantities for the diameter of the
removed trees as shown in the table above.
(d) Trees to be considered for credit must be located in the
specific area of the required landscape plantings.
(e) In determining trees to be protected, consideration shall be
given to maintaining a clear zone between new buildings and
preserved forest/woodland edges. The following guidelines are
suggested: buildings, 20 to 30 feet; pavement/walks, 10 feet.
(8) Removal and replacement of existing trees.
(a) Any person, organization, association or corporation engaging
in site work such as grading, new construction or other activity
which will result in the destruction of more than the allowable
percentages noted in Chapter 370, Zoning, § 370-305,
Environmental restriction standards, Subsection E, of existing
trees six inches DBH or greater on a lot containing two or more
acres shall prepare a plan in accordance with Subsection C(1)
of this section.
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:456
(b) If greater than the allowable percentages noted in Chapter
370, Zoning, § 370-305, Environmental restriction standards,
Subsection E, of existing trees on a site with a trunk diameter
of six inches DBH are removed or destroyed because of street
alignment, building placement, parking area location, grading
or otherwise, then existing trees destroyed shall be replaced in
accordance with the following chart:
Tree Size Removed
(inches)
Number of 3-Inch
Replacements
6 to 12 1
To 18 2
To 24 3
To 30 4
To 36 5
To 42 6
Greater than 42 7
[1] The replacement trees may be selected from the approved
Recommended Plant Material List.85
[2] Such new trees shall be planted in addition to the trees
and/or shrubs required under Subsection E. If there is
insufficient space to plant all of the required trees, the
developer shall plant all remaining trees on lands owned
by the Township as directed by the Township Manager or
his designee. At the sole discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, the Township Manager may accept a fee in
lieu of such plantings. The fee shall be the full cost that
would otherwise be incurred by the developer for the plant
and installation and shall be used for landscaping
Township-owned land as directed by the Board of
Supervisors or the Township Manager.
[3] These replacement trees shall be shown on the landscape
plan with a schedule of trees to be removed and trees to be
used for replacement as defined in Subsection C(1) or on
the landscape plan with a separate plant schedule for
replacement trees or shown as trees to be contributed to
the Township. A maximum of 50% of the required trees
may be replaced as evergreen trees and/or ornamental
trees at a ratio of two evergreen or ornamental trees per
each replacement. A maximum of 20% of the required
trees may be replaced as shrubs at a ratio of 10 shrubs per
85.Editor's Note: Said list is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:457
required tree. Refer to Subsection F for sizes and types of
trees and shrubs recommended.
(c) Prior to removal of existing trees greater than six inches DBH,
the Township Engineer shall walk the site to review the trees to
be removed. Based upon such review, the Township Engineer
shall establish the quantity of trees and value to be contributed
to the escrow account for replacement of trees as provided in
Subsection D(8). If the developer disputes the conclusion of the
Township Engineer, the owner/developer shall notify the
Township Manager, in writing, and shall arrange with the
Township Manager for a joint inspection of the site.
E. Landscape design requirements.
(1) The location, dimensions, and spacing of required plantings should
be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance, taking into
account the sizes of such plantings at maturity and their present
and future environmental requirements, such as wind, soil,
moisture and sunlight.
(2) Planting guidelines.
(a) Plantings shall be selected and located where they will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to the public's health,
safety, and welfare. Such locations include, but shall not be
limited to: public street rights-of-way; underground and
aboveground utilities; and sight triangle areas required for
unobstructed views at street intersections as required per
pertinent sections of this chapter and Chapter 370, Zoning. In
addition, plantings at the ends of parking lot drive aisles must
be designed to stay below two vertical feet to maximize
visibility for motorists and pedestrians and minimize screening
due to high vegetation.
(b) Trees and shrubs shall be located so as not to interfere with the
installation and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. Trees
shall be planted 15 feet from overhead utilities and six feet
from underground utilities.
(3) All plant materials used shall meet the minimum standards for
health, form, and root condition as outlined in the American
Association of Nurserymen (AAN) Standards and, at the time of
planting, meet minimum size requirements as stated in Subsection
F.
(4) Caliper. For measuring trees for buffering or landscaping purposes,
caliper measurements shall be taken at a point on the trunk six
inches above the natural ground line.
(5) Street trees.
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:458
(a) Street trees shall be planted for any subdivision or land
development where suitable street trees do not exist, as part of
the design and construction of:
[1] New streets.
[2] New sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
[3] Existing streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, highways,
bicycle trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the
subdivision or land development.
[4] Access driveways to residential developments having more
than four dwelling units.
[5] Renovations to or widening of existing streets or
sidewalks.
(b) Spacing. Street trees shall be planted no closer than 40 feet on
center nor further than 50 feet on center for each side of the
street, except along major roads where, with the approval of
the Board of Supervisors, they may be up to 100 feet on center;
or an equivalent number may be planted in an informal
arrangement.
(c) Setback. Street trees shall be planted a minimum distance of
two feet outside and parallel to the right-of-way line, unless
otherwise approved by the Township Engineer. Trees located
at intersections shall respect the sight triangle as defined in
this chapter and Chapter 370, Zoning. Adequate separation
from overhead and underground utilities shall be provided.
(d) Existing trees along a street which would be suitable based on
species, condition and form as street trees can be counted
toward the street tree requirement and shall be over four
inches in caliper and be within 20 feet of the curb or road edge.
(e) Street trees shall have a clear trunk from ground level to seven
feet above ground level, with full branching structure. All
hanging branches shall be trimmed to maintain a minimum
height of seven feet above the ground surface at all times.
(6) Buffers and perimeter areas.
(a) Consistent with the intent of this section and § 370-3607,
Screening and buffering and planting strip requirements, of
Chapter 370, Zoning, the entire perimeter of a property being
developed shall have a buffer which includes trees, shrubs, and
other landscape improvements necessary to screen the visual
impact the development will have on the property, on adjoining
properties, and on the Township.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:459
(b) Softening buffer. Along the sides and rear of property lines of
all developments where existing vegetation is not sufficient, at
the discretion of the Township Engineer, and a screen buffer is
not required, a permanent softening buffer shall be planted.
The following landscape requirements must be adhered to:
[1] Softening buffer plant materials shall include a
combination of trees and shrubs in free-form arrangement.
As a guideline for the amount of plant materials to use, the
buffer shall consist of a minimum of four shade trees for
each 100 linear feet and eight shrubs for each 100 linear
feet of property line. Informal groupings that reflect the
natural character of the site are encouraged. Up to 50% of
shade trees may be substituted with ornamental or
evergreen trees or shrubs at a rate of two ornamental, two
evergreen trees, or 10 shrubs for every shade tree.
(c) The buffer planting area along the property lines shall be used
for no purpose other than planting of trees, shrubs and lawn,
unless approved by the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer. It
may include a wall or fence. Any wall or fence shall be
compatible and constructed in such a manner that it will not
conflict with the character of the abutting district.
(d) The buffer plantings shall be aligned along the property lines
or right-of-way boundaries but may be sited on any position of
the property if recommended by the Township Planning
Commission and permitted by the Board of Supervisors. An
innovative and free-form arrangement of plant materials is
encouraged. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
(e) Within the buffer area, no proposed slopes shall be steeper
than four horizontal to one vertical (25%), unless these areas
previously existed at a steeper slope than 4:1 and no new
grading is proposed within such areas.
(f) Screen buffer. Where under applicable sections of Chapter
370, Zoning, screen buffers are required for the entire length
of all common boundaries abutting noncomplementary
districts, the following landscape requirements shall be
adhered to:
[1] Trees and shrubs used for screening shall be composed of
at least 75% evergreen and shall be arranged to provide an
immediate visual screen of 50%. Evergreen trees shall be
at least eight feet in height at the time of planting. The
balance of the plantings may be deciduous trees and
shrubs.
[2] Walls, ornamental structures, fences and berms or a
combination of these may be used in combination with
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:460
appropriate plant material, subject to the specific land use
areas involved and as approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
[3] Screening shall consist of evergreen trees in double rows,
staggered 10 feet to 20 feet on center. The spacing will
depend on the type of tree used. Evergreen or deciduous
shrubs shall supplement the evergreen trees at a minimum
rate of 20 per 100 feet.
[4] The planting screen shall be broken only at points of
vehicular or pedestrian access.
(g) The establishment of large monoculture evergreen buffers is
discouraged. Where a buffer planting shall include 40 or more
evergreen trees, no more than 1/3 of these evergreen trees
shall be a single species of tree. The use of Pinus strobus, white
pine, in buffer plantings of less than 40 but more than 15
required evergreens shall be limited to 1/3 Pinus strobus
species. Screen buffers of less than 15 required evergreens
shall be made up of species other than Pinus strobus.
(7) Off-street parking area.
(a) The perimeters of off-street parking lots in all districts shall be
buffered in accordance with the above regulations for
softening buffers. This shall include the introduction of
landscape elements or softscape separation between buildings
and parking as well as between parking areas and public
streets. In addition, any parking closer than 50 feet to a public
street right-of-way or residential district shall have a
continuous row of shrubs, fence, wall, berm or a combination
of these to a minimum height of three feet between the street
or residential district and parking area.
(b) Not more than 15 parking spaces shall be placed in a
continuous row without an intervening planting island of at
least 10 feet in width and the length of the parking stall.
(c) There shall be a minimum of one shade tree per 15 spaces, and
all planting beds within a parking lot shall be surfaced with
lawn, ground cover or low-growing shrubs. Proposed trees,
shrubs and ground cover can be placed around the parking
area perimeter or within interior islands or at locations
acceptable to the Township Manager or his designee.
(d) Planter islands shall be placed at the end of each row of
parking spaces which begins or terminates at an internal
circulation aisle. End islands adjacent to primary traffic
circulation routes shall have only low-growing shrubs, ground
cover or grass so as to not impede adequate sight distance.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:461
(e) For any land use where the total number of parking spaces in
one parking lot exceeds 100 stalls, the parking area shall be
divided by continuous center islands perpendicular to the
spaces every 130 feet, assuming four rows of parking and two
aisles. These divider islands shall be a minimum of 10 feet
wide.
(8) Drainage area and detention/retention basin landscaping.
(a) Whenever a detention or retention basin is provided, such
basin shall conform to the requirements set forth in the
applicable Zoning, Stormwater Management and Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinances and the landscaping
requirements as follows.
(b) The basin shall be so designed that the plantings in and
adjacent to it shall not have a negative effect on the
hydrological function of the basin. Trees shall be kept off of
permanent stormwater control basin berms in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
requirements.
(c) All continuously flowing natural watercourses shall be
maintained in their natural state, except that removal of debris
and correction of severe erosion shall be required.
(d) Intermittent streams shall be maintained essentially at their
existing alignments and gradients, except that they may be
improved by minor regrading, unless otherwise restricted by
state, federal or Warrington Township zoning regulations, and
shall either be planted and stabilized in vegetative cover or
provided with erosion control improvements such as river
stone or rip-rap.
(e) Drainageways and detention and retention basins shall be
aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the adjacent land
use. Creative grading and innovative basin forms are
encouraged. The use of best management practices as detailed
in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual 2009, or latest addition, is also encouraged. Where
basins adjoin existing forest/woodlands, it is recommended
that plantings be selected to blend with the natural
surroundings.
(f) Basin floors.
[1] Soil covers other than lawn are encouraged where
appropriate. Where lawn is not specified, plans shall
include a narrative and schedule for short- and long-term
maintenance to include cutting/harvesting, reseeding,
fertilizing, selected weed removal and the party
responsible for maintenance. Trees are encouraged
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:462
wherever possible to promote cooling of water within the
basin.
[2] Floors intended to be dry most of the year shall be
landscaped in one or a combination of the following:
[a] Seeded or sodded lawn.
[b] Seeded in low-maintenance wildflowers and meadow
grasses.
[c] Wildflower sod.
[d] All-season ground cover.
[e] PennDOT Formula L modified seed.
[f] Appropriate trees and shrubs with no impact to
hydrological function of the basin.
[3] Basin floors, portions of a floor, or channels that are wet
most of the year shall be landscaped in one or a
combination of the following:
[a] Wet habitat grasses and ground covers.
[b] Seeded in wildflower mix for wet areas.
[c] Appropriate trees and shrubs with no impact to
hydrological function of the basin.
(g) Basin perimeter plantings.
[1] There shall be a minimum of one shade tree and two
shrubs for each 30 linear feet of basin perimeter. To
promote diversity, up to 50% of the shade trees may be
substituted with an option of two flowering trees or
evergreen trees, or 10 shrubs for every shade tree.
[2] This requirement is in addition to required softening
buffers where basins are against property edges.
[3] This requirement may be waived along portions of a basin
where screen buffer is required and where the applicant
can demonstrate that such added buffer will not produce
added screening benefit, provided that the applicant
agrees to provide equivalent plantings at other areas in
the Township as directed by the Board of Supervisors or
the Township Manager.
[4] Sufficient plantable area shall be provided between
stormwater basins and property lines and buildings to
permit the satisfactory spacing and placement of required
plant material.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:463
(9) Site element screening.
(a) Service, loading, outdoor nonresidential/commercial dumpster
and recycling containers, outdoor displays, material storage,
transformers and mechanical equipment, and utility delivery
areas shall be screened from all residential districts and uses,
public streets, parking lots and pedestrian walkways.
Screening shall be by the use of fences, walls, berms,
evergreen plant material, or a combination of these.
(b) Fences and walls shall be designed to be compatible in terms of
materials and overall aesthetics with the surrounding
architecture and physical features.
(c) Screening shall be installed and maintained at a height which
effectively blocks the view but shall not be less than six feet
unless approved by the Township Board of Supervisors. Trash
disposal areas shall be screened on three sides when possible.
(10) Individual lot landscaping requirements. In addition to the
landscape requirements as defined above, each individual
nonresidential building lot/use shall provide the following:
(a) Each building lot/use in nonresidential districts, including, but
not limited to, institutional, commercial, industrial, office and
business, shall provide one deciduous or evergreen tree as
listed in Subsection F per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
of building. Up to 50% of required shade/evergreen trees may
be substituted with ornamental trees or shrubs at a rate of two
ornamental trees or 10 shrubs for every shade tree.
(11)Rare, threatened and endangered plants. The following trees,
shrubs and plants shall be granted priority for retention and
protection and shall be left in an undisturbed condition unless the
applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer, that reasonable efforts have been made to protect them
and the plan cannot be reasonably altered:
(a) Trees, shrubs or plants determined to be rare, threatened or
endangered under the current Federal Endangered Species
Act of 1973 in 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 through 1544 and in 50 CFR
Part 17 or placed upon the Pennsylvania Threatened Species
List or the Pennsylvania Endangered Species List (34 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2101 et seq.).
(b) Trees that are part of an historic site, associated with an
historic structure, or have been designated as a national, state,
or county champion tree.
(c) Any tree having a caliper of 24 inches or more that is
designated as a national, state, or county champion tree of a
particular species.
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-325
1:464
F. Preapproved plant materials.
(1) Preapproved plant materials are listed in Subsection H below. Plant
material shall be selected for its form, hardiness, texture, color,
pattern of growth and suitability to local conditions.
(2) Plants that are determined to be injurious to public health, crops,
livestock, agricultural land or other property as those listed on the
Pennsylvania Noxious Weed Control List are prohibited in any
plantings within the Township. Refer to the current Noxious Weed
Control Law, Act of 2017, P.L. 774, No. 46,86 as amended from time
to time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) In order to promote diverse plant communities within the Township
and maintain viable vegetative populations, it is recommended that
a mix and variety of trees, shrubs and ground cover be utilized in
each land development, subdivision and planting plan.
(a) Where a development or subdivision requires:
[1] One to 10 trees: two different species of trees are
required.
[2] Ten or more trees: a minimum of three different species of
trees are required.
(b) Plant species are to be spread and mixed throughout the site.
(4) Proposed plant sizes.
(a) Replacement, street, shade or canopy trees used in buffer and
perimeter, off-street parking, basin, and/or individual lot
landscaping situations shall be no less than three-inch caliper
when planted.
(b) Evergreen buffer, site element screening, and individual lot
landscaping evergreen trees shall be no less than eight feet
when planted.
(c) Ornamental trees for all landscape requirements shall be no
less than 1 1/2-inch to two-inch caliper when planted.
(d) Evergreen and deciduous shrubs used in buffer and perimeter,
site element screening, off-street parking, basin, and/or
individual lot landscaping situations shall be no less than 18
inches to 24 inches when planted.
(e) Smaller evergreen and deciduous shrubs used in parking lot
islands or instances where plant material does not grow to the
86.Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 1501 et seq.
§ 305-325 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-325
1:465
§ 305-326. Refuse collection for nonresidential developments.
§ 305-327. Environmental performance standards. [Added
7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11]
larger specified sizes shall be no less than 12 inches to 18
inches when planted.
(f) Perennials, ferns, grasses, ground covers, and vines shall be no
less than a two-quart container when planted.
G. Guarantee/performance bond.
(1) Any tree or shrub that dies within 18 months of planting shall be
replaced within one year. Any tree or shrub which, within 18
months of planting or replanting, is deemed, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, not to have survived or grown in a manner
uncharacteristic of its type shall be replaced. Substitutions for
certain species of plants may be made only when approved by the
Township Engineer.
(2) The developer or landowner shall deposit with the Township a sum
of money equal to the amount necessary to cover the cost of
purchasing, planting, maintaining and replacing all vegetative
materials for a period of 18 months.
(3) This condition may be satisfied through a land development
agreement with sufficient and appropriate financial guarantees.
H. Preapproved plant material list. This list of preapproved plant material
is intended to offer a broad selection of available plant material suitable
for the various required landscapes found in this chapter. Native plant
material is preferred to ensure hardiness, adaptability and survivability.
Plant material found on this preapproved list can be utilized. When
substitutions are proposed, they shall meet the requirements of this
section and shall be suitable for their proposed purpose and location.87
A. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when indoor collection is not provided.
B. Collection stations shall be located to avoid being offensive and shall be
screened from view and landscaped.
A. General.
(1) The design and development of all subdivisions and land
developments shall preserve, whenever possible, natural features
which will aid in improving conditions generally favorable to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents. These natural features
include, but are not limited to, the natural terrain of the site,
87.
§ 305-325 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-327
1:466
woodland area, streams, bodies of water and wetlands. More
detailed standards to preserve specific natural features are set
forth in the following subsections.
(2) No change shall be made to land which is environmentally sensitive
except as otherwise permitted and regulated in this section and by
federal and state regulations. No grading, excavating, removal or
destruction of vegetation shall be approved unless there shall be a
recommendation by the Planning Commission and determination
by the Board of Supervisors that such activities are permissible.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(3) Lands regulated as resource protection areas in Chapter 370,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Warrington shall not be
developed except by strict compliance with said chapter.
(4) Sensitive lands, other than resource protection areas, shall be
preserved and protected in accordance with the standards and
principles as established in this section.
(5) When regulated by this chapter or Chapter 370, Zoning, all
environmentally sensitive areas shall be evaluated and documented
with submission of a impact statement. The impact statement shall
also evaluate and document the impact of the subdivision or land
development on the environment (see Appendix G).
B. Performance standards. The following standards shall apply as
minimum standards in protecting sensitive areas other than resource
protection areas, which are regulated by requirements set forth in
Chapter 370, Zoning:
(1) Type II streams: shall not be disturbed except in accordance with
strict compliance with state and federal regulations. Where alluvial
soils exist, no disturbance of such soils is permitted. For every Type
II stream, a minimum conveyance facility capable of controlling
stormwater from a one-hundred-year storm event shall be provided
with a minimum of one foot of freeboard.
(2) Type II water bodies: shall not be disturbed except in accordance
with strict compliance with federal and state regulations. Where
alluvial soils exist, no disturbance of such soils is permitted. For
every Type II water body, the area which shall be considered
environmentally sensitive shall be the limit of the top of bank or the
area within five feet of the maximum water surface elevation.88
C. Protection requirements.
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Transition Area, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04.
§ 305-327 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-327
1:467
§ 305-328. Service loading and refuse areas. [Added 8-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-5]
(1) An environmental impact assessment report shall document and
evaluate the limits of sensitive lands. Each project shall be
reviewed and considered on the basis of the impact on sensitive
areas. Balancing the preservation of natural resources and
development of Warrington Township in accordance with Chapter
370, Zoning, shall be the Township's criteria for evaluating each
project. Protection of resource-protected areas shall be regulated
by Chapter 370, Zoning. Other sensitive areas shall be regulated to
the degree presented above the general guidelines in this section
unless the impact statement indicates, to the satisfaction of the
Township, one of the following:
(a) No sensitive areas exist.
(b) Rigorous enforcement and protection is not necessary.
(c) Mitigating measures for substituting or recreating similar
sensitive areas.
(d) An alternative proposal for preserving sensitive areas.
(2) General guidelines for use of sensitive areas are:
(a) Land may be left as open space with ownership by Township,
homeowners' association, or other public organization
acceptable to the Township.
(b) Land may be assigned as part of each lot if properly deed
restricted in perpetuity to ensure protection and preservation.
(c) Sensitive areas may be used for stormwater management
facilities and for linear development, such as roads and utility
lines, which have no feasible alternative locations.
(d) Ongoing agriculture and similar historical uses shall be
permitted.
(3) To satisfy the alternative proposal test for preserving sensitive
areas, an applicant must demonstrate that disturbance of the
sensitive areas cannot be avoided by redesign or reduction in
project scope.
(4) To satisfy the condition that rigorous enforcement is not necessary,
the applicant must demonstrate a compelling public need for the
project which would not be served by other projects, mitigation
measures, etc., and the fact that there will be no substantial impact
on resource protection areas.
(5) To satisfy the mitigating measures approach, an applicant must
demonstrate an equivalent area for preservation.
§ 305-327 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-328
1:468
§ 305-329. Corridor Overlay District. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-19; amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-14; 1-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-4; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-03]
A. Service loading and refuse areas shall take access from an internal
street. Trash storage and refuse shall not be located in parking areas
but may be inside or attached to the building. When attached to the
building, the enclosure will be six feet in minimum height and
constructed of materials to match the building.
B. Service areas shall not be located on the side of a building that faces an
external street.
C. Service areas shall be screened using fences, walls, plant material or a
combination thereof.
A. Applicability. The Corridor Overlay District shall apply to all properties
in Warrington Township, regardless of zoning district, depicted on the
attached overlay district plan.89 These are supplemental regulations
which shall apply in addition to all other applicable regulations of
Chapter 370, Zoning, and this Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development. In the case of a conflict between this section and any
other section, the section imposing the stricter requirement shall apply.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the Corridor Overlay District is to enhance the
appearance and design of the corridor which serves as a gateway to
Bucks County and to Warrington Township; to develop a process for
review and approval of development that maintains a high standard of
architectural and site development design; to ensure that facilities for
parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation can be safely and
adequately provided; to provide for landscaping and street trees; and to
make sure that new development reflects and enhances the visual,
historic and cultural character of Warrington Township. This section is
adopted in accordance with § 10605(2) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Design review process. Applicants for subdivision or land development
shall submit, in addition to all other required information, the
information and drawings listed below. The proposed design shall be
reviewed as part of the subdivision or land development review
process. Where no subdivision or land development is required or
where developments are constructed in phases, such as, but not limited
to, expansions or changes in use, the proposed design shall be reviewed
by the Township Manager as part of the building permit review process
and, at the request of the Township Manager, by the Warrington
Township Planning Commission. Design review consists of a systematic
assessment of the three-dimensional configuration design and materials
89.Editor's Note: Ordinance 2008-O-03 provided for the addition of additional Tax Map
parcels to this overlay district to match with existing zoning district boundaries. The list
of additional parcels, along with the overlay district plan, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 305-328 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-329
1:469
to be used to ensure that the proposed development meets the goals
for the Corridor Overlay District. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(1) Description of use or uses proposed.
(2) Architectural drawings of proposed building(s), showing all sides of
the proposed building(s), with information on building materials
and colors.
(3) Photographs of the original site in which the proposed development
will occur, prior to any changes being made, showing surrounding
areas and how the new development will relate to the existing
surroundings.
D. Standards for development within the Corridor Overlay District.
(1) Building design. The following standards shall apply to all building
designs:
(a) All sides of a building shall be architecturally consistent with
the front facade and all building faces visible from the street or
abutting properties shall have the same architectural features
and style as the front facade. Modifications may be made in the
design for necessary loading and other utility areas.
(b) Building materials shall be limited to the following:
[1] Stone.
[2] Clapboard (wood, vinyl or simulated).
[3] Brick.
[4] Stucco.
[5] Board and batten.
[6] Cedar shakes or simulated shakes looking like cedar.
[7] Slate or slate substitute.
[8] Decorative block.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to
approve the use of other similar building materials on a
case-by-case basis consistent with the purposes of this
section.
(c) Roof design. Pitched roofs are required. Flat roofs are
prohibited except where there is a partial or pent roof that
extends along all sides of the building. HVAC units shall not be
visible from surrounding properties or any public street on the
same elevation.
§ 305-329 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-329
1:470
(d) Colors. All buildings and roofs shall be designed to use
primarily earth tones, colors of natural materials or colors of
traditional building materials such as brick, stone or wood.
Appropriate augmenting trim colors shall be permitted.
(e) Building walls of more than 150 feet in length must be
designed so that there are no long expanses of unbroken wall.
The building wall shall include changes in materials, color or
texture; windows; entranceways; or other variations.
(2) Prototypical design. Design of establishments shall conform to the
standards of building design, landscaping, parking, lighting and
signs for developments within the Corridor Overlay District.
Modifications shall be made to any prototypical design to ensure
that it meets the purpose and standards of the Corridor Overlay
District.
(3) Landscaping. Street trees shall be provided every 30 feet along all
public street frontages. Where parking areas are located between
the street and the proposed principal building, plant materials shall
be installed at the edge of the parking area closest to the street
which shall be at least three feet in height when planted and which
shall meet the landscape requirements of this chapter. The
development shall meet any additional buffer requirements of all
applicable Township ordinances.
(4) Parking. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way line of any public street. The area
between the cartway and the parking area shall be devoted to
required street trees, landscaping and sidewalks. Parking lots are
encouraged to be designed so that a portion of the parking spaces
are located to the side and the rear of the building, as well as the
front of the building. Parking layout shall provide for pedestrian
circulation throughout the parking area. The pedestrian circulation
system shall be illustrated on the site plan.
(5) Lighting.
(a) All parking areas, walkways and passages shall be adequately
illuminated with a lighting system designed to complement the
general area and the site of the proposed development and to
prevent any off-site glare and spillover light onto adjacent
properties. Lighting plans must provide detailed isocandle
levels with a minimum one maintained footcandle level and a
maximum 3.0 minimum maintained footcandle level. The
incident spillover light at property boundaries shall not exceed
0.3 footcandle, except that this maximum may be increased to
0.5 footcandle along adjacent public roadways.
(b) All lighting sources are to be high-pressure sodium.
(c) Freestanding fixtures.
§ 305-329 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-329
1:471
[1] Freestanding fixtures shall utilize appropriate sharp cutoff
luminaries with shielding of the light source at angles
above 72° from the vertical.
[2] Various freestanding fixture types may be permitted as
approved by the Township. The design lighting plan shall
provide details on all proposed fixtures and poles and shall
be accompanied by appropriate manufacturer cut sheets
at the time of plan submission.
[3] The maximum height of freestanding fixtures shall vary to
provide scale and dimension to the project. A maximum of
25% of the fixtures required on the site shall not exceed 30
feet in height. All other fixtures shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. Fixture heights shall be measured from the bottom
of the fixture to ground level.
(d) Building-mounted lighting shall be shown on all plans. All
building-mounted lighting shall be designed so that all light
from the source is shielded at angles above 72° from the
vertical so as not to create any glare or visible source of light.
Lights are not permitted along the outline of buildings or along
rooflines.
(e) All canopy lighting shall be recessed in the canopy with no lens
extending below the canopy surface. Canopy lighting sources
shall be shielded at angles above 90° from the vertical to
prevent glare and view of the lighting source.
(6) Signs.
(a) All building-mounted signs shall be consistent and compatible
with the style composition, materials, colors and details of the
building and the purposes of this section.
(b) Internally lit signs shall consist of a dark background and light
lettering so that the characters, letters and graphics of the sign
are illuminated but the background is not.
(c) The applicant shall comply with all applicable sign regulations
of the underlying zoning district except as modified or
supplemented by these regulations.
(d) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 12 feet and
shall be mounted to the ground and landscaped to the
satisfaction of the Township. On sites with an approved
aggregate building square footage of 100,000 square feet or
more, one freestanding sign shall be permitted per road
frontage, which may include all of the individual users of the
development and which shall not exceed a height of 32 feet and
which shall be mounted to the ground and landscaped to the
satisfaction of the Township.
§ 305-329 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-329
1:472
§ 305-330. Alternative energy facilities: design, transport, and
installation requirements. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2014-O-15]
(e) Rotating or revolving signs, pennants, flags, banners, balloons
and objects, such as tires, automobiles, food products or other
items designed to draw attention to the product or business
must be approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to
installation. This does not apply to registered trademarks,
service marks and similar corporate logos.
A. The design of the alternative or emerging energy facility shall conform
to applicable industry and safety standards, including, but not limited
to, those of the American National Standards Institute, the Uniform
Construction Code, and/or other pertinent codes adopted by
Warrington Township.
B. Unless otherwise required by Warrington Township, the following
provisions shall apply to the use of public roads involving the transport
of alternative and/or emerging energy facilities:
(1) The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be
used within Warrington Township to transport equipment and parts
for construction, operation or maintenance of the alternative and/
or emerging energy facility.
(2) The Warrington Township Engineer shall inspect and document the
condition of all roads prior to construction and 30 days after the
construction has been completed or as weather permits. The
applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all fees associated
with the inspections conducted by the Warrington Township
Engineer.
(3) Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be
promptly repaired at the applicant's expense to the satisfaction of
the Warrington Township Engineer.
(4) Warrington Township may require the applicant to post a bond for
any required repairs or maintenance to public roads.
C. Aboveground alternative and emerging energy facilities shall be
designed with a nonobtrusive color, such as white, off-white, gray or
black. Black will be limited to PV solar panels and associated piping
only. No such facilities shall be artificially lighted, except to the extent
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable
authority that regulates air safety.
D. Aboveground alternative and emerging energy facilities shall not
display advertising beyond nameplate information typically applied by
the manufacturer.
§ 305-329 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-330
1:473
E. On-site transmission and power lines for an alternative or emerging
energy facility shall be placed underground.
F. Clearly visible warning signs concerning voltage must be placed at the
base of all aboveground transformers and substations and on fencing
enclosing the facility. Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags,
reflectors or tape, shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and
along the guy wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
G. Windmills or wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
the ground surface. All access doors to wind turbines and electrical
equipment shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry
by nonauthorized persons.
H. Aboveground alternative and emerging energy facilities shall not be
combined with other support towers or accessory structural
components that are devoted to or utilized by public or private utilities.
I. Liability and insurance requirements.
(1) The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing
any excess damage to public or private roads caused by the
alternative and emerging energy facility.
(2) Unless otherwise required by Warrington Township, the landowner
shall maintain a general liability policy covering bodily injury and
property damage with a minimal limit of at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence and a minimum of $5,000,000 in the aggregate.
Certificates shall be made available to Warrington Township upon
request.
J. Decommissioning.
(1) The landowner or facility operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy facility
within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the alternative
and emerging system. The alternative or emerging energy system
will presume to be at the end of its useful life if no energy is
generated for a continuous period of 12 months.
(2) The removal of the aboveground alternative or emerging energy
facility components shall be completed within 12 months of
decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy system.
Facility components shall be disposed of, if applicable, in
accordance with US DOT hazardous material classifications. All
disturbed earth shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
(3) Unless otherwise required by Warrington Township, the landowner
shall be responsible for the following financial and inspection
provisions as part of the decommissioning process:
(a) The landowner or facility operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net
§ 305-330 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-330
1:474
decommissioning costs, provided that at no point shall
decommissioning funds be less than 25% of decommissioning
costs. The decommissioning funds shall be posted and
maintained with a bonding company or a lending institution
approved by Warrington Township.
(b) An independent and certified professional engineer may be
retained by Warrington Township to inspect the installation
and decommissioning of the alternative and emerging
facilities. All such inspection fees shall be paid by the applicant
or landowner.
(c) Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance
bond, surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or
other form of financial assurance as may be acceptable by the
Warrington Township Solicitor.
(d) Warrington Township may release the decommissioning funds
only when the landowner or facility operator has satisfactorily
demonstrated compliance with the decommissioning plan.
(4) If the landowner or facility operator fails to complete
decommissioning during the prescribed period of 12 months,
Warrington Township may draw down on the decommissioning
funds and take such measures as necessary to complete
decommissioning in accordance with the laws of Warrington
Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
K. Public inquiries and inspections.
(1) The landowner and the facility operator shall provide Warrington
Township with a telephone number and identify a responsible
person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints
throughout the life of the alternative or emerging energy facility.
Such information shall be updated within five working days of any
changes or no later than January 15 annually, whichever occurs
first.
(2) At the request of Warrington Township, the landowner and the
facility operator shall consult with a qualified inspector to
determine if the alternative or emerging energy facility is operating
in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer. Such
inspections shall be performed at the expense of Warrington
Township should said facility be found to be performing in
accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer. In all other
cases, the expense shall be borne by the facility owner.
L. In no event shall an alternative or emerging energy facility be installed
on any parcel in Warrington Township that is designated as open space.
M. Violations and remedies. It shall be unlawful for any landowner, person,
firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with or take any action
§ 305-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-330
1:475
which is contrary to the terms of this section of this Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development. If Warrington Township determines
that a violation has occurred, a notice of violation shall be issued to
the landowner and/or facility operator in accordance with the laws
specified by Warrington Township and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Any person, firm or corporation which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by Warrington Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by Warrington Township as a result thereof. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 305-330 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-330
1:476
ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
§ 305-401. Purpose.
§ 305-402. Application.
§ 305-403. Revision of plans.
When changes from the accepted drawings and specifications become
necessary during construction, written acceptance by the Board of
Supervisors shall be secured before the execution of such changes.
§ 305-404. Acceptance for dedication.
Any (required) improvements proposed for dedication shall be accepted or
refused within 30 days of official notice of completion, final inspection, and
approval of construction.
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be bonded and constructed by
the applicant as a condition for final plan approval.
B. All construction shall be completed in accordance with the specific
conditions of the commitment and the accepted drawings and
specifications, and in the manner acceptable to the Township Board of
Supervisors.
C. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications in Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408
and Form 409 Specifications, as amended, RC Standards, as amended,
and specifications listed in Appendix F of this chapter.
A. The improvements included in this Article are minimum requirements.
However, the Board of Supervisors reserves the right in any case to
increase the same if conditions so warrant.
B. If any mandatory provisions of this chapter are shown by the applicant
to be unreasonable and cause undue hardship as they apply to his
proposed subdivision, the Supervisors may grant a variance to such
applicant from such mandatory provisions, so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent of this chapter.
The responsibility of proof of hardship shall be on the developer or
property owners.
C. In granting variances and modifications, the Township may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 305-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-405
1:477
§ 305-405. Maintenance.
A written agreement and bond is required for the satisfactory maintenance
of all streets and other improvements proposed for dedication for a period
of one year after completion of construction before final approval.
§ 305-406. Monuments.
§ 305-407. Streets.
§ 305-408. Sidewalks.
A. Monuments shall be placed at each change in direction of boundary;
two to be placed at each corner of each street intersection and one on
both sides of each street at angle points and at the beginning and end of
curves; utility easements shall be monumented at their beginning and
at their end and areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully
monumented at their external boundaries.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is
completed, at the time specified by the Township Engineer. The
monuments shall be concrete, four inches square in width and two feet
long.
C. All monuments shall be checked for accuracy by the Township Engineer
or their accuracy certified by the owner's engineer. Accuracy of
monument shall be within 3/100 of a foot.
A. The construction of streets, roads, lanes and driveways, as shown upon
final plans and as contained in contract agreements, shall in every
respect conform to the requirements as specified in Article III of this
chapter or as the Board of Supervisors may by resolution require.
B. Specifications. The minimum requirements for materials shall be those
contained in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408
Specifications, as amended.
C. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street profiles
and cross-section plan submitted and approved with the final plan.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all existing abutting streets and
on both sides of all other streets within the subdivision or land
development for all districts, except in the Residential Agricultural (RA)
District, where sidewalks shall be required for all subdivisions of five or
more homes.
B. It is required to install sidewalks, on-site walks, and curbs for
convenience and access to all living units from streets, driveways,
parking areas, or garages and for convenient circulation and access to
all project facilities.
§ 305-405 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-408
1:478
§ 305-409. Curbs.
§ 305-410. Street signs.
§ 305-411. Streetlights.
All proposed streets, whether dedicated or privately owned, intersections
with existing streets and existing street improvements, shall be illuminated
as specified in § 305-314 of this chapter. Final approval of lighting layout
and design shall be subject to final approval by the Township.
§ 305-412. Storm drainage system.
The owner shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, including curbs,
catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, swales and stabilized channels,
and retention/detention basins in order to prevent flooding, erosion,
sedimentation, and other hazards to life and property. All such facilities
are to be of a size and gradient to adequately accommodate maximum
potential volumes and velocities as indicated in the required hydrologic
report (see § 305-319 of this chapter). Facilities size, type, and general
construction shall follow those standards and specifications of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications, as amended; the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual,
C. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications, as amended, or
§ 305-311 of this chapter.
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all streets as specified in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications,
as amended, or as specified in Appendix F of this chapter.
B. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development
abuts (hereinafter called "boundary streets"), curbs shall be
constructed and the existing paved cartway shall be widened to the
curb. The location of curbing along a boundary street shall be
determined by the width of the required cartway of the road as
established by the Board of Supervisors and in accordance with those
specified in § 305-304 of this chapter.
A. The Township shall erect at every intersection of a dedicated street a
street sign or street signs having thereon the names of the intersecting
streets. The developer or owner of private streets shall be fully
responsible for the erection of street signs on private or nondedicated
streets in all residential, commercial, and industrial developments.
B. Street signs are to be erected when the first dwelling on the street is
occupied. Temporary street signs may be erected on the approval of the
Township but shall be made permanent before final offer of streets for
dedication.
§ 305-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-412
1:479
Chapters 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 1, 13, 14, 16, and 17; and, Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation RC Standards, Nos. RC-30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and RC-70.
§ 305-413. Public water supply. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
§ 305-414. Private water supply. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
Where no public water is accessible, as determined by the Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Department, water shall be furnished by the
owner in accordance with Chapter 353, Water, Article III, Well Rules and
Regulations, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
§ 305-415. Public sanitary sewers. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
A. The owner shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivisions or land development. The entire system shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements and standards of the Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Department or other public or private
agency having jurisdiction and shall be subject to their approval.
B. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
appropriately spaced fire hydrants for firefighting purposes. Review
and approval by the Fire Marshal shall be required in order to ensure
that fire protection is provided.
C. All additions described in this section will be dedicated to the
Warrington Township or other public or private agency having
jurisdiction upon satisfactory completion as determined by the Water
and Sewer Department.
A. Whenever practicable, sanitary sewer shall be installed and connected
to the Township sanitary sewer system. If, at the time of final approval,
public sanitary sewer facilities are not available to the subdivision or
land development but will become available within a period of five years
or a period determined by the Board of Supervisors from the date of
recording, the owner shall be required to install or cause to installed at
his expense sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street line in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the Township Water
and Sewer Department; and he shall cap all laterals. Review and
approval by the Township Water and Sewer Department shall be
required and the sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street line
shall be dedicated to the Warrington Township Water and Sewer
Department. The sewer installation shall include the construction
within rights-of-way or easements to bring the sewer to the future
connection with the Township sanitary sewer system.
§ 305-412 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-415
1:480
§ 305-416. Private sewage disposal systems.
If public sewer facilities are not available as determined by the Water and
Sewer Department, the owner shall provide for sewage disposal on an
individual lot basis according to the rules, regulations, terms, definitions,
and conditions of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(1) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been completed and the construction of facilities adequate to
serve the area containing the subdivision has been programmed for
completion within a reasonable time.
(2) When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall
also be provided.
B. Size and grade. Sanitary sewers, both public and private, shall conform
to the Township Authority Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for sanitary extensions.
C. Manholes. Manholes shall be located at intervals of 250 feet at each
change of line or grade. In exceptional cases the interval may be
extended to not more than 300 feet. Manhole appurtenances shall
conform to the Township Water and Sewer Department Standard
Construction and Material Specifications for sanitary sewer extensions.
D. Laterals. Lateral connections to each lot shown on the final plan shall
be installed to the right-of-way line of the street prior to paving. Each
building shall have separate connection to the Township or other
agency sewer.
E. Construction and inspection. All sanitary sewers shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Township and/
or the Township Water and Sewer Department. All construction shall be
inspected and approved by a representative of the Township and/or the
Water and Sewer Department prior to backfilling. An as-built vellum
plan of the installed system showing horizontal and vertical dimensions
and locations of all sanitary sewers shall be filed with the Township
upon completion of the construction.
F. No public sanitary sewer or treatment plant shall be constructed until
plans and specifications have been submitted to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and approved in accordance
with existing laws.
G. All sanitary sewer lines and treatment plants shall conform to the
Township Water and Sewer Department Standard Construction and
Material Specifications for sanitary sewer extensions and may be
maintained in private ownership and operated by the Township
Authority's standards or will be dedicated to the Water and Sewer
Department upon satisfactory completion as determined by the Water
and Sewer Department.
§ 305-415 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-416
1:481
and individual sewage disposal system application and certification
procedure for Bucks County, Pennsylvania, adopted by the Bucks County
Board of Health on January 20, 1969, and any amendments thereto made.
§ 305-417. On-lot sewer and water locations.
The dimensioned location of the on-lot sewage system and the well must be
shown on the plan prior to the issuance of a building permit and must be
constructed as shown.
§ 305-418. Electric, telephone, cable television and communication
facilities. [Amended 5-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3; 8-23-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-8]
A. All electric, telephone, cable television and communication service
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided by underground
cables, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility and other companies providing such services,
except where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the underground installation herein required is not
feasible because of the physical condition of the lands involved.
B. Where practicable, all utilities shall be located within the street rightof-
way, otherwise, easements or rights-of-way as specified in § 305-317
of this chapter for installation and maintenance shall be provided.
C. Final plans shall show locations of all utilities and their easements or
rights-of-way and shall be coordinated with required street tree
planting and other utilities servicing the development.
D. Cable television service cable shall be installed underground along with
other utilities in the utility easements similar to the method provided
for the installation of electric or telephone service and connections.
Installation of cable television wire, cable or other means of service
shall be by the enfranchised cable operator (operators, if more than
one) authorized by Warrington Township to provide television cable
signals to the residents where the development is to be constructed.
The aforementioned cable operator shall be given notice of all ground
openings and reasonable time and opportunity to make the required
installation. Cable television service shall be made available to all new
construction in Warrington Township. Each residence constructed
within the Township shall be prewired to provide distribution of cable
television within the residence at a minimum of one location. Such
prewiring shall be performed either by the enfranchised cable operator
if it chooses to do so or, in the event it does not choose to prewire the
residence, then by a competent contractor who shall prewire the
residential unit in accordance with specifications and standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the
National Electrical Code (NEC). The prewiring for distribution cable
service shall not be covered until inspected by the Township Building
Inspector or by his agent.
§ 305-416 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-419
1:482
§ 305-419. Grading.
Grading shall conform in all respects to the final plan and the requirements
and standards specified in this chapter.
§ 305-420. Planting.
A. Street trees and other required plantings shall be in accordance with
§ 305-325 of this chapter.
B. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until
the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been
completed.
C. The Township Planning Commission shall review plans of proposed
street tree plantings or buffer zone plantings and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for consideration of
approval or disapproval. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
§ 305-419 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-420
1:483

ARTICLE V
Procedure for Subdivision and Land Development
§ 305-501. General. [Amended 8-22-1978 by Ord. No. 78-5;
7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7]
A. There are two stages in the procedure for approval of subdivision and
land development plans. [The procedures for planned residential
development submission are specified in Article IX, Planned Residential
Development District, of Chapter 370, Zoning, as amended.] These
stages are required to enable the Township Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors and their professional consultants to have an
adequate opportunity to review the submission and to ensure that their
formal recommendations are reflected in the final plan. [Amended
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-06]
B. The separate stages of approval require the submission of preliminary
and final plans. These plans differ in their purpose and required level of
detail. The table below indicates the required plans for the different
types of submission and the section in which those plans are defined:
Type of Plan Requirements
(and section number)
Type of
Subdivision Preliminary Final
Minor Not required Required (§ 305-502)
Major Required (§ 305-504) Required (§ 305-505)
Land
development
Required (§ 305-504) Required (§ 305-505)
C. The review process required by the Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors shall include no more than 90 days each for any
preliminary and final plans, following the date of the regular meeting of
the governing body or the planning agency (whichever first reviews the
application) next following the date the application is filed or after a
final order of court remanding an application, provided that should the
said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing
of the application or the final order of the court, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06; at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. The Township Manager shall stamp each plan submission and
resubmission "Date Received" and shall date and initial the plan above
the title block. Plans should be conveyed to the Township Planning
§ 305-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-501
1:485
§ 305-502. Minor subdivision. [Amended 8-22-1978 by Ord. No.
78-5; 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13; 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11;
1-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-2]
Commission as soon as practicable. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a simplified
procedure by which the plans for minor subdivisions (as defined in
§ 305-202 of this chapter) may be submitted and approved.
B. General. In the event that the proposed subdivision shall involve a
change in the location of streets, sanitary or storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other municipal improvements, then the provision
of this section on minor subdivisions shall not be applicable and the
owner shall be required to comply with the requirements of § 305-505.
C. Fee. See the Township Fee Schedule.90
D. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares minor subdivision plan and application.
(Sample application is included as Exhibit 1 in Appendix D of this
chapter.)
(2) Applicant submits six copies of the minor subdivision plan.
(3) Applicant must obtain and submit one copy of a highway occupancy
permit for each encroachment within the legal right-of-way of state
roads and must submit a plan for the approval of the Township
Engineer for all highway encroachments on Township roads (see
Appendix D, Exhibit 3).
(4) Township Manager checks submission against checklist for
completeness and:
(a) If subdivision is incomplete, immediately returns submission to
applicant and indicates the deficiencies; or
(b) If submission is complete, accepts minor subdivision plan,
application, and fee.
(5) The Township Manager shall submit one copy of the plan and
application to the Board of Supervisors, one copy to the Bucks
County Planning Commission, three copies to the Township
Engineer, and one copy to the Township Planning Commission for
review and comment. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
90.Editor's Note: The Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township's offices.
§ 305-501 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-502
1:486
(6) The Board of Supervisors, within the time period prescribed in
§ 10508 of the Municipalities Planning Code, shall:
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and reports of the
Township Engineer, the County Planning Commission and the
Township Planning Commission. [Amended 2-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(b) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(c) Determine whether the minor subdivision plan meets the
objectives and requirements of this chapter and other
ordinances of the Township.
(d) Either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
submitted plans.
(e) Inform the applicant in writing by certified mail, mailed to him
at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision. When the application is not approved in terms as
filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the
application, describe the requirements which have not been
met, and in each case cite the specific provisions of the
applicable ordinance which have not been satisfied.
(7) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the minor
subdivision plan in terms as presented, unless the applicant has
agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or a change in the
prescribed manner of communication of the decision, in which case
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
communication shall have like effect.
(8) After all signatures as required by § 305-506B(3)(c), have been
obtained on linen prints of the minor subdivision plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall sign two linen prints of the minor subdivision
plan.
E. Submission requirements. The minor subdivision plan shall meet the
following standards and include or be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
50 feet, or 100 feet.
(b) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof, and
bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(c) The plan shall be a clear, legible white paper print.
§ 305-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-502
1:487
(2) General information to be shown.
(a) Name of the subdivision.
(b) Name and address of the owner/applicant.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification on the subject tract and adjacent
properties, and requirements on the subject tract.
(e) Date, North point and scale.
(f) A location map for the purpose of locating the site at a scale of
not less than 800 feet to the inch.
(g) All monumentation, both existing and proposed, noting
material.
(h) A note shall be included on the plan stating: "Any additional
subdivision of a lot created by this minor subdivision submitted
within 10 years of the date of approval of this plan shall be
deemed to be a major subdivision for the purposes of the
Subdivision Ordinance and shall follow the procedures
applying thereto." [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-05]
(3) Existing features to be shown.
(a) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided
showing all courses, distances, and areas, and tie-ins to all
adjacent street intersections.
(b) The location, names, and widths of streets, the location of
property and governmental boundary lines and names of
adjacent owners, the location of watercourses, sanitary
sewers, water distribution lines, storm drains, easements or
rights-of-way, and similar features.
(c) Resource protection areas.
(d) Environmentally sensitive areas.
(4) Proposed layout.
(a) Proposed layout of lots.
(b) Lots numbered.
(c) Building setback lines.
(d) Gross and net lot areas.
(5) For state roads, a letter shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation indicating that the plan has been
§ 305-502 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-502
1:488
§ 305-503. Feasibility sketch plan; major subdivision or land
development. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11; 7-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-7]
reviewed and approved in concept and that traffic considerations,
driveways, and the discharge of water on the road right-of-way
have been reviewed. For Township roads, a letter shall be obtained
from the Township Engineer approving all highway encroachments
on Township roads.
(6) Recording of plan, see § 305-506.
(7) Impact studies. Applicant shall be required to submit such impact
studies as warranted to ensure compliance with requirements of
these regulations.
F. Conversion to major subdivision. [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-O-05]
(1) A minor subdivision application filed after the effective date of this
amendment shall be subject to the requirement that any additional
subdivision of a lot created by that minor subdivision within 10
years of the date of approval of the minor subdivision plan shall be
deemed to be a major subdivision for the purposes of this chapter
and shall follow the procedure applying to major subdivisions.
(2) The applicant for such additional subdivision shall be required to
install all public improvements that would have been required had
the subdivision originally been a major subdivision.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the feasibility sketch plan is to afford the
applicant the opportunity to consult early and informally with the
Township Planning Commission and Bucks County Planning
Commission before the preparation of the preliminary plan and formal
application for approval. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
B. General.
(1) During the feasibility sketch plan procedure, the applicant can
advantageously make use of the services of both Township and
county planning agencies to help him analyze the development and
plan more adequately for its sound coordination with the
community. The feasibility sketch plan procedure also affords both
planning commissions the opportunity to give informal guidance to
the applicant at a stage when potential points of difference can be
more easily resolved. It can also simplify official actions and save
unnecessary expense and delay. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(2) Feasibility sketch plans may be submitted for informal discussion
for any major subdivision or land development.91
§ 305-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-503
1:489
§ 305-504. Preliminary plan; major subdivision or land
development. [Amended 8-22-1978 by Ord. No. 78-5; 3-24-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-4; 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13; 7-19-1988 by Ord. No.
88-11; 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
1-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-2]
C. Submission requirements. Data furnished in the feasibility sketch plan
shall include the following information:
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner/applicant.
(3) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan.
(4) Tract boundaries.
(5) Date, North point and scale.
(6) Location map.
(7) Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(8) Significant topographic and physical features, including, but not
limited to, USGS contours, existing vegetation and natural
drainage.
(9) Proposed general street and lot or building layout.
(10) Existing tract and adjacent property zoning.
(11) Limits of resource protection areas.
(12) Limits of environmentally sensitive area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to require formal
conditional approval in order to minimize changes and revisions before
final plans are submitted.
B. General. A preliminary plan shall be submitted conforming in all
respects with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Deposit and fee.
(1) Refer to the Township Fee Schedule.92
(2) The Township Manager shall immediately deposit all fees collected
to the proper Township bank account as directed by the Board of
Supervisors.
91.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3, Suggested sketch plan content, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
92.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 305-503 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-504
1:490
D. Procedure.
(1) Applicant prepares preliminary plan and application. (Sample
application is included as Exhibit 1 in Appendix D of this chapter.)
(2) Applicant initially submits 10 copies of the preliminary plan and
application to the Township Manager. Applicant must also submit
two compact discs containing all plans, documents, and
correspondence in digital format. Applicant must submit additional
copies of plans upon request by Warrington Township. [Amended
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
(3) Township Manager checks submission against checklist for
completeness and:
(a) If submission is incomplete, immediately returns submission to
applicant indicating the deficiencies; or
(b) If submission is complete, accepts preliminary plan,
application and fees, and dates and initials the plan.
(4) Township Manager shall immediately distribute copies of the
preliminary plan and application with a request for review and
comment to: [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
(a) Township files (for public viewing): one copy.93
(b) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies (one copy per
member). [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: one copy.
(d) Township Engineer: three copies.
(e) Water and Sewer Department: one copy.
(f) Township lighting consultant: one copy.
(g) Township Fire Marshal: one copy.
(h) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation: one copy (if
needed).
(i) Bucks County Conservation District: one copy (with erosion
and sediment control or NPDES applications).
(j) Township Parks and Recreation Board: one copy (if needed).
(k) Township Historical Commission: one copy (if needed).
(l) Township Planning Commission: one copy per member (if
needed).
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 4D(2), regarding distribution of copies of the plans to
the Township Planning Department, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06.
§ 305-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-504
1:491
(m) Bucks County Department of Health: one copy (if wells or
septic systems are proposed).94
(5) The County Planning Commission, Township Engineer, Municipal
Authorities, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and Bucks
County Soil and Water Conservation District review preliminary
plan and prepare analysis for review by the Township Planning
Commission within 30 days of the official submission date
established as per § 305-501 of the completed preliminary plan.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(6) At a regular or special Township Planning Commission meeting
following receipt of reports from agencies listed above, the
Planning Commission shall: [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(a) Review the applicant's submission.
(b) Review all reports received.
(c) Discuss submission with the applicant.
(d) Evaluate the plan, reports, and discussion.
(e) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Township.
(f) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
preliminary plan. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-06]
(g) Submit its report to the Board of Supervisors. When the
application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the application, describe the
requirements which have not been met, and, in each case, site
the specific provisions of the applicable ordinance which have
not been satisfied.
(7) The Board of Supervisors, within the time prescribed in § 10508 of
the Municipalities Planning Code, shall:
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and the reports of the
Township Engineer and the Township Planning Commission.
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
94.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 4E, regarding meetings with significant traffic
generators, was repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01.
§ 305-504 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-504
1:492
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Township.
(c) Either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
preliminary plan.
(d) Inform the applicant in writing by certified mail to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision. When the application is not approved in terms as
filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the
application and describe the requirements which have not
been met and shall, in each case, site the provisions of the
ordinance relied upon.
(8) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the preliminary
plan in terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time or a change in the prescribed
manner of communication of the decision, in which case, failure to
meet the extended time or change in manner of communication
shall have like effect.
(9) Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute conditional
approval of the subdivision or development as to the character and
intensity, but shall not constitute approval of the final plan or
authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(10) Before acting on any preliminary plan, the Board of Supervisors
may hold a public meeting in the manner prescribed in
§ 370-3608E, as amended.
E. Submission requirements. The preliminary plan shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
50 feet or 100 feet.
(b) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof, and
bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(c) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship
to the total number of sheets.
(d) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show
features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to show
the presently proposed features.
§ 305-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-504
1:493
(e) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate length to
indicate clearly which features are existing and which are
proposed.
(f) The boundary line of the subdivision or land development shall
be shown as a solid heavy line.
(g) The plan shall be a clear, legible white paper print.
(h) Plans shall be prepared on sheets no larger than 24 inches by
36 inches, and all lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if
the plan should be reduced to 1/2 the size.
(2) General information to be shown.
(a) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(b) Name and address of the owner/applicant.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyors, or architect
responsible for the plan.
(d) Present zoning classification on the subject tract and adjacent
properties, and requirements on the subject tract.
(e) Date, North point, and scale.
(f) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be
subdivided or developed at a scale of not less than 800 feet to
the inch, showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property
and to all streets, roads, and municipal boundaries existing
within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
subdivided or developed.
(3) Existing features to be shown.
(a) Complete outline survey subdivided or developed, showing all
areas (gross and net), and tie-ins at intersections.
(b) The location, names, and widths of streets, the location of
property lines and names of owners, the location of
watercourses, sanitary sewers, storm drains, and similar
features within 400 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided
or developed.
(c) Location of all existing monuments with references noting
material.
(d) Location, size and ownership of all underground utilities, and
any rights-of-way or easements within the property.
(e) Appropriate contours at two-foot to five-foot intervals with
sufficient details to show the course, structure, and capacity of
all drainage facilities, and the method of drainage of the
§ 305-504 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-504
1:494
adjacent or contiguous territory. All ground contours shall be
taken from United States Coast and Geodetic benchmarks and
run direct to the degree that the actual elevations of the spot
points or contours shall be the exact elevations above United
States Coast and Geodetic datum.
(f) The location and character of existing buildings, the location,
size, and species of all large trees standing along, and the
location and general condition of all wooded areas, floodplains,
alluvial soils, lakes and ponds, streams and natural drainage
courses, and areas of marsh, swamp or wetlands.
(g) Floodway restriction overlay area, see Chapter 370, Zoning, as
amended, § 370-3503.
(h) Limits and types of resource protection areas.
(i) Limits and types of environmentally sensitive areas.
(4) Proposed layout.
(a) The layout of streets, including name and width of streets,
alleys, and crosswalks.
(b) The layout and approximate dimensions of lots.
(c) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in planned
industrial, commercial, and multifamily developments.
(d) Applicable zoning requirements and the location of zoning
district boundary lines affecting the subdivision.
(e) A reference to any land dedicated for public use, or offered for
dedication for parks, recreation areas, schools, widening of
streets, or other public uses.
(f) For multifamily developments, the total area, total dwelling
units, number of buildings, proposed density, total parking
spaces, building coverage and bedroom ratio shall be noted on
the plan.
(g) For subdivisions, the total area, number of lots, average and
minimum lot size, and proposed length of new streets shall be
noted on the plan.
(h) Location and size of storm drains, sanitary sewers, culverts,
watercourses and all appurtenances thereof, on-site sewage
disposal facilities, gas mains, water mains, fire hydrants,
streetlights, planting, special structures, and other
underground conduits or structures.
(i) Building setback lines, established by zoning or other
ordinances, or deed restrictions with distances from the rightof-
way line.
§ 305-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-504
1:495
(j) An indication of any lots in which other than a residential use is
intended.
(k) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all
drainage purposes, utilities, or other pertinent reasons.
Preliminary and final plans must be reviewed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for all plans which
abut state roads.
(l) Tentative typical cross sections and center-line profiles for
each proposed street shown on the preliminary plan. These
plans shall be submitted as separate sheets.
(m) A plan of proposed planting showing street tree location,
landscape treatment, reverse frontage lots, required buffer
strips and refuse collection screening.
(n) The developer must obtain a highway occupancy permit for all
right-of-way encroachments on state or Township roads (see
Appendix D, Exhibit 3).
(o) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the owner's
entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective
street layout for the remainder.
(p) The words "preliminary plan, not to be recorded" shall be
shown on the plan.
(q) For apartment projects, a model, at a scale of one inch equals
50 feet, need not be submitted at the time of submission of the
plan and application but shall be submitted at the time of
review by the Township Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01;
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(r) The Township may obtain, at the developer's expense, a
preliminary traffic impact study of proposed development
streets, existing streets and intersections providing access to
the site, collector streets and intersections providing access to
the general area in which the proposed development is located,
and any additional streets the Planning Commission or Board
of Supervisors feels may be adversely affected by the proposed
development. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(s) Preliminary environmental impact assessment reports
identifying all resource protection areas and environmentally
sensitive areas. Compliance with applicable zoning ordinances
and § 305-327 of these regulations shall be required. Refer to
Appendix G for impact assessment report requirements.
§ 305-504 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-504
1:496
(t) A proposed lighting plan containing: [Added 9-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-O-11]
[1] Location of driveways, structures, curb and sidewalk.
[2] Layout of all proposed utilities (including storm sewer).
[3] Proposed tree planting locations coordinated with
proposed grading and underground utilities maintaining
required horizontal separation distances.
[4] Location of parking area lighting, driveway lampposts and
streetlight fixtures with radial extent of illumination in the
form of isocandle contours in units of footcandles (fc);
isocandle contour lines shall be in increments of 0.50 fc.
[5] The spacing of light poles/pole foundations along streets
shall be indicated for all lighting; pole, foundation, and
luminaire types shall be noted.
[6] Photometry detail indicating coverage area of proposed
luminaire and lumens shall be indicated, including a
candela numeric lumen output.
[7] Details and appropriate manufacturer's information of all
lighting and accessory equipment to be utilized, including
fixtures, wattage, fixture height, poles, foundations, and
conduit.
(5) Plan for stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation
control. In the event that any developer shall intend to make
changes in the contour of any land proposed to be subdivided,
developed, or changed in use by grading, excavating, removing or
destroying the natural topsoil, trees or other vegetative covering
thereon under a subdivision or land development application, such
subdivision or land development shall be approved only after the
applicant has obtained approval of a plan for stormwater
management/erosion and sedimentation control, or there has been
a determination by the Township Engineer during review of the
feasibility sketch plan that such a plan is not necessary. These plans
shall, as a minimum, meet the requirements of this chapter (see
especially §§ 305-319 and 305-320) as well as those of the Bucks
County Soils and Water Conservation District. Any plan for
stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation control shall
be submitted by the Township to the Bucks County Soil and Water
Conservation District for review and comment. A plan, when
required, shall include a proposed agreement and bond which will
assure the Township that emergency measures could be taken by
the Township at the developer's expense if said plan were not
implemented. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
(6) Sewer and water feasibility report.
§ 305-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-504
1:497
(a) The subdivider shall submit a feasibility report concerning the
availability and/or adaptability of sewer and water facilities in
or near the proposed subdivision. Said report shall be prepared
by a registered professional engineer and be submitted with
the preliminary plan for review and recommendations by the
local office of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
(b) The feasibility report shall contain engineering and cost data,
evaluations, and recommendations sufficient to enable the
Planning Commission to evaluate the reasons for or against
providing the subdivision with various means of waste disposal
and water service. The requirements of the preceding
paragraph will be met if, as a minimum, the following material
is provided in the sewer and water feasibility report:
[1] Results of an on-site survey tentatively locating existing
water mains, including fire hydrants and sewage facilities,
feasible routes for proposed water mains, water towers,
collector and, to the extent necessary, interceptor and
trunk sewers, pump stations, and interim and long-range
facilities.
[2] Review of topography, soil conditions shown on USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service maps and
subsurface geology charts and reports to the extent that
such conditions will affect the costs and advisability of
various types of water and sewage systems for the
subdivision or land development. Evaluation of costs and
public interest factors in providing waste disposal by three
different means:
[a] Connection to an existing public sanitary sewer
system.
[b] Complete private sanitary sewer system and sewage
disposal plan.
[c] On-lot sewage.
(The Board of Supervisors may waive any one of the
three when it does not apply as a reasonable choice.)
[3] The results of soil percolation tests. Soil percolation tests
shall be performed pursuant to Act 537, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., and current
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for all subdivisions where
buildings at time of construction will not be connected to
any active public sewage disposal system, and where the
net density of proposed dwelling units will exceed two
dwelling units per acre.
§ 305-504 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-504
1:498
§ 305-505. Final plan; major subdivision or land development.
[Amended 8-22-1978 by Ord. No. 78-5; 3-24-1987 by Ord. No. 87-4;
9-13-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13; 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11;
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3; 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-6; 1-25-2005
by Ord. No. 05-2]
[4] Recommendations stating the engineer's professional
opinion as to the means of disposal and water supply that
will be preferable in the short- and long-term interest of
the community in which the subdivision is located.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the final plan is to require formal approval by
the Board of Supervisors before plans for all subdivisions and land
developments are recorded as required by § 305-701 of this chapter.
B. General.
(1) A final plan shall be submitted conforming to the changes
recommended during the preliminary plan procedure. The final
plan and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in all
respects be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
except where variation therefrom may be specified, in writing, by
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Prior to approval of any final plan, a contract for improvement
bond, as defined in Appendix A, must be submitted to and approved
by the Township as a guaranty that all improvements as required by
Article IV of this chapter will be completed.
C. Deposit and fee.
(1) Refer to the Township Fee Schedule.
(2) If the final plan is submitted more than one year after receiving
conditional approval of the preliminary plans as required, an
additional fee of 1/2 the original fee shall be paid upon submission
of the completed final plan to the Board of Supervisors.
D. Procedure. Procedure for approval of final plans shall be identical to the
procedure as outlined for preliminary plans in § 305-504, except as
noted below:
(1) Applicant prepares final plan and application. (Sample application
is included as Exhibit 1 in Appendix D of this chapter.)
(2) Applicant initially submits 10 copies of the final plan and
application plus three copies of the State Planning Module to the
Township Manager. Applicant must also submit two compact discs
containing all plans, documents, and correspondence in digital
format. Applicant must submit additional copies of plans upon
request by Warrington Township. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-01]
§ 305-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-505
1:499
(3) Township Manager checks submission against check list for
completeness and 1) if submission is incomplete, immediately
returns submission to applicant and indicates the deficiencies, or 2)
if submission is complete, accepts final plan, application, and fees,
and dates and initials the plan. The Township Manager shall
immediately deposit all fees collected to the proper Township bank
account as directed by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Township Manager shall immediately distribute copies of the final
plan and application with a request for review and comment to:
[Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01]
(a) Township files (for public viewing): one copy plus one copy of
the state planning module.95
(b) Township Board of Supervisors: five copies (one copy per
member). [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(c) Bucks County Planning Commission: one copy.
(d) Township Engineer: three copies plus one copy of the state
planning module.
(e) Water and Sewer Department: one copy.
(f) Township Lighting Consultant: one copy.
(g) Township Fire Marshal: one copy.
(h) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation: one copy (if
needed).
(i) Bucks County Conservation District: one copy (with erosion
and sediment control or NPDES applications).
(j) Township Parks and Recreation Board: one copy (if needed).
(k) Township Historical Commission: one copy (if needed).
(l) Township Planning Commission: one copy per member (if
needed).
(m) Bucks County Department of Health: one copy plus one copy of
the state planning module (if wells or septic systems are
proposed).
(5) The County Planning Commission, Township Engineer, Water and
Sewer Department, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Bucks County Soil and Water Conservation District, and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection review final
plan and prepare analysis for review by the Township Planning
95.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 4D(2), regarding distribution of copies of the plans to
the Township Planning Department, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06.
§ 305-505 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-505
1:500
Commission within 30 days of the official submission date
established as per § 305-501 of the completed final plan. The
Township shall also review the applicant's state planning module
for compliance with the Township's 537 Plan. [Amended
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-06]
(6) At a regular or special Township Planning Commission meeting
following receipt of reports from agencies listed above, the
Planning Commission shall: [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(a) Review the applicant's submission.
(b) Review all reports received.
(c) Discuss submission with the applicant.
(d) Evaluate the plan, reports, and discussion.
(e) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Township. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(f) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the final plan.
[Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(g) Submit its report to the Board of Supervisors. When the
application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the application, describe the
requirements which have not been met, and, in each case, site
the specific provisions of the applicable ordinance which have
not been satisfied.
(7) The Board of Supervisors, within the time prescribed in § 10508 of
the Municipalities Planning Code, shall:
(a) Reevaluate the applicant's submission, presentation and report
of the Township Planning Commission. [Amended 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-06]
(b) Determine whether the final plans meet the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Township.
(c) Review and evaluate the Township Engineer's report on the
applicant's State Planning Module.
§ 305-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-505
1:501
(d) Either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the final
plan by resolution.
(e) Inform the applicant in writing by certified mail mailed at his
last known address not greater than 15 days following the
decision. When the application is not approved in terms as filed
the decision shall specify the defects found in the application,
describe the requirements which have not been met, and in
each case cite the specific provisions of the applicable
ordinances which have not been satisfied.
(8) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the final plan in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time or a change in the prescribed manner of
communication of the decision, in which case failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of communication shall have
like effect.
(9) If approved:
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall adopt a resolution approving
the final plan.
(b) Approval shall not be final until entry into a contract and
production of completion guaranty as set forth in Appendix A.
(c) Two exact copies of the approved final plan on linen with
signatures of the required agencies as specified in Article V,
§ 305-506B(3)(c), of this chapter shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors.
E. Submission requirements. The final plan shall be accompanied by the
following information, which shall be considered in addition to that
required for the preliminary plan under § 305-504.
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
50 feet, or 100 feet.
(b) The plan shall be a clear, legible white paper print.
(c) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals to the nearest
hundredths of a foot, and bearings shall be in degrees, minutes
and seconds.
(d) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship
to the total number of sheets.
(e) The boundary line of the subdivision or land development shall
be shown as a solid heavy line.
§ 305-505 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-505
1:502
(f) Final plans shall be prepared on sheets no larger than 24
inches by 36 inches, and all lettering shall be so drawn as to be
legible if the plan should be reduced to 1/2 the size.
(2) General information to be shown.
(a) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(b) Name and address of the owner/applicant.
(c) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan.
(d) Date, North point, and scale.
(e) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be
subdivided or developed at a scale of not less than 800 feet to
the inch showing the relation of the tract to the adjoining
property and to all streets, roads, and municipal boundaries
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed
to be subdivided or developed.
(f) Present zoning classification on the subject tract and adjacent
properties, and requirements on the subject tract.
(3) Existing features to be shown.
(a) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed showing all courses, distances, and areas and tie-ins
to all adjacent street intersections.
(b) The location, names and widths of streets, the location of
property lines and names of owners, the location of
watercourses, sanitary sewers, storm drains and similar
features within 400 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided
or developed.
(c) Location, size and ownership of all underground utilities,
easements and rights-of-way within the property.
(d) The location and character of existing buildings, the location,
size and species of all large trees standing alone, and the
location and general condition of all wooded areas, floodplains,
alluvial soils, lakes and ponds, streams and natural drainage
courses, and areas of marsh, swamp, or wetlands.
(e) Floodway restriction overlay area, see Chapter 370, Zoning, as
amended, § 370-3503.
(f) Limits of resource protection areas.
(g) Limits of environmentally sensitive areas.
(4) Proposed layout.
§ 305-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-505
1:503
(a) Lot layout, including dimensions and bearings, and
consecutive numbering of lots.
(b) The proposed names, cartway width and right-of-way width of
all proposed streets.
(c) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in planned
industrial, commercial and multifamily developments with all
necessary dimensions noted on the plan.
(d) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot and boundary line.
(e) The proposed building setback for each street, or the proposed
location of each building.
(f) Accurate locations of all concrete monuments, one to be placed
at each change in direction of boundary, two to be placed at
each street intersection, and one on each side of each street at
angle points and at the beginning and end of curves. Utility
easements shall be monumented at their beginning and at their
end, and areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully
monumented at their external boundaries.
(g) The location, width and purpose of all easements or rights-ofway
and boundaries by bearings and dimensions.
(h) For multifamily dwellings, the total area, total dwelling units,
number of buildings, proposed density, total parking spaces,
building coverage, and bedroom ratio shall be noted on the
plan.
(i) For subdivisions, the total area of each lot, number of lots,
average and minimum lot size, and proposed length of new
streets shall be noted on the plan.
(j) For projects proposing a development in more than one phase,
a phasing plan delineating each phase of development with the
above required information noted on the plans for each phase
shall be required.
(k) The location of all existing and proposed fire hydrants and
utilities.
(l) Certification of water and sewer facilities from the Warrington
Township Water and Sewer Department.
(m) The Township may obtain, at the developer's expense, a final
traffic impact study of proposed development streets, existing
streets and intersections providing access to the site, collector
streets and intersections which provide access to the general
area in which the proposed development is located, and any
additional streets the Township Planning Commission or Board
§ 305-505 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-505
1:504
of Supervisors feels may be adversely affected by the proposed
development. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
(n) Final environmental impact assessment report to include
identification and confirmation of resource protection areas
and environmentally sensitive areas, evaluation of
preservation proposal, and other items to ensure compliance
with zoning ordinances and § 305-327 of these regulations.
(5) Improvement construction plan; drainage and construction.
(a) All horizontal drainage and utility construction plans shall be
accompanied by a grading plan with existing contours
delineated by a dashed lined and proposed contours by a solid
line of not less than a two-foot interval with spot elevations at
sufficient locations to review the proposed amendments.
(b) The improvement construction plan shall be at any of the
following scales:
Horizontal Vertical
50 feet/inch 5 feet/inch
100 feet/inch 10 feet/inch
(c) The horizontal plan for streets shall show details of the
horizontal layout including:
[1] Center line with bearings, distances, curve data, and
stations corresponding to the profile.
[2] Right-of-way lines and curblines with radii at intersections.
[3] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[4] Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all
public roads, with their names and widths.
[5] Location of all concrete monuments with reference to
them.
[6] Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
[7] Location and size of all drainage structures, public
utilities, and street name signs.
[8] Location of sidewalks.
(d) Profile for streets shall include:
[1] Profile of existing ground surface along center line of
street.
§ 305-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-505
1:505
[2] Proposed center line grade noting percent on tangents,
elevations at fifty-foot station intervals, street center line
intersections, and both ends of curb radii.
[3] Vertical curve date including length and elevations of
twenty-five-foot station intervals.
(e) Cross sections shall include:
[1] Right-of-way width and location and width of paving.
[2] Type, thickness and crown of paving.
[3] Type and size of curb.
[4] Grading of sidewalk area.
[5] Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks.
[6] Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes.
(f) Horizontal plans for storm drains and sanitary sewers shall
include:
[1] Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the
profile.
[2] Location of manholes or inlets with grade between
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
[3] Property lines and ownership, with details of easements
where required.
[4] Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[5] Location of laterals.
[6] Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
(g) Profiles for storm drains and sanitary sewers shall include the
profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets.
(h) A proposed lighting plan containing: [Added 9-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-O-11]
[1] Location of driveways, structures, curb and sidewalk.
[2] Layout of all proposed utilities (including storm sewer).
[3] Proposed tree planting locations coordinated with
proposed grading and underground utilities, maintaining
required horizontal separation distances.
[4] Location of parking area lighting, driveway lampposts and
streetlight fixtures, with radial extent of illumination in the
§ 305-505 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-505
1:506
§ 305-506. Recording of final plans.
form of isocandle contours in units of footcandles (fc);
isocandle contour lines shall be in increments of 0.50 fc.
[5] The spacing of light poles/pole foundations along streets
shall be indicated for all lighting; pole, foundation, and
luminaire types shall be noted.
[6] Photometry detail indicating coverage area of proposed
luminaire and lumens shall be indicated, including a
candela numeric lumen output.
[7] Details and appropriate manufacturer's information of all
lighting and accessory equipment to be utilized, including
fixtures, wattage, fixture height, poles, foundations, and
conduit.
(6) Submission of final plans in AutoCAD format. An exact copy of the
final subdivision or land development plans shall be submitted to
the Township on a computer disk, or other transferable media as
may be developed, in AutoCAD DWG or DXF format, as a condition
of final plan approval.
F. Appeal. In the case where the Board of Supervisors disapproves a
preliminary or final plan, any person aggrieved thereby may, within 30
days:
(1) Appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in case where such Board has
jurisdiction over a zoning matter involving the same development.
In any such case, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have no power to
pass upon nonzoning issues, but shall take evidence and make a
record thereon. Such evidence shall become part of the record on
appeal to the court.
(2) Appeal to the Court of Common Pleas having jurisdiction over
Bucks County, which court shall hear the matter and enter a decree
either affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the Board of
Supervisors, as may appear just in the premises. The court shall
designate the manner in which notices of the hearing of any such
appeal shall be given to all parties interested.
A. Recording plans. The action of the Board of Supervisors or of the Court
of Appeals in approving any subdivision or land development plan,
together with an approved duplicate copy of such plan shall, within 90
days of the date of approval, be recorded by the owner in the Office of
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County. The applicant shall notify the Board
of Supervisors, in writing, of the date of such recording and the plan
book and page wherein such subdivision or land development plan is
recorded. If the plan is not recorded within the ninety-day period, the
approval shall lapse and become void. The Board of Supervisors may
extend the ninety-day period upon written application by the applicant.
§ 305-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-506
1:507
B. Record plan requirements.
(1) The record plan shall be clear, legible blue or black line print on
white opaque linen, and shall be an exact copy of the approved final
plan on a sheet of the size required for final plans. The record plan
shall be submitted in two copies.
(2) The final plans as approved and recorded shall be interpreted to
include all information required and approved under § 305-505 of
this chapter. All plans, reports, and studies submitted for final
approval under § 305-505 of this chapter shall be stamped and
dated and retained as part of the record set of approved final
drawings. Changes made at the time of final approval must be
dated and recorded with the Township Manager and noted as
revised sheets before building permits are issued.
(3) The following information shall appear on the record plan in
addition to the information required for a final plan or minor
subdivision plan (see Appendix D, Exhibit 6, for required
certification wording):
(a) Seals.
[1] The impressed seal of the licensed engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
[2] The impressed corporation seal if the applicant is a
corporation.
[3] The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified
officer acknowledging owner's statement of intent.
(b) Acknowledgements.
[1] A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of
the land proposed to be developed and that the subdivision
or land development shown on the final plan is made with
his/her or their consent and that it is desire to record the
same.
[2] Acknowledgement of said statement before an officer
authorized to take acknowledgements.
(c) The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in
black ink.
[1] The signatures of the owner or owners of the land. If the
owner of the land is a corporation, the signatures of the
president and secretary of the corporation shall appear.
[2] The signatures of the notary public or other qualified
offices acknowledging the owner's intent.
§ 305-506 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-506
1:508
§ 305-507. Modification of requirements.
[3] The signature of the licensed engineer or surveyor who
prepared the plan.
[4] The signature of the Chairperson of the Township Planning
Commission (except for minor subdivisions). [Amended
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-06]
[5] The signatures of the Chairperson and Executive Director
of the County Planning Commission, acknowledging that
the plan has been approved, or reviewed by the
Commission (except for minor subdivisions).
[6] The signature of the Township Engineer.
[7] The signature of the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Township Board of Supervisors.
(d) Dedication of land between existing and future rights-of-way.
The following statement shall be made on the record plan and
signed by the owner of record:
"Title to land located between existing and future rights-of-way
is hereby dedicated to the Township of Warrington."
C. Effect of recording.
(1) After a subdivision or land development plan has been duly
recorded, the streets, parks and other public improvements shown
thereon shall be considered to be a part of the official plan of the
Township.
(2) Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a
subdivision or land development plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the Township by formal notation thereof
on the plan, or the owner may note on the plan that such
improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Township.
(3) Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or
land development plan that is recorded, as provided herein, shall
be deemed to be a private street, park, or improvement until such
time as the same has been offered for dedication to the Township
and accepted, by resolution, and recorded in the office of the Clerk
of the Courts of Bucks County, or until it has been condemned for
use as a public street, park, or other improvement. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
§ 305-506 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-507
1:509
§ 305-508. Acceptance of streets and improvements by Township.
A. The above requirements for preliminary and final plans and for the
supporting data may be modified by the Township Board of Supervisors
as warranted by special circumstances.
B. In subdivisions requiring no new streets, and in the case of
resubdivision, the requirements for the contours may be waived at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Inspection.
(1) The applicant shall notify the Board of Supervisors in writing by
certified or registered mail of the completion of the required
improvements and shall send a copy to the Township Engineer.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements.
(3) The Township Engineer shall:
(a) Inspect the completed required improvements.
(b) File a report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, and
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail, within 30 days after receipt by the Township
Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board of
Supervisors. Said reports shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or
in part, and if said improvements or any part thereof shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer,
said report shall contain a statement of the reasons for such
nonapproval or rejection.
(4) If the Board of Supervisors or Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitations provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
(5) If any portion of the improvements shall be rejected by the Board of
Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to complete said
improvements to Township requirements and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
(6) In the event that any improvements which may be required have
not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the
approval final plan, the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the
power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond
or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or
§ 305-507 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-508
1:510
§ 305-509. Disclosure requirements. [Added 1-26-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2; amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4]
making repair or corrections to all the improvements covered by
said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option, install
part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or
land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder
of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from
the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against
the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of
the improvements covered by such security, and not for any other
municipal purpose.
B. Acceptance.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of acceptance of
the required improvements if satisfied that the applicant has
complied with all specifications and ordinances of the Township.
(2) The applicant shall:
(a) Furnish the Township with one linen and one paper print of the
completed required improvements.
(b) Pay all costs for the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of
Bucks County on the petition and resolution of the Board of
Supervisors to the said court for its approval of the acceptance
of the required improvements.
A. Applicability. This section shall apply to the seller (the "seller") of a
vacant subdivided residential lot or a newly constructed home located
within Warrington Township ("dwelling unit not previously occupied")
to a member of the general public (the "buyer").
B. Intent. These requirements are intended to inform the buyer of
important facts pertaining to the new residential property including,
but not limited to, the general nature of the subdivision and/or land
development project (the "project") in which the new residential
property is located.
C. Disclosure requirements.
(1) Prior to the seller conveying to the buyer title to any dwelling units
not previously occupied, the buyer shall sign a residential
disclosure statement ("disclosure statement") which verifies that
the seller has complied with this section and has provided, shown
and/or reviewed with the buyer all of the information that is
required by this section.
(2) The approved subdivision and/or land development plan for all
phases of the project ("approved plan") shall be made available for
§ 305-508 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-509
1:511
inspection by the buyer in the location where property sales are
transacted by the seller. The approved plan shall include the record
plan and all other accompanying plans approved with the record
plan by Warrington Township.
(3) A copy of the approved plan shall be made available to the buyer for
inspection and a copy of the record plan shall be provided to the
buyer. The approved plan and text narrative shall contain the
following information:
(a) Common areas, such as parklands, streets and open spaces
which are part of the project.
(b) All lot lines.
(c) Membership in a common ownership regime such as a
homeowners' or condominium association, if applicable.
Copies of the declaration documents and bylaws shall be
provided to the buyer prior to the buyer's signing an
agreement of sale.
(d) All current dimensional requirements for the primary uses of
each dwelling unit not previously occupied, such as lot size and
required setbacks, building coverage, impervious coverage,
height limitations and deed restricted areas.
(e) All current dimensional requirements for the accessory uses
permitted on each lot, such as lot size, required setbacks,
height limitations and deed restricted areas.
(f) The location of all easements encumbering each dwelling unit
not previously occupied, describing the uses of the easements,
including any underground pipe within such easement
(including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water, gas, cable television and electric lines), a description as
to which dwelling units not previously occupied are affected by
these easements and the limitations imposed by such
easements.
(g) The location of all areas which are classified as wetlands by
current governmental law, rule, regulation or ordinance, with a
notation that such federal, state and local laws and regulations
govern the use of property within wetlands, which may limit
the use and development of such areas.
(h) The location of all areas classified as floodplain or other
resource conservation areas by current governmental law,
rule, regulation or ordinance, with a notation that such federal,
state and local laws and regulations govern the use of property
within such areas, which may limit the use and development of
such areas.
§ 305-509 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-509
1:512
(i) The location of stormwater management facilities, including
detention/retention basins, stormwater management
easements and the ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for such facilities and easements.
(j) The date of the zoning and/or subdivision and land
development ordinances which govern the approved plan shall
be made available to the buyer. If the approved plan is
governed by a court order or stipulation, such documentation,
including all amendments, shall be made available to the buyer.
(k) The present zoning classification of the project and property
which abuts the project.
(4) The buyer of a dwelling unit not previously occupied which is
located within 100 yards of a natural gas transmission line must be
informed, in writing, of the existence, location and owner of the
natural gas transmission line.
(5) The buyer of a lot that was the subject of a minor subdivision must
be informed that pursuant to § 305-502F of this chapter, any
additional subdivision of a tract that is the subject of a minor
subdivision plan within 10 years of the date of approval of the
minor subdivision plan shall be deemed to be a major subdivision
for the purposes of this chapter and shall follow the procedure
applying thereto. [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-05]
D. Buyer responsibility. The buyer shall be responsible to review the
subdivision and/or land development plan, the developer agreement
and the building permit plan. The buyer shall be responsible to become
informed about existing conditions within the neighborhood of the lot
and the vicinity of the subdivision or land development that may affect
the buyer's unique lifestyle requirements. The buyer shall obtain a copy
of the Warrington Township General Location/Information Map; the
current copy of which is dated March 22, 2001, and is adopted herein
by reference.
Sample
Warrington Township Residential Disclosure Statement
Buyer's Name:
Address:
Lot No.: Development Name:
Please initial next to each of the following categories to verify that the
required information was made available for your review.
Initial below:
_____ 1. I have been advised that site plans, permit history and
inspections for my property are available from Warrington
Township.
§ 305-509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-509
1:513
_____ 2. I have been advised that a copy of the record plan, and all
recorded revisions are available for review at the Office of
the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, Doylestown, PA.
_____ 3. I have been informed that an agreement exists between
the Township and the developer that governs
development of the property. This document can be
reviewed at the Warrington Township Building.
_____ 4. I have received a copy of the Warrington Township
General Location/Information Map.
Buyer
Seller or Authorized Agent
Buyer
Date
Date
§ 305-509 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-509
1:514
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 305-601. Hardship.
Where the Township Board of Supervisors finds that extraordinary
hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, the Board
may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest may be secured, provided that such variation will not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan or
this chapter. The burden of responsibility of proof of hardship shall be on
the developer and/or landowner.
§ 305-602. Conditions. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01;
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
In granting variances and modifications, the Board of Supervisors, with the
advice of the Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer, may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the requirements so varied or modified.
§ 305-603. Fees and deposits.
A. Dollar amount of fees specified in this section can be found on the latest
Township Fee Schedule approved by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. The owner shall pay to the Township reasonable engineering and/or
planning fees incurred by the Township for the services of the Township
Engineer incidental to the examination and other work incidental to the
approval of each subdivision or development or section thereof. In
addition, he shall also pay to the Township reasonable legal fees
incurred by the Township for legal services incidental to the
preliminary and final approvals of such plans or sections thereof and
the drafting of the contracts and bonds required in Appendix A of this
chapter. The owner shall also pay for legal services required by the
Township which may arise by reason of the approval of such plans of
each subdivision or development, or section thereof, inclusive of the
cost of legal services, incidental to the final acceptance by the Township
of the streets laid out on the subdivision.
C. The engineering and legal fees required to be paid by this article shall
be promptly paid to the Township by the owner upon the submission of
bills thereof by the Township to the owner, from time to time, as such
fees are billed to the Township or Authority by its or their engineers or
attorneys.
D. To the engineering and/or planning and legal fees herein required to be
paid to the Township, there shall be added a percentage (according to
the Township Fee Schedule) for administrative cost, which the owner
shall pay to the Township as reimbursement for the costs incurred by
§ 305-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-603
1:515
§ 305-604. Inspection by Township Engineer.
the Township for administration and disbursement of such fees to the
Township Engineer, Township Solicitor, and other consultants that may
be needed.
E. A deposit in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule shall be
required at the time of submission of the preliminary and final plans in
order to cover engineering and legal fees incurred during review and
approval of subdivision or land development plans.
A. Three days prior to the commencement of any operation in the
construction or installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage of
streets, curbs, or sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and sewer
facilities, street signs, monuments, or capped sewers, the owner shall
notify the Township Engineer, who shall inspect the work, materials,
construction and installation as to Township requirements.
B. The Township Engineer shall be authorized to have such tests of
materials made as are specified in this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications, as amended, in
order to have proper control of materials. The owner shall pay to the
Township the cost of such tests plus an administrative percentage
according to the Township Fee Schedule to reimburse the Township for
the collection of such fees and disbursement of same to the Township
Engineer.
§ 305-603 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-604
1:516
ARTICLE VII
Jurisdiction and Penalties
§ 305-701. Jurisdiction.
A. Subdivision and land development control.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land in the Township or any
other person, firm or corporation, to subdivide any lot, tract, or
parcel of land or to lay out, construct, open, or dedicate for public
use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings
within the subdivision or land development, any street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, drainage facilities, or other facilities in
connection therewith, unless and until final plans of such
subdivision or development shall have been prepared by a
registered land surveyor, submitted to and approved in writing
thereon by the Township Board of Supervisors, and recorded in the
Bucks County Recorder of Deeds Office in Doylestown,
Pennsylvania.
(2) In order to provide for encouraging and promoting flexibility,
economy and ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and
land developments, the Township Planning Commission is
authorized to recommend to the Board the alteration of site
requirements and to encourage other practices which are in
accordance with modern and evolving principles of site planning
and development. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-01;
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-06]
B. Sale of lots; issuance of building permits; erection of buildings.
(1) No lot in a subdivision may be sold, and no permit to erect, alter, or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land development
may be issued unless and until the municipal improvements
required by the Board of Supervisors in connection therewith have
either been constructed or guaranteed as specified in Appendix A
of this chapter.
(2) No building in a subdivision or land development depending for
ingress and egress upon the improvement of any street or streets
therein provided for shall be permitted to be occupied before
improvements are fully completed from now existing paved streets
to and across the front of the lot on which the building is located,
and/or to a sufficient depth along the side of the lot to service any
driveway, driveways, or parking spaces.
(3) No building depending upon public water and sewer facilities shall
be permitted to be occupied before such facilities are fully provided
and operational.
C. Approval not required. Fractional portions of lots shown on a
subdivision plan which have received final approval in accordance with
§ 305-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-701
1:517
§ 305-702. Penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
the requirements of this chapter may be conveyed without the approval
of a minor subdivision plan, provided:
(1) The portions of such lots are added to the contiguous lot or lots for
the purpose of such conveyances.
(2) No lot will thereby be reduced or changed in size or shape in such a
way as not to conform with any of the provisions of Chapter 370,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, as amended.
(3) Prior to such conveyance, the owner of the subject property files
with the Township Manager's office at least three prints of a survey
plan prepared by a registered professional engineer showing all
lots affected and the new subdivision lines in such a way as to
indicate conformance to Subsection C(1) and (2) hereof.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
§ 305-701 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-702
1:518
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that
there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good-faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(4) Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this section.
C. Approval. Upon approval by the Board of Supervisors of the
improvement construction plan, and provided the subdivision plan has
similarly been approved, the subdivider shall thereupon apply for a
building permit. A building permit herein means a formal document
issued by the Township for the purpose of authorizing commencement
of construction of those public improvements contemplated by the
improvement plans for which provision has been made by the terms of
the subdivision agreement. Payment to the Township for the building
permit shall accompany the application. If said documents are in proper
form and the security submitted by the subdivider is approved by the
Township, the building permit will then be issued by the Township.
§ 305-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-702
1:519
D. Permit to be void. If more than six months have elapsed since the
issuance of a construction permit and no improvements have been
constructed, or if the improvements have been commenced and there
has been no construction performed for a period of six months, the
Board shall require that, prior to any further construction, the plan
shall be resubmitted and changes and modifications to the plan may be
required. No building permits will be issued; all work on issued building
permits will be terminated; and no permit will be issued for the
continuation of construction improvements until such changes and
modifications, if necessary, as are ordered by the Board, have been
incorporated in the plan and, when required, additional security has
been posted to guaranty completion of the improvements. An extension
of six months may be granted by the Board upon written request
therefor.
E. Time limit for construction. All construction improvements must be
completed within one year from the date of building permit or at a
prearranged schedule of construction. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
F. Completion certificate. After satisfactory completion of the work, the
guarantees will be released and the completion certificate on the
permit endorsed by the Township Manager.
§ 305-702 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-702
1:520
ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Home Park Regulations
§ 305-801. Permits. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
A. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the
Township unless he holds a valid certificate of registration issued by the
Bucks County Health Department in the name of such person, as well as
a permit issued by the Township.
B. Application for a certificate of registration. All applications for
certificates of registration shall be made by the owner of the mobile
home park or his authorized representative in accordance with the
Local Heath Administration Law, No. 315, P.L. 1304, 16 P.S. § 12001 et
seq. A copy of the county application is included as Exhibit 2 in
Appendix D of this chapter.96
C. Application of initial mobile home park permit.
(1) Applications for a mobile home park permit shall follow the
requirements and procedures as established in §§ 305-504 and
305-505 of this chapter for preliminary and final plan approvals. A
copy of the permit application is included as Exhibit 2 in Appendix
D of this chapter.97
(2) Upon approval of the entire final plan and payment of the required
fees, the Board of Supervisors shall issue a mobile home park
permit to the owner, which shall be valid for a period of one year
thereafter.
D. Renewal permits.
(1) Renewal permits shall be issued annually by the Board of
Supervisors upon the furnishing of proof by the applicant that his
park continues to meet the standards prescribed by this chapter.
(2) A Building Inspector or other Township officer may inspect a
mobile home park at reasonable intervals and at reasonable times
to determine compliance with this chapter.
(3) The permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the
premises of the mobile home park at all times.
E. Compliance of existing mobile home parks.
(1) Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this
chapter, and duly authorized to operate as such by the Department
of Environmental Protection, may be continued so long as they
otherwise remain lawful.
96.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-801
1:521
(2) Existing mobile home parks shall be required to apply for a mobile
home park permit as required under this chapter and to submit an
existing plot plan, drawn to scale, when applying for a permit or
renewal of permit.
(3) Any subsequent new construction, alteration, or extension of an
existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Any existing mobile home park which, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors and its inspectors, creates a fire, safety or health
hazard shall be required to comply with the provisions of this
chapter within a reasonable period of time to be determined by the
same body.
F. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes not located in a
mobile home park shall not be required to obtain a mobile home park
permit; however, they shall be required to obtain a building permit.
Individual mobile homes shall comply with the other applicable
Township ordinances and regulations that govern single-family homes
in zoning districts where permitted.
G. Fees. The initial permit fee for each mobile home park and the renewal
permit fee for each mobile home park shall be established by resolution
in the manner prescribed in the Township Fee Schedule.
H. Revocation of permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home
park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the Board of Supervisors or designated officer shall
give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the permit was issued.
Such notice shall consist of a listing of the violated sections of this
chapter and shall advise the person that unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a period of time specified in the notice,
the permit to operate will be suspended. At the end of such period, the
mobile home park shall be reinspected and, if such conditions or
practices have not been corrected, the Board of Supervisors shall
suspended the permit and give notice in writing of such suspension to
the person to whom the permit is issued.
§ 305-801 WARRINGTON CODE § 305-801
1:522
Chapter 310
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 310-1. Permit required. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
Any person or persons desiring to construct a bathing, swimming place or
swimming pool, in which water may be placed or collect in excess of a depth
of two feet, within 300 feet of any property line of the property on which it
is located, shall first secure a permit from the Zoning Officer of Warrington
Township. The fee, to be established from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, shall be collected for such permit, such fee to
include the permit necessary for fencing. The applicant shall submit to the
Zoning Officer such plans, drawings or other data as may be required by
him and shall satisfactorily indicate the method of fencing and latching and
the manner of the emptying of the pool.
§ 310-2. Fencing required. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
A. Every bathing, swimming place or swimming pool not enclosed in a
building, in which water may be placed or collect in excess of a depth of
two feet, heretofore or hereafter installed or constructed within 300
feet of any property line of the property on which it is located, shall be
entirely surrounded by a substantial wire mesh or solid fence not less
than four feet in height which contains no vertical interspace of more
than two inches and no horizontal rail or component on the outside
usable as a footstep, and which satisfies the appropriate following
minimum requirements:
(1) Wood picket: three-fourths-inch stock.
(2) Iron picket: one-half-inch iron bar.
(3) Chain link: vertical chains shall be nine gauge wire and a maximum
of two inches apart.
(4) Woven or other solid fence: of a strength equivalent to one of the
foregoing, satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
(5) The fence shall be erected a minimum of five feet from the edge of
the pool.
(6) Each gate in every such fence shall be secured with an automatic
locking device satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
§ 305-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:523
§ 310-3. Exceptions to permit requirements.
§ 310-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by
the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate
officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable
relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. This chapter
may be enforced initially by violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38,
Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
Chapter 318
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal claims and liens — See Ch. 209.
B. A fee, to be established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, shall be collected for a permit for fencing.
A. No person or persons shall be required to obtain a permit or to fence a
plastic or material-type wading pool in which water may be placed or
collected to a depth not to exceed one foot; provided, further, that said
pool is not larger than six feet by 10 feet, and not containing more than
60 square feet of bottom space.
B. Any person or persons shall be required to obtain a permit and to fence,
as aforementioned, any plastic or material-type wading pool in which
water may be placed or collected in excess of one foot if said pool is
larger than six feet by 10 feet, or contains more than 60 square feet of
bottom space and said wading pool is located within 300 feet of any
property line of the property on which it is located.
§ 310-2 WARRINGTON CODE § 310-4
1:524
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 318-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Warrington Township Earned Income and
Net Profits Tax Ordinance," referred to herein as "this article."
§ 318-2. Enabling authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to and under the enabling authority of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. and the Act of General
Assembly of July 2, 2008 (P.L. 197) known as Act No. 32.
§ 318-3. Intent and purpose; applicable rules.
§ 318-4. Definitions.
All words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in Act 32, as
amended. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
A. The primary purpose of this article is to conform the local income tax
currently levied by Warrington Township on earned income and net
profits with the Act. It is the intent of this article to include all of the
applicable language and provisions of 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., the Act
of General Assembly of July 2, 2008 (P.L. 197) and known as Act No. 32,
as may be amended and supplemented from time to time. In all
administration and enforcement of this article, the language and intent
of the Act, as amended, shall take precedence.
B. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected and administered in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations; and regulations,
policies and procedures adopted by the Tax Collection Committee (as
herein defined) or Tax Officer. This includes any regulations, policies
and procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed
by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 318-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-4
1:525
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. This term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development or successor agency charged with any duties under
the Act, as may be amended and supplemented.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or
as determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
For purposes of earned income, employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform Code of
1971." The term does not include: wages and compensation paid to
individuals on active military service regardless of whether it is earned
for active military service inside or outside the commonwealth; offsets
for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied herein by the
municipality on earned income and net profits. Also referred to as "tax"
herein.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties
hereunder, this term includes a corporate officer.
MUNICIPALITY — A city of the second class, city of the second class A, city
of the third class, borough, town, township of the first class or township
of the second class. For purposes of this article, such term shall mean
Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, except
corporations as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971
(P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules and
§ 318-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-4
1:526
regulations promulgated under such section. The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided; and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. Further, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the municipality.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the municipality.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established by a TCC for the
administration and collection of earned income and net profits tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (HEREIN REFERRED TO AS "TCC") — The
committee established to govern each tax collection district for the purpose
of income tax collection. This term shall include a joint tax collection
committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (HEREIN REFERRED TO AS "TCD") — The
Bucks County Tax Collection District as established under the Act.
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau,
county (excluding a county of the first class), or private agency which
administers and collects earned income and net profits for one or more tax
collection districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of
the obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the Tax Officer or Tax
Collector for the tax collection district within which the employer is located;
or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more than one tax collection
district, the Tax Officer for each such tax collection district with respect to
employees principally employed therein.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required hereunder to file a return of
earned income or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
§ 318-5. Imposition.
A. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
B.
C. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by residents of the municipality. Where a
resident's school district also imposes an earned income tax, the
effective Township tax rate is 0.5%.
§ 318-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-5
1:527
§ 318-6. Declaration and payment.
Except as provided in § 98-33C, taxpayers shall declare and pay income
taxes as follows:
B. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents, exclusive of domestic
servants.
C. The earned income and net profits tax levied under this article shall be
applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned during
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year or for taxpayer fiscal year beginning in
the current year. The earned income and net profits tax shall continue
in force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis without the
need for annual enactment or reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
(1) Calendar year. For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is a calendar year,
income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year; except that taxes imposed for the
first time and changes to existing tax rates shall become effective
on January 1 or July 1, as specified in this article, and the tax shall
continue in force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis,
without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
(2) Taxpayer fiscal year. For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a
calendar year, the Tax Officer shall establish deadlines for filing,
reporting and payment of taxes which provide time periods
equivalent to those provided for a calendar year taxpayer.
(3) Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer
who is domiciled in a political subdivision for only a portion of the
tax year shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
calendar months during the tax year that the individual is domiciled
in the political subdivision, and the denominator of which is 12. A
taxpayer shall include in the numerator any calendar month during
which the taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the calendar
month. A day that a taxpayer's domicile changes shall be included
as a day the individual is in the new domicile and not the old
domicile. If the number of days in the calendar month in which the
individual lived in the old and new domiciles is equal, the calendar
month shall be included in calculating the number of months in the
new domicile.
A. Taxable income. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the resident Tax Officer, a final
§ 318-5 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-6
1:528
return showing the amount of taxable income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December
31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable
income, the amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been
withheld under § 98-36 below and the balance of tax due. All amounts
reported shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the Tax Officer the balance
of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
B. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the current
year, make and file with the Tax Officer a declaration of the
taxpayer's estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, and shall
pay to the Tax Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax
due on the estimated net profits. The first installment shall be paid
at the time of filing the declaration, and the other installments shall
be paid on or before July 15 of the current year, October 15 of the
current year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration required on or
before July 15 of the current year, October 15 of the current year or
January 15 of the succeeding year, whichever date next follows the
date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and
shall pay to the Tax Officer in equal installments the tax due on or
before the quarterly payment dates that remain after the filing of
the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Tax Officer a final return showing the
amount of net profits earned or received based on the method of
accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year, and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits and the
total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Officer the balance of tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any
taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of
the estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Tax Officer on or
before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return.
(4) The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue,
shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in
cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required
under this subsection anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or has overestimated anticipated net profits.
§ 318-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-6
1:529
§ 318-7. Employer registration; employee certificate of residency.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file a final return as required under this article and pay
the tax due.
C. Other taxable income. Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable
income not subject to withholding under Section 512(3) of the Act shall
make and file with the resident Tax Officer a quarterly return on or
before April 15 of the current year, July 15 of the current year, October
15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, setting
forth the aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to
withholding by the taxpayer during the three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30
of the current year, and December 31 of the current year, respectively,
and subject to income tax, together with such other information as the
Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at the
time of filing the return, pay to the Tax Officer the amount of income tax
due. The Department shall establish criteria under which the Tax
Officer may waive the quarterly return and payment of the income tax
and permit a taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the
taxpayer's annual return and pay the income tax due on or before April
15 of the succeeding year.
D. Waiver. The TCC may, by regulation, waive the requirements for a
quarterly return and payment of income tax under specified
circumstances, including those instances where a taxpayer's annual
taxable income is less than a specified amount.
A. Employer registration. Every employer having an office, factory,
workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business within
Warrington Township, having imposed a tax on earned income or net
profits within its municipal boundaries, who employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation and who has not previously registered shall,
within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Tax
Officer the name and address of the employer and such other
information as the Department or Tax Officer may require.
B. Employee certificate of residency. Every employer shall require each
new employee to complete a certificate of residency form, which form
shall be an addendum to the Federal Employee's Withholding Allowance
Certificate (Form W-4 or successor form). An employer shall also
require any employee who changes his/her address or domicile to
complete a certificate of residency form, which form is available from
the Department or the Tax Officer upon request. The purpose of said
form shall be to help identify the political subdivision where an
employee lives and works.
§ 318-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-8
1:530
§ 318-8. Filing and payment by employer; withholding; annual
return; withholding statement.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within Warrington Township (having imposed
a tax on earned income or net profits within the municipality), who
employs one or more persons, exclusive of domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation shall deduct at the
time of payment thereof the greater of the employee's resident tax or
the employee's nonresident tax imposed by this article on the earned
income due to his employee or employees and shall, on or before April
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the
current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a quarterly
return and pay to the Tax Officer the amount of taxes deducted during
the preceding quarterly periods ending March 31 of the current year,
June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such return, unless
otherwise agreed upon between the Tax Officer and employer, shall
show the name, address and social security number of each such
employee, the compensation of such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total
compensation of all such employees during such preceding quarterly
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return as
well as any other information prescribed by the Department or the Tax
Officer.
B. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or who has failed to
pay over the proper amount of tax to the Tax Officer may be required by
the Tax Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such case,
payment of tax shall be made to the Tax Officer on or before the last day
of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, the provisions of
this Subsection C shall apply if any employer has more than one place of
employment in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days
following the last day of each month, the employer may file the return
required by Subsection A above and pay the total amount of tax due
from employees in all work locations during the preceding month to the
Tax Officer for either the tax collection district in which the employer's
payroll operations are located or as determined by the Department. The
return and tax deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The
employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and
make combined payments with the Tax Officer for each place of
employment at least one month prior to filing its first combined return
or making its first combined payment. This Subsection C shall not be
construed to change the location of an employee's place of employment
for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
§ 318-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-8
1:531
§ 318-9. Powers and duties of Tax Officer.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Tax Officer or other designated Tax Officer to whom tax,
which has been deducted, has been remitted as required herein:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of compensation paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, the total amount of tax paid to the
Tax Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year, and any other
information prescribed by the Department.
(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with
the Federal Wage and Tax Statement (Form W-2 or successor form),
for each employee employed during all or any part of the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and
Social Security number, the amount of compensation paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
numerical code prescribed by the Department representing the tax
collection district where payments required herein were remitted
and any other information required by the Department or the Tax
Officer and the amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 511 of the Act, every
employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which the employer is required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee. The failure or
omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this
section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or
from complying with the requirements of this article relating to the
filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Officer to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the Tax
Officer's duty to keep a record showing the amount of tax received from
each taxpayer paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Officer, before entering upon official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the TCC appointing such Tax Officer. The bond
provided shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the Act.
§ 318-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-9
1:532
§ 318-10. Suit for collection of tax.
C. The Tax Officer shall comply with all resolutions, policies and
procedures adopted by the TCC and shall comply with all regulations
adopted by the Department under the Act.
D. The Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Tax Officer and agents designated by him/her/it are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers, records and relevant federal
or state tax returns, accompanying schedules or supporting
documentation of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person
whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer
in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return or, if no
declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer
and every taxpayer and every person whom the Tax Officer reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required
to give to the Tax Officer or to any agent designated by him any means,
facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations as
are hereby authorized. Such examination and investigations shall be
conducted by the Tax Officer and any agents designated by the Tax
Officer in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 84, Subchapter C
(relating to the local taxpayers bill of rights).
F. Any information gained by the Tax Officer, the Tax Officer's designated
agents or by any other official or agent of the taxing district as a result
of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications
required or authorized by this article shall be and remain confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
G. The Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year, provided that any filing, reporting or payment dates shall
provide time periods equivalent to those time periods set forth for
taxpayers whose fiscal year coincides with a calendar year.
A. The Tax Officer may sue in the name of Warrington Township within the
TCD for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Except as provided otherwise in this section, any suit brought to
recover the tax imposed by this article shall be begun within three
years after such tax is due; the declaration or return has been filed; or a
redetermination of compensation or net profits by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue, whichever date is later; provided, however,
that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
§ 318-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-10
1:533
§ 318-11. Interest and penalties.
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed under the provisions
of this article.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Tax Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes.
(3) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Tax
Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this article.
(4) Where an employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this article.
(5) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and not involving or revealing fraud; provided, however, that
such suit is begun within six years.
C. The Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund; provided,
however, that such suit is begun two years after making such refund,
except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that
any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
D. This section shall not be construed to limit the Board of Supervisors of
Warrington Township from recovering delinquent taxes by any other
means provided by the Act. Further, nothing set forth herein shall be
construed to limit a Tax Officer or TCD from recovering delinquent
taxes by any other means provided by the Act.
A. Except as may be provided for in Subsection B below, in the event any
tax imposed in this article is not paid when due, interest shall accrue at
the same rate a taxpayer is required to pay to the commonwealth as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176),
known as the Fiscal Code, or such successor legislation, on the amount
of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected; but the amount of penalty shall not exceed 15% in
the aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of tax, the
taxpayer liable for the tax shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection, interest and penalties, including, but not limited to, court
costs and attorneys' fees.
B. Pursuant to the Act, the Department may establish conditions under
which a Tax Officer, with the concurrence of the TCC, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for
§ 318-10 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-11
1:534
§ 318-12. Violations and penalties.
nonpayment of taxes previously imposed and due if the taxpayer files
delinquent returns and pays the tax in full.
C. The provisions of Subsection B above shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under this article, or prevent the commencement of prosecution of any
proceedings by the appropriate authorities for violations of this article.
However, no proceedings shall be commenced on the basis of
delinquent returns filed pursuant to § 98-38 above if the returns are
determined to be substantially true and correct and the tax due is paid
within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register, keep or supply records or returns or to pay the tax
deducted from his employees or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or
withhold the tax from his employees; any person who refuses to permit
the Tax Officer or any agent designated by the Tax Officer to examine
his/her books, records, papers; and any person who knowingly makes
any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his/her net
profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed by this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each
offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding six months.
B. Any employer who is required under this article to collect, account for
and distribute taxes and who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute such tax commits a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to
imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him or her from making such declaration or return.
E. Warrington Township hereby approves and adopts the Cost of
Collection Schedule, attached hereto and made a part hereof and to
include any amendments thereto as may be adopted by resolution of the
TCC from time to time, to be imposed by the designated Tax Officer for
the collection of taxes on earned income and net profits from any
taxpayer whose taxes are or become delinquent and/or remain due and
unpaid. The designated Tax Officer is hereby authorized to retain such
costs of collection as set forth in the attached schedule, as may be
§ 318-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-12
1:535
§ 318-13. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to any employer or person as to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of the municipality to levy, assess and impose
the tax or duties as herein provided.
§ 318-14. Amendment and restatement/repeal.
As stated in § 98-31, the primary purpose of this article is to conform
the local income tax currently levied on earned income and net profits by
Warrington Township with the Act and to do so within the time frame set
forth in the Act. Any prior ordinance levying such tax is hereby amended
and restated in its entirety to read as set forth in this article. To the
extent that any previous ordinance or portion thereof is inconsistent or
conflicts with this article, such ordinance(s) or portion thereof shall be
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency and/or conflict. To the extent
the any prior ordinance levying such tax is in force immediately prior
to enactment of this article, this article is intended as a continuation of
such prior ordinance and not as the enactment of an ordinance imposing
a new tax. In the event this article or any portion thereof is determined
to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the prior ordinance or portion
thereof, levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by the adoption of this article. Nothing contained herein
shall affect, impair or otherwise abrogate any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall any provision of this article affect, impair or preclude any suit
or prosecution pending, whether or not currently initiated, to enforce any
right, penalty or violation under the authority of any previous ordinance in
force prior to adoption of this article.
§ 318-15. Effective date; initial current year.
The effective date of this article and beginning of the initial current year
shall be January 1, 2012.
amended from time to time, in recovering delinquent taxes and as
permitted to be assessed to delinquent taxpayers pursuant to law.
§ 318-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-15
1:536
ARTICLE II
Video Programming Municipal Tax
[Adopted 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-10 (Ch. 24, Part 5, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 318-16. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Warrington Township Video
Programming Municipal Tax Ordinance."
§ 318-17. Incorporation of statute.
This article is enacted and adopted under and by virtue of the authority
of the Second Class Township Code,98 as amended, and the Video
Programming Municipal Tax Act of 1995, P.L. 264, No. 37, as amended. The
latter aforesaid act is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 318-18. Definitions.
The terms used in this article shall have the definitions ascribed to them by
Section 2 of the Video Programming Municipal Tax Act of 1995, P.L. 264,
No. 37, as amended.
§ 318-19. Imposition.
A. Warrington Township hereby imposes and authorizes the collection of a
video programming tax on and from, respectively, any person who sells
video programming to subscribers who are located within Warrington
Township by any means of transmission, other than wireless or directto-
home satellite transmission, or who provides such subscribers with
access to video programming by any means of transmission, other than
wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission, and who is not
otherwise subject to federally authorized or permitted local fees or
taxes on the gross receipts received from the provision of cable
television service or video programming services to customers in
Warrington Township. This tax shall be imposed on persons engaging in
any commercial activity in Warrington Township, or employing capital
in Warrington Township, or owning, leasing or utilizing property in
Warrington Township, or maintaining an office in Warrington Township,
or having employees in Warrington Township for all or any part of any
calendar year, to the full extent permitted by the Constitution of the
United States. The tax imposed hereby is imposed only on the gross
receipts of such persons from sales of video subscribers who are
located within Warrington Township.
B. Tax rate. The tax rate under this article shall be the franchise fee rate
lawfully imposed by the Warrington Township Cable Television
Ordinance [Chapter 126] or, if no local cable ordinance exists, the rate
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 318-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-19
1:537
§ 318-20. Exemption from certain taxes.
Gross receipts, as defined in this article, and subject to the tax imposed by
this article, as well as any revenues received by a person providing access
to video programming from video programmers for the transport of video
programming to a subscriber's premises or from video programmers for
access to the video dial-tone network, shall not be subject to any tax under:
set in the agreement between the local cable television operator and
Warrington Township. In no event shall the rate imposed under this
article exceed 5%.
C. Calculation of tax. The tax authorized in this article shall be determined
by multiplying the tax rate as set forth in either Subsection A or F of this
section, as applicable, by the gross receipts of video programmers from
sales of video programming or of persons from sales of access to video
programming, of common carriers from sales or access to video
programming, by any means of transmission, other than wireless or
direct-to-home satellite transmission, directly to subscribers who are
located in Warrington Township.
D. Election. Any person subject to tax under this article may elect at any
time to pass through to subscribers as a separate itemized line charge
on the subscriber's bill the tax imposed under this article.
E. Penalty. A penalty of an amount equal to 10% of the taxes due, including
all delinquent taxes due under this article, shall be added to the tax
levied under this article for failure to pay the tax by the quarterly due
dates set forth in Subsection G of this section.
F. Alternate rate. If no cable television operator provides cable service
within the limits of Warrington Township, the tax to be collected from
persons subject to tax under this article shall be 5%. In the event that a
cable operator shall thereafter provide cable service within the limits of
Warrington Township, the tax rate set under this article shall be
adjusted under Subsection B of this section.
G. Due dates. The tax imposed under this article shall be paid to
Warrington Township by each person quarterly on or before April 39,
July 31, October 31 and January 31 and shall be calculated based on the
gross receipts of each person during the three months prior to the
month of payment. Any payment of tax shall be considered as timely
made if the payment received by Warrington Township is postmarked
by the United States Postal Service on or prior to the final day on which
payment is to be received.
A. Article XI of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971."
B. The Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as the "Local
Tax Enabling Act," or any other local tax or fee imposed on the receipts
of persons providing video programming or access to video
§ 318-19 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-20
1:538
§ 318-21. Tax credits.
§ 318-22. Procedures and regulations.
Procedures. A person may be audited by Warrington Township; provided,
however, that any dispute or controversy that results from such audit or
imposition of tax under this article shall be contested and resolved in
accordance with a uniform set of procedures, rules and regulations,
applicable to all municipalities, that shall be promulgated by the
Department of Revenue.
§ 318-23. Enforcement and penalties.
Enforcement and penalties for the nonpayment of any tax imposed
hereunder may be pursued and imposed by Warrington Township as
authorized by the Video Programming Municipal Tax Act of 1995, P.L. 264,
No. 37, as amended, and by the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq.
programming to subscribers who are located within Warrington
Township.
A. Credit for interstate transactions. Any person subject to the tax
imposed under this article shall be entitled to a credit against the tax
imposed by this article equal in amount to any similar tax on gross
receipts, other than a generally applicable sales or use tax or corporate
income tax, that the person has paid to another state or government
entity thereof under a lawful requirement of such state or government
entity on sales by the person of the same video programming or sales of
access to such video programming to subscribers located within
Warrington Township.
B. Credit for taxes paid under any franchise or similar fees. Any person
subject to the tax imposed under this article shall be entitled to a credit
against the tax imposed by this article equal in amount to any fees on
gross receipts that the person has paid under any franchise fee or
similar fee authorized or permitted by federal, state or local law or
imposed by ordinance in any municipality or agreed to pursuant to a
written franchise agreement between the person and Warrington
Township, with respect to any revenues received by a person or video
network or for video programming or from video programmers for the
transport of video programming to a subscriber's premises or for access
to a video network.
§ 318-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-23
1:539

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 318-24. Imposition.
Warrington Township adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 and imposes a transfer tax as authorized under that article
subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this section
shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 318-25. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 318-24 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act," provided that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by
the last date prescribed for timely payment, Warrington Township, pursuant
to Section 1120-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D),
authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
§ 318-26. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 318-24 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 318-27. Repealer.
§ 318-28. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on and be applicable
to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for
recording on or after February 13, 2007.
A. As of the effective date of this article, the following ordinances and
resolutions are repealed: former Code Chapter 24, §§ 201 to 218.
B. The repealed ordinance enumerated in Subsection A shall remain
effective for documents that became subject to tax prior to the effective
date of this article.
§ 318-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-28
1:541

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10 (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 318-29. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or
as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act
of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971,
and rules and regulations promulgated under that section, subject to the
following:[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L.
6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and regulations
Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by the
Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned
income.
A.
The term does not include:
Wages or compensation paid to individuals on active military
service, regardless of whether it is earned for active military
service inside or outside this commonwealth.
(1)
(2) Offsets for business losses.
The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the
clergy.
(3)
B.
§ 318-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-29
1:543
promulgated under that section. The term does not include income under
any of the following paragraphs:[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Warrington.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 318-30 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 318-30. Levy of tax.
Income which:
(1) Is not paid for services provided; and
(2) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
Income which represents:
(1) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; or
(2)
(3) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
B.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Township of Warrington during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be
used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by
the Board of Supervisors from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
§ 318-29 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-30
1:544
§ 318-31. Exemption and refunds.
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2) below, the employer shall not withhold the tax from
the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
§ 318-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-31
1:545
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption
certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political
subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3) below.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2) above, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2) above, a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the
exemption claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the
per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of
tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) above, it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Board of Supervisors, in consultation with the collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Board of Supervisors or the
collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
§ 318-31 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-32
1:546
§ 318-32. Duty of employers to collect.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
§ 318-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-32
1:547
§ 318-33. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 318-34. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th day following the end of
each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 318-35. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession with a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 318-36. Individuals engaged in multiple occupations or employed
in more than one political subdivision.
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 318-31B and
this section and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this
article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
§ 318-32 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-36
1:548
§ 318-37. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 318-38. Administration.
§ 318-39. Suits for collection.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998
(municipalities may detail their appeal processes).
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the collector may sue for the
§ 318-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-39
1:549
§ 318-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 318-41. Interpretation.
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 318-39 WARRINGTON CODE § 318-41
1:550
Chapter 330
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assemblies — See Ch. 104.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 294.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 337.
§ 318-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-41
1:551

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 330-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 330-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 330-3. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 330-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Police Department representative shall have the following powers
to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
§ 330-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-4
1:553
§ 330-5. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township of Warrington where,
for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and
shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if they had
been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or
tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected,
posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of
such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25
together with costs of prosecution; provided that the purpose of this section
is to allow for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility
and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township of
Warrington relative to traffic and parking.
§ 330-6. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station flagmen at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is underway or a special event is being conducted on
the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
underway and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 330-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-6
1:554
§ 330-7. Processions and assemblages.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Police Department representative, which
shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at
least one week in advance of the day on which the assemblage is
proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway
is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in
advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where
and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the
assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been
completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at
any time or place other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Police Department representative, which
shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at
least two weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed
to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is
proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in
advance of the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on
which the procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the
procession, the hour when and place where participants may
commence to assemble and form before the procession is under way,
the time when the procession may commence to move along its route,
and the time by which the end of the procession shall have reached the
end of the route of the procession and the procession shall have been
disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate
in any procession unless the permit shall have been granted or under
any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the
permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 330-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-8
1:555
§ 330-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township of Warrington are hereby authorized
to direct traffic on the highways of the Township of Warrington and at
intersections thereof and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this
chapter.99
§ 330-9. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or unless another penalty is herein specified, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any
supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of
prosecution.
§ 330-10. Impoundment, immobilization, towing and storage of
certain vehicles. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
Township police officers are authorized to enforce Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code Section 6309 (Impoundment for nonpayment of fines vehicles or
combinations with a gross vehicle weight rating of 17,001 pounds or more,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6309); Section 6309.1 (Impoundment for nonpayment of
fines; vehicles or combinations with a gross vehicle weight rating of 17,000
pounds or less, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6309.1); and Section 6309.2 (Immobilization,
towing and storage of vehicle for driving without operating privileges or
registration, 75 Pa.C.S.A § 630.2), as written.
99.Editor's Note: Original Section 109, Authorization for use of speed-timing devices, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-10
1:556
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 330-11. Speed limits. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10;
11-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-16; 5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-12; 7-8-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-O-12; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-12;
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-11]
Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets, as
follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Abbey Court Entire length 25
Acorn Way Entire length 25
Adams Court Entire length 25
Alexander Court Entire length 25
Appaloosa Drive Entire length 25
Arabian Court Entire length 25
Arabian Road Entire length 25
Arbor Ridge Drive Entire length 25
Argyle Road Entire length 25
Ashford Court Entire length 25
Aster Way Entire length 25
Ayden Lane Entire length 25
Ballantine Lane Entire length 25
Barton Lane Entire length 25
Basset Court Entire length 25
Bellflower Boulevard Entire length 25
Belmont Drive Entire length 25
Bennett Circle Entire length 25
Bentley Court Entire length 25
Bentwood Drive Entire length 25
Birch Court Entire length 25
Blackburn Drive Entire length 25
Black Horse Drive Entire length 25
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:557
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Black Oak Court Entire length 25
Blue Bell Lane Entire length 25
Bradford Avenue Entire length 25
Bradley Road
[Amended 1-10-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-O-02]
Entire length 15
Brandes Way Entire length 25
Breezy Hollow Drive Entire length 25
Bridle Lane Entire length 25
Brinkworth Avenue Entire length 25
Bronco Circle Entire length 25
Buckboard Circle Entire length 25
Buckingham Drive Entire length 25
Buggy Whip Drive Entire length 25
Bunnell Road Entire length 25
Burgundy Boulevard Entire length 25
Burr Oak Court Entire length 25
Buttercup Boulevard Entire length 25
Buttonwood Way Entire length 25
Cambridge Lane Entire length 25
Carriage Way Entire length 25
Cedar Court Entire length 25
Chariot Court Entire length 25
Chatfield Road Entire length 25
Chestnut Avenue Entire length 25
Chickasaw Circle Entire length 25
Chip Point Entire length 25
Cindy Lane [Added at
time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Cleveland Court Entire length 25
§ 330-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-11
1:558
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Coachlight Circle Entire length 25
Cobblestone Circle Entire length 25
Columbia Road Entire length 25
Connemara Circle Entire length 25
Continental Drive Entire length 25
Coolidge Court Entire length 25
Cooper Lane Entire length 25
Costner Drive Entire length 25
Country Club Lane Entire length 25
Cove Drive Entire length 25
Crestwald Terrace Entire length 25
Crimson Court Entire length 25
Crop Circle Entire length 25
Daltry Court Entire length 25
Dapple Drive Entire length 25
Deborah Court [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Deer Path Circle Entire length 25
Deer Path Drive Entire length 25
Detweiler Road Entire length 35
Dianne's Way [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Dogwood Court Entire length 25
Dubree Avenue Entire length 25
Eisenhower Court Entire length 25
Elbow Lane Entire length 25
Elm Avenue Entire length 25
Emily Circle Entire length 25
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:559
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
English Ivy Drive Entire length 25
Equestrian Court Entire length 25
Erin's Way [Added at
time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Euclid Avenue Entire length 25
Evening Walk Lane Entire length 25
Evergreen Avenue Entire length 25
Fairway Terrace Entire length 25
Falabella Circle Entire length 25
Fawn Lane Entire length 25
Fieldcrest Court Entire length 25
Fir Court Entire length 25
Foal Drive Entire length 25
Folly Road Entire length 35
Forest Glen Drive Entire length 25
Fox Drive Entire length 25
Fox Run Terrace Entire length 25
Freedoms Way Entire length 25
Gait Circle Entire length 25
Garfield Court Entire length 25
Garden Avenue Entire length 25
Gelding Circle Entire length 25
Georges Lane Entire length 25
Georgetown Lane Entire length 25
Glenview Circle Entire length 25
Golf Drive Entire length 25
Gotland Circle Entire length 25
Grace Lane Entire length 25
Grady Avenue Entire length 25
Grand Boulevard Entire length 25
§ 330-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-11
1:560
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Grant Court Entire length 25
Gray Fox Drive Entire length 25
Green Ash Lane Entire length 25
Greenbriar Court Entire length 25
Greenfield Lane Entire length 25
Greenridge Drive Entire length 25
Greensward North Entire length 25
Gregory Drive Entire length 25
Greensward South Entire length 25
Guinea Lane Entire length 35
Greenwood Circle Entire length 25
Greenwood Terrace Entire length 25
Grey Horse Drive Entire length 25
Griffith Road Entire length 25
Hackney Circle Entire length 25
Hamilton Court Entire length 25
Harding Circle Entire length 25
Harness Drive Entire length 25
Hemlock Court Entire length 25
Herblew Road Entire length 25
Heron Way Entire length 25
Hickory Holly Circle Entire length 25
Hickory Ridge Road Entire length 25
Harvard Drive Entire length 25
Hidden Court Entire length 25
Highgate Avenue Entire length 25
Highland Road Entire length 25
Hillside Drive Entire length 25
Holly Road Entire length 25
Honora Street Entire length 25
Horseshoe Road Entire length 25
Jackson Circle Entire length 25
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:561
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Jefferson Court Entire length 25
Jennings Lane Entire length 25
Jericho Drive Entire length 25
Johnson Court Entire length 25
Juneberry Court Entire length 25
K Street Entire length 25
Kansas Road Entire length 25
Kelly Road Entire length 25
Kennedy Court Entire length 25
Kings Court Entire length 25
Kulp Road Entire length 25
Larkspur Lane Entire length 25
Larue Lane Entire length 25
Liberty Lane Entire length 25
Lincoln Circle Entire length 25
Lincoln Court Entire length 25
Linden Way Entire length 25
Live Oak Lane Entire length 25
Longview Road Entire length 25
Longwood Court Entire length 25
Lorraine Drive Entire length 25
Lower Barness Road Entire length 25
Lyric Way Entire length 25
Madison Circle Entire length 25
Maple Avenue Entire length 25
Mare Road Entire length 25
Marie Circle Entire length 25
Martindale Road Entire length 25
Meadow Lane Entire length 25
Metsger Way Entire length 25
Mill Creek Road Entire length 35
Modesto Lane Entire length 25
§ 330-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-11
1:562
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Monaco Drive Entire length 25
Monroe Court Entire length 25
Morgan Horse Drive Entire length 25
Morning Walk Drive Entire length 25
Moss Avenue Entire length 25
Moss Avenue Entire length 25
Muirfield Lane Entire length 25
Musket Court Entire length 25
Mustang Avenue Entire length 25
Neshaminy Avenue Entire length 25
Niblick Drive Entire length 25
Notre Dame Drive Entire length 25
Oak Avenue Entire length 25
Oakfield Road Entire length 25
Orchard Hill Circle Entire length 25
Orchard Place Entire length 25
Oxford Drive Entire length 25
Palomino Drive Entire length 25
Park Road Entire length 25
Parkview Circle Entire length 25
Paso Fino Drive Entire length 25
Patty Lane Entire length 25
Paul Valley Drive Entire length 25
Peach Tree Lane Entire length 25
Philadelphia Avenue Entire length 25
Phillips Avenue Entire length 25
Pickertown Road Entire length 35
Pierce Court Entire length 25
Pine Cone Road Entire length 25
Pin Oak Court Entire length 25
Pin Oak Drive Entire length 25
Pinto Road Entire length 25
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:563
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Pittner Place [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Pointer Court Entire length 25
Polk Court Entire length 25
Pond View Drive Entire length 25
Poplar Road Entire length 25
Post Oak Court Entire length 25
Primrose Place Entire length 25
Quinton Court Entire length 25
Rangerbred Circle Entire length 25
Raven Circle Entire length 25
Rebecca Court Entire length 25
Red Coat Farm Drive Entire length 25
Red Maple Court Entire length 25
Red Oak Drive Entire length 25
Redstone Drive Entire length 25
Ridgeview Drive Entire length 25
Riding Court Entire length 25
Roan Drive Entire length 25
Robin Drive Entire length 25
Rodgers Avenue Entire length 25
Saddle Drive Entire length 25
Sage Lane Entire length 25
Sarahs Lane Entire length 25
Scarlet Oak Drive Entire length 25
School Lane Entire length 25
Shadow Creek Lane Entire length 25
Shepard Lane Entire length 25
Sherrick Court Entire length 25
Shetland Drive Entire length 25
§ 330-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-11
1:564
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Silver Linden Lane Entire length 25
Snapdragon Street Entire length 25
Somerset Circle Entire length 25
Sorrel Road Entire length 25
Sovreign Drive Entire length 25
Spring Meadow Road Entire length 25
Spruce Road Entire length 25
Stallion Road Entire length 25
Stapleton Road Entire length 25
Starflower Street Entire length 25
Statesman Road Entire length 25
Stetson Drive Entire length 25
Stirrup Lane Entire length 25
Street Road Annex
[Added at time of
adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Stuckert Road Entire length 25
Summer Ridge Circle Entire length 25
Summit Lane Entire length 25
Sunnybrook Circle Entire length 25
Sunrise Court Entire length 25
Sunset Drive Entire length 25
Stump Road Entire length 35
Surrey Lane Entire length 25
Suzann Drive Entire length 25
Sweet Cherry Street Entire length 25
Tabatha Drive Entire length 25
Taylor Avenue Entire length 25
Timber Lane Entire length 25
Titus Avenue Entire length 25
Tohickon Lane Entire length 25
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-11
1:565
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Trellis Drive Entire length 25
Triumphe Way Entire length 25
Truman Court Entire length 25
Turk Road Entire length 35
Tyler Way [Added at
time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Entire length 25
Upper Barness Road Entire length 25
Upper State Road Entire length 35
Valley Road Entire length 25
Valley Square
Boulevard
Entire length 25
Victoria Way Entire length 25
Villanova Circle Entire length 25
Walnut Avenue Entire length 25
Warrington Avenue Entire length 25
Warwick Road Entire length 25
Washington Court Entire length 25
Waverly Circle Entire length 25
Wayside Drive Entire length 25
Wedge Way Entire length 25
Welsh Road Entire length 25
Wheatsheaf Lane Entire length 25
Whisper Way Entire length 25
White Oak Court Entire length 25
Wilson Court Entire length 25
Winding Way Entire length 25
Winterberry Court Entire length 25
Woodlawn Avenue Entire length 25
Woodock Avenue Entire length 25
Woodspring Drive Entire length 25
§ 330-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-11
1:566
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Wyckwood Road100 Entire length 25
§ 330-12. Speed limits on certain bridges and elevated structures.
Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and
elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:101
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)
§ 330-13. Speed limits for certain vehicles on hazardous grades.
The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight in
excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for that
grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that grade,
and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle shall
stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:102
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
§ 330-14. Speed limits in parks. [Amended 10-5-1996 by Ord. No.
96-5]
A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and roadways
in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township of
Warrington.103
100. Editor's Note: Original Section 201, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed this table, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Original Section 202, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
102. Editor's Note: Original Section 203, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-15
1:567
§ 330-15. Traffic signals.
At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be erected
(or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations shall be
directed by those signals:104
Location Type of Signal
Entrance to Barness Park Flashing/Warning
Entrance to Bucks County Fuel Oil Company
[Repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Entrance to Fox Nursing Home Flashing/Warning
Intersection of Limekiln Pike and County
Line Road
Flashing/Warning
§ 330-16. Prohibited turns on red signal.
The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from making a
right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
on a steady red signal:105
Signal on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Folly Road [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
North Street Road
Folly Road [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
South Street Road
§ 330-17. One-way streets.
The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the
direction established for traffic on that street:106
103. Editor's Note: Original Section 204, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed this paragraph, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
104. Editor's Note: Original Section 205, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Original Section 206, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-15 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-17
1:568
Street From To Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 330-18. Prohibited turns at intersections. [Amended 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-15]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following intersections,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/
or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time when
such a turn is prohibited by this section:107
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable To
Pickertown
Road
Westward Left turn Folly
Road
Anytime Trucks over
25 feet long
§ 330-19. Right turns only at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at any
time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:108
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make Left Turn
Into or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
§ 330-20. U-turns. [Amended 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of the
following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated for that
street, to make a U-turn:109
106. Editor's Note: Original Section 207, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
107. Editor's Note: Original Section 208, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
108. Editor's Note: Original Section 209, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
109. Editor's Note: Original Section 210, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-20
1:569
Street Portion Direction of Travel
Harvard Drive Island near Street Road Either direction
Valley Square
Boulevard [Added
3-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-04]
Entire length Either direction
§ 330-21. No-passing zones.
The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive
on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone:110
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
§ 330-22. Through highways.
The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those intersections
with traffic signals or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by
this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by
§ 3323(b) or § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,111 as the case may be, and shall
not proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law:112
Highway Between
Folly Road From Street to County Line Road
Guinea Lane From Bristol to Warwick Road
Kansas Road From Street to County Line Road
Oak Avenue From Street Road to Wodock Avenue
Pickertown Road From Bristol to Upper State Road
Stuckert Road From Bristol to Warwick Road
Stump Road From Bristol to County Line Road
Upper State Road From Bristol to County Line Road
Valley Road From Bristol to County Line Road
110. Editor's Note: Original Section 211, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
111. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A § 101 et seq.
112. Editor's Note: Original Section 212, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-20 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:570
§ 330-23. Stop intersections. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10; 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-9; 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-8;
6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-11; 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-13; 9-9-2003
by Ord. No. 03-18; 9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-22; 11-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-24; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-15; 1-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-01; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-03; 7-8-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-O-12; 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-14]
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by § 330-22) are established as stop intersections, and
official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street (the
intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop street)
in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or stop street,
in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required
by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code,113 and shall not proceed into or across
the second-named or intersecting or through street until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.114
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Abbey Court Fox Drive East
Adams Court Continental Drive North
Alexander Court Riding Court East
Alyssa Drive Valley Square Boulevard West
Anderson Way
[Added 11-13-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-O-12]
Bristol Road North
Anderson Way
[Added 11-13-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-O-12]
Matt's Way East and west
Appaloosa Drive Arabian Court West
Appaloosa Drive Brahma Circle North
Appaloosa Drive Chickasaw Circle North
Appaloosa Drive Connemara Circle Both
Appaloosa Drive Falabella Circle East
Appaloosa Drive Gelding Circle East
113. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
114. Editor's Note: Original Section 213, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:571
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Appaloosa Drive Gotland Circle East
Appaloosa Drive Hackney Circle East
Appaloosa Drive Paso Fino Drive South
Appaloosa Drive Valley Road East
Appaloosa Drive Welsh Road East
Arabian Road [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-02]
Appaloosa Road North
Arabian Road [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-02]
Appaloosa Road South
Arbor Ridge Drive Bentwood Drive South
Arbor Ridge Drive English Ivy Drive West
Arbor Ridge Drive Folly Road West
Arbor Ridge Drive Pickertown Road North
Arbor Ridge Drive Trellis Drive North
Argyle Road Pickertown Road North
Ashford Court Summit Lane North
Aster Way Buttercup Boulevard East
Autumn Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Bristol Road South
Aydan Way Heron Way East
Barton Lane Bradley Road North
Barton Lane Fox Drive West
Basset Court Fox Drive East
Basset Court Fox Drive South
Basswood Costner Circle North
Basswood Costner Circle South
Bellflower Boulevard Buttercup Boulevard North
Bellflower Boulevard Buttercup Boulevard South
Bellflower Boulevard Larkspur Lane East
Bellflower Boulevard Sweet Cherry Street East
Belmont Drive Bennett Circle North, West, East
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:572
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Belmont Drive Shepard Lane West
Bens Run Court Kelly Road East
Bentley Court Stetson Drive East
Bentwood Drive Arbor Ridge Drive South
Billingsley Drive Rayburn Lane South
Billingsley Drive Stump Road East
Black Horse Drive Foal Drive East
Black Horse Drive Palomino Drive East-West
Black Horse Drive Shetland Avenue South
Blue Bell Lane Pickertown Road North
Bradford Avenue Tabatha Drive West
Bradford Avenue Tohickon Lane West
Bradford Greene
Drive
Cedarwaxwing Drive East
Bradford Greene
Drive
Goldfinch Court West
Bradford Greene
Drive
Mockingbird Way South
Bradford Greene
Drive
Mockingbird Way West
Bradford Greene
Drive
Oriole Court East
Bradford Greene
Drive
Purple Martin Court West
Bradford Greene
Drive
Raven Court East
Bradford Greene
Drive
Tanager Court West
Bradford Road County Line Road South
Bradford Road Street Road North
Bradley Road Barton Lane East-West
Bradley Road Folly Road East
Bradley Road Lower State Road West
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:573
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Breezy Hollow Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Upper State Road West
Bridle Lane Carriage Way South
Bridle Lane Palomino Drive North
Brinkworth Avenue Street Road South
Bristol Road Cooper Lane South
Bristol Road Red Oak Drive North
Bristol Road Shadow Creek North
Brookwood Court Creekside Court East
Buckboard Circle Palomino Drive East
Buckingham Drive Cedar Court North
Buggy Whip Drive Appaloosa Drive North
Buggy Whip Drive Harness Drive North East
Buggy Whip Drive Harness Drive South West
Buggy Whip Drive Surrey Lane West
Bunnell Road Titus Avenue East
Burgundy Boulevard Redstone Drive South
Buttercup Boulevard Aster Way North
Buttercup Boulevard Bellflower Boulevard East
Buttercup Boulevard Bellflower Boulevard South
Buttercup Boulevard Bellflower Boulevard West
Buttercup Boulevard Primrose Place North
Buttercup Boulevard Primrose Place South, East, West
Buttercup Boulevard Pickertown Road South
Buttercup Boulevard Snapdragon Street East
Buttercup Boulevard Snapdragon Street West
Cadwallader Road Kelly Road East
Cambridge K Street South
Cambridge Oxford Drive North
Carriage Way Bridle Lane East
Carriage Way Bridle Lane West
Carriage Way Palomino Drive North
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:574
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Carriage Way Stallion Road East
Carriage Way Stallion Road West
Chariot Court Riding Court North
Chatfield Road Oakfield Avenue South
Chestnut Avenue Neshaminy Avenue East-West
Chestnut Avenue Philadelphia Avenue East
Chestnut Avenue Warrington Avenue East-West
Cleveland Court Freedoms Way South
Coachlight Circle Bristol Road North
Coachlight Circle Coachlight Circle East
Columbia Avenue Easton Avenue West
Columbia Avenue Spruce Road South
Continental Drive Adam Court North
Continental Drive Freedoms Way South
Continental Drive Hamilton Court South
Continental Drive Jackson Circle South
Continental Drive Jefferson Court North
Continental Drive Liberty Lane South-East
Continental Drive Lincoln Court North
Continental Drive Madison Court South
Continental Drive Pierce Court East
Continental Drive Polk Court East
Continental Drive
[Amended
8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-17]
Washington Court North-South
Coolidge Court Freedoms Way South
Cooper Lane Orchard Hill Circle North
Cornell Drive Kelly Road East
Costner Circle Basswood Court East
Costner Circle Basswood Court West
Costner Circle Hackberry Court North
Costner Circle Hackberry Court South
Costner Circle Valley Road East
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:575
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Costner Drive Basswood Court Both
Costner Drive Redbud Court Both
Costner Drive Hackney Court Both
Costner Drive Sassafras Court Both
County Club Lane Wedge Way East
County Line Road Bradford Greene Drive South
County Line Road Kulp Road East South
Creekside Court Pennswood Court South, North, East
Crimson Court Redstone Drive South
Daltry Court Hickory Ridge Drive East
Dapple Drive Appaloosa Road East
Dapple Drive Foal Circle East
Dapple Drive Foal Circle South
Dapple Drive Foal Circle West
Dapple Drive Morganhorse Drive South
Dapple Drive Palomino Drive North
Dapple Drive Palomino Drive West
Deerpath Drive Deerpath Circle North
Detweiler Road Stump Road East
Detweiler Road Upper State Road West
Dubree Avenue Easton Road West
Easton Road Crestwald Terrace West
Easton Road Stagner Avenue East
Eisenhower Court Freedoms Way North
Elbow Lane Pickertown Road North
Elbow Lane Pinecone Road West
Elbow Lane Springmeadow Drive East
Elbow Lane Street Road South
Elm Avenue Kansas Road East
English Ivy Drive Arbor Ridge Drive West
Equestrian Court Street Road North
Euclid Avenue Martindale Road North-South
Euclid Avenue Palomino Drive North
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:576
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Evergreen Avenue Oak Avenue East
Fairmont Avenue County Line Road South
Fairway Terrace Golf Road East
Fawn Lane Sunset Drive East
Fawn Lane Pickertown Road North
Fernwood Court Pointer Court South
Fieldcrest Court Pointer Court West
Foal Circle Black Horse Drive South
Foal Circle Dapple Drive North
Foal Circle Dapple Drive South
Foal Road Black Horse Drive South
Folly Road Heron Way East
Folly Road Legacy Oaks West, East
Folly Road Legacy Oaks entrance West
Folly Road Pickertown Road North, South
(except Folly Road
northbound may
proceed east on
Pickertown Road on
yield, and Folly Road
southbound may
proceed west on
Pickertown Road on
yield)
Folly Road Pointer Court East
Forest Glen Drive Birch Court West
Forest Glen Drive Buttonwood Way West
Forest Glen Drive Fox Run Terrace East
Forest Glen Drive Hemlock Court North
Forest Glen Drive Jericho Drive East
Forsythia Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Geranium Drive West
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:577
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Forsythia Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Kansas Road East
Fox Drive Abbey Court North
Fox Drive Barton Lane South
Fox Drive Bassett Court North
Fox Drive Kulp Road, East North
Fox Drive Kulp Road, West East
Fox Drive Kulp Road, West South
Fox Drive Musket Court South
Fox Drive Victoria Way North
Fox Run Terrace Acorn Way East
Freedoms Way Cleveland Court South
Freedoms Way Coolidge Court North
Freedoms Way Eisenhower Court North
Freedoms Way Garfield Court South
Freedoms Way Harding Court North
Freedoms Way Johnson Court North
Freedoms Way Kennedy Court North
Freedoms Way Liberty Lane East
Freedoms Way Liberty Lane West
Freedoms Way Monroe Court South
Freedoms Way Truman Court South
Freedoms Way Wilson Court South
Fulgens Court
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Hosts Court West
Fulgens Court (dead
end) [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Fulgens Court South
Gait Circle
[Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-02]
Arabian Road East
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:578
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Garden Avenue Easton Road East
Garden Avenue Kansas Road East
Garden Avenue Oak Avenue West
Garfield Court Freedoms Way South
Georges Lane Easton Road West
Georges Lane Rogers Road South
Georges Lane Route 611 West
Geranium Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Tulip Drive South
Goldenrod Court
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Fulgens Court East
Grace Lane Griffiths Road West
Grace Lane Street Road South
Grady Avenue Street Road North
Grand Boulevard Peachtree Lane South
Grant Court Liberty Lane North
Greenbriar Court Hickory Ridge Drive West
Green Ridge Drive Guinea Lane East
Green Ridge Drive Robin Drive South
Greensward North Elbow Lane West
Greensward North Freedoms Way West
Greensward North Golf Drive East
Greensward North Wedge Way East
Greensward North Wedge Way North
Greensward North Wedge Way South
Greensward North Wedge Way West
Greensward South Chip Point West
Greensward South Country Club Lane South
Greensward South Elbow Lane West
Greensward South Golf Drive South
Greensward South Wedge Way East
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:579
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Greensward South Wedge Way West
Greenwood Terrace Greenwood Circle East
Greenwood Terrace Meadow Lane North
Greenwood Terrace Stump Road East
Gregory Drive Emily Circle West
Gregory Drive Warwick Drive North
Greyhorse Drive Black Horse Drive North
Greyhorse Drive Palomino Drive West
Griffith Road Oakfield Road North
Griffith Road Street Road South
Guinea Lane Bristol Road South
Guinea Lane Grand Boulevard East
Guinea Lane Peachtree Circle South
Hackney Circle Costner Circle West
Hamilton Court Continental Drive South
Harvard Drive Georgetown Lane South
Harvard Drive Harvard Drive South
Harvard Drive Notre Dame North
Harvard Drive Street Road North
Harvard Drive Villanova Circle South
Herblew Road Stuckert Road West
Heron Way Ayden Court East
Heron Way Folly Road South
Heron Way Pointer Court East
Heron Way Pointer Court North
Hickory Ridge Drive Hickory Ridge Drive North
Hickory Ridge Drive Pickertown Road South
Highland Road Blue Bell Lane South
Hillside Drive Timber Lane West
Hilltop Lane Route 611 West
Holly Road Bristol Road North
Holly Road Juneberry Court East
Holly Road Palomino Drive South
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:580
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Holly Road Winterberry Court East
Honora Street Street Road South
Horseshoe Drive Dapple Drive North
Horseshoe Road Dapple Drive North
Horseshoe Road Dapple Drive South
Hosts Court [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Goldenrod Court South
Iris Court [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Fulgens Court West
Iris Court [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Tulip Drive East
Jefferson Court Continental Drive North
Jericho Drive Buckingham Drive West
Jericho Drive Dogwood Court East
Jericho Drive Fir Court East
Jennings Lane Timber Lane East-West
Jericho Drive Warwick Road South
Jericho Drive Waverly Court North
Johnson Court Freedoms Way North
Joseph Road Oxford Drive North
Joseph Road Pileggi Drive South
K Street Palomino Drive East
K Street Palomino Drive North
K Street Palomino Drive South
K Street Approximately 1,080 feet
west of Palomino Drive
West
K Street Route 611 West
K Street Approximately 673 feet
east of Route 611
East
K Street Trolley Stop parking lot East
Kansas Road Brookwood Court West
Kansas Road Garden Avenue North
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:581
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Kansas Road Garden Avenue South
Kansas Road Pennswood Court West
Kansas Road Red Stone Drive East
Kansas Road Street Road North
Kelly Drive Bristol Road South
Kelly Drive [Added
3-24-2009 by Ord.
No. O-03]
Cornell Drive North, South
Kelly Road Stuckert Road East
Kennedy Court Freedoms Way North
Kings Court Kings Court South
Kulp Road, East County Line Road West
Kulp Road, East Fox Drive West
Kulp Road, East Pointer Court West
Kulp Road, West Kulp Road East
Kulp Road, West Riding Court East
Larkspur Lane Bellflower Boulevard East
LaRue Lane Lorraine Drive West
LaRue Lane Valley Road East
Legacy Oaks
Entrance
South Founders Court North, South
Liberty Lane Continental Drive North-East
Liberty Lane Freedoms Way South
Liberty Lane Grant Court West
Limekiln Pike Belmont Drive South
Lincoln Court Continental Drive North
Linden Way Pointer Court East, West
Linksman Lane Greensward North North
Linksman Lane Putter Court East
Lisa Drive Oxford Drive South
Lisa Drive Ted Jim Drive West
Live Oak Lane Red Oak Lane North
Longview Road Guinea Lane East
Longview Road Herblew Road South
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:582
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Longwood Court Pickertown Road South
Lorraine Drive Triumphe Way North
Lorraine Drive Triumphe Way South
Lyric Way [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Pickertown Road South
Main Street (north) Valley Square Boulevard North
Main Street (south) Valley Square Boulevard North
Maple Avenue Easton Road East
Maple Avenue
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Kansas Road East
Maple Avenue
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Street Road North
Mare Road Surrey Lane East
Martindale Road Rodgers Avenue West
Matt's Way [Added
11-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-O-12]
Anderson Way North (both
intersections)
Meadow Lane Stump Road East
Metsger Way Rayburn Lane North
Mill Creek Road Limekiln Pike South
Mill Creek Road Pickertown Road North
Mill Road Street Road South
Modesto Lane Pickertown Road North
Monaco Drive Triumphe Way South
Monroe Court Freedoms Way South
Morganhorse Drive Bronco Circle South
Morganhorse Drive Palomino Drive West
Morningwalk Drive Eveningwalk Lane East
Morningwalk Drive Eveningwalk Lane South
Morningwalk Drive Glenview Circle East
Morningwalk Drive Parkview Circle North
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:583
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Morningwalk Drive Street Road North
Morningwalk Drive Sunnybrook Circle West
Moss Avenue Wodock Avenue North
Muirfield Lane Limekiln Pike East
Musket Court Fox Drive South
Mustang Road Carriage Way South
Mustang Road Palomino Drive North
Neshaminy Avenue Chestnut Avenue North-South
Neshaminy Avenue
[Added 4-26-2011
by Ord. No.
2011-O-06]
Walnut Street North (placard stating
"except right turn")
Niblick Place Wedge Way West
Oak Avenue Redstone Drive South
Oak Avenue Street Road North
Oakfield Avenue Greensward West
Orchard Hill Circle Grand Boulevard North, South, West
Orchard Place Elbow Lane West
Oxford Drive Lisa Drive North-East
Oxford Drive Ted Jim Drive South-West
Palomino Drive Black Horse Drive North-South
Palomino Drive Bristol Road North
Palomino Drive Carriage Way East
Palomino Drive Crop Circle East
Palomino Drive Dapple Drive East
Palomino Drive Dapple Drive West
Palomino Drive Mustang Road East-West
Palomino Drive Roan Drive East-West
Palomino Drive Rodgers Avenue North
Palomino Drive Shetland Drive North
Palomino Drive Shetland Drive South
Palomino Drive Valley Road East
Park Road Easton Road East
Park Road Pickertown Road North
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:584
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Park Road School Lane East-West
Paso Fino Drive Rangerbred Circle South
Paso Fino Drive Welsh Road North
Patty Lane Grace Lane East
Patty Lane Griffiths Road West
Philadelphia Avenue Chestnut Avenue North-South
Philadelphia Avenue Neshaminy Avenue West
Pickertown Road Bristol Road North
Pickertown Road Buttercup Boulevard South
Pickertown Road Folly Road East-West
Pickertown Road Kings Court East
Pickertown Road Scarlett Oak Drive South
Pickertown Road Upper State Road West
Pierce Court Continental Drive East
Pileggi Drive Cambridge Lane East
Pileggi Drive Thomas Road East-West
Pinecone Road Cove Drive East
Pin Oak Drive Live Oak Lane South
Pinto Road Black Horse Drive North
Pinto Road Greyhorse Drive East
Pittner Place [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Valley Road East
Pointer Court Fernwood Court East
Pointer Court Fieldcrest Court South
Pointer Court Folly Road South
Pointer Court Kulp Road, East West
Pointer Court Linden Way North
Pointer Court Quinton Court West
Polk Court Continental Drive East
Popular Road Columbia Avenue South
Primrose Place Buttercup Boulevard West
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:585
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Putter Court Dogleg Drive North
Putter Court Greensward North North
Quinton Way Pointer Court North
Raven Circle Sovreign Drive North
Rebecca Court Riding Court East
Redbud Court Costner Circle East
Red Maple Court Scarlett Oak Drive East
Red Maple Court Silver Linden Lane West
Red Oak Drive Black Oak Court East
Red Oak Drive Bristol Road North
Red Oak Drive Burr Oak Court West
Red Oak Drive Pin Oak Drive East, West; West, East
Red Oak Drive Post Oak Court West
Red Oak Drive Scarlett Oak Drive East
Red Oak Drive White Oak Court East
Redstone Drive Bradford Avenue West
Redstone Drive Kansas Road East
Riding Court Kulp Road, West South
Riding Court Kulp Road, West West
Roan Drive Mare Road North
Robin Drive Gregory Drive South
Rodgers Avenue Palomino Drive North
Roosevelt Street Street Road North
Saddle Drive Carriage Way East
Saddle Drive Stallion Road East
Sage Lane Winding Way South
Sandwedge Court Dogleg Drive South
Sandwedge Court Greensward North North
Sarahs Lane Marie Circle East
Sarahs Lane Warwick Drive North
Scarlett Oak Drive Green Ash Lane East
Scarlett Oak Drive Pin Oak Drive North, South
Scarlett Oak Drive Silver Linden Lane East
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:586
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
School Lane Bristol Road North
School Lane Park Road South
Shetland Drive Easton Road West
Shetland Drive Palomino Drive East
Sherrick Court Stetson Drive North
Slate Court Easton Road East
Snapdragon Street Buttercup Boulevard East
Snapdragon Street Buttercup Boulevard North
Snapdragon Street Starflower Street East
Somerset Circle-
North
Hickory Ridge Drive East
Somerset Circle-
South
Hickory Ridge Drive East
Sorrel Road Palomino Drive North-West
Sovreign Drive Elbow Lane West
Springmeadow Drive Woodspring Drive North
Stallion Road Carriage Way South
Stallion Road Palomino Drive North
Stapleton Road Black Horse Drive South
Starflower Street Snapdragon Street East
Stetson Court Kulp Road, West North
Stetson Drive Bentley Court North
Stetson Drive Kulp Road, West West
Stetson Drive Sherrick Court North
Stirrup Lane Carriage Way South
Stirrup Lane Palomino Drive North
Stone Manor
Corporate Center
Drives A, B, C, N, O
and P
Kelly Road South
Street Road Greenfield Lane South
Street Road Morningwalk Drive North
Street Road Wayside Drive South
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:587
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
350 feet north of the
intersection of Street
Road and Valley
Square Boulevard
Valley Square Boulevard West
Stuckert Road Bristol Road South
Stuckert Road Deerpath Drive East
Stuckert Road Forest Glen Drive East
Stuckert Road Herblew Road North
Stuckert Road Herblew Road South
Stuckert Road Kelly Drive North
Stuckert Road Kelly Drive South
Stuckert Drive Ridgeview Drive West
Stuckert Road Wheatsheaf Lane West
Stump Road Billingsley Drive East
Stump Road Bristol Road North
Stump Road Pickertown Road North-South
Summer Ridge Court
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Breezy Hollow Drive South
Summit Lane Somerset Circle East
Summit Lane Upper State Road West
Sunrise Court Hickory Ridge Drive North
Sunset Drive Elbow Lane West
Surrey Lane Appaloosa North
Surrey Lane Palomino Drive South
Suzann Drive Oxford Drive South
Sweet Cherry Street Bellflower Boulevard East
Tabatha Drive Bradford Avenue West
Taylor Avenue Street Road North
Ted Jim Drive Cambridge Lane West
Ted Jim Drive Lisa Drive North
Teresa Circle Mill Creek Road South
Thomas Road Oxford Drive North
Thomas Road Pileggi Drive South
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:588
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Timber Lane Bristol Road North
Timber Lane Lennings Lane North
Timber Lane Lennings Lane South
Titus Avenue County Line Road South
Tohickon Lane Oak Avenue West
Trellis Drive Arbor Ridge Drive North
Triumphe Way Lorraine Drive North
Triumphe Way Monaco Drive East-West
Triumphe Way Valley Road East
Trolley Stop Apts. (2) K Street North
Trolley Stop Apts. (2) K Street South
Truman Court Freedoms Way South
Tulip Drive [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
County Line Road South
Tulip Drive [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-O-03]
Kansas Road East
Turk Road Bristol Road South
Tyler Court [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Folly Road West
Tyler Court [Added
at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Tyler Court South
Upper Barness Road Easton Road East
Valley Road County Line Road South
Valley Road Hickory Hollow Circle East
250 feet south of the
intersection of Valley
Square Boulevard and
Easton Road
Valley Square Boulevard North
Valley Square
Meridian
Valley Square Boulevard East-West
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-23
1:589
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Victoria Way Fox Drive North
Vincent Road Oxford Drive North
Vincent Road Pileggie Drive South
Walnut Avenue
[Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-06]
Neshaminy Avenue East
Walnut Avenue Philadelphia Avenue East
Walnut Avenue Warrington Avenue East-West
Walnut Street [Added
4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-06]
Neshaminy Avenue East
Warrens Circle Kelly Road East
Warrington Avenue Chestnut Avenue North-South
Warrington Avenue Philadelphia Avenue South
Warrington Avenue Walnut Avenue North
Warrington Avenue Walnut Avenue South
Warrington Greene,
development
driveway exit
Easton Road East
Warwick Road Guinea Lane East
Washington Court
[Amended
8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-17]
Continental Drive East
Wayside Drive Greenfield Lane North
Wedge Way Greendsward North
Wedge Way Street Road South
Welsh Road Appaloosa Drive South-West
Welsh Road Bristol Road North
Wheatsheaf Lane Cobblestone Circle West North
Wheatsheaf Lane Cobblestone Circle East South
Wheatsheaf Lane Hidden Court East
Whisper Way Pickertown Road North
Wilson Court Freedoms Way South
Winding Way Hickory Ridge Drive South
§ 330-23 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-23
1:590
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street Direction of Travel
Wisteria Drive
[Added 5-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-O-03]
Tulip Drive East
Wodock Avenue Kansas Road East
Wodock Avenue Oak Avenue West
Woodlawn Avenue County Line Road South
Woodlawn Avenue Limekiln Pike North
Wyckwood Avenue Oakfield Road South
Wyckwood Oakfield Road South
§ 330-24. Yield intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
highways established by § 330-22) are established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street
(the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in the
direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or yield street, in
the direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle as
required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,115 and then yield the right-of-way
as required by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.116
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Anderson Way [Added
11-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-O-12]
Bristol Road East
§ 330-25. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall be
operated on any property owned by the Township of Warrington or any
other public agency or instrumentality within the Township of Warrington
without the permission of the property owner and a permit from the police
department representative of the Township of Warrington.117
115. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
116. Editor's Note: Original Section 214, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
117. Editor's Note: Original Section 215, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed this paragraph, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-26
1:591
§ 330-26. Rotary traffic islands.
The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every
vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right
of the island:118
(Reserved)
§ 330-27. Play highways.
§ 330-28. Snowmobile roads.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the Township of Warrington are
established as play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
B. The Police Department representative is authorized to designate as play
highways whenever he deems that action advisable, and for whatever
period of time directed by him, any part of any street in the Township of
Warrington, where sledding and coasting shall be permitted. That play
highway shall be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the
police department representative.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Police Department
representative or of the flagman in charge, who shall first clear that
play highway of all persons using it for the purpose for which it was set
aside. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The following roads and streets within the Township of Warrington are
designated as special snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic?
Shared With
Vehicular Traffic
(Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Township of Warrington other than as
118. Editor's Note: Original Section 216, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-26 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-28
1:592
§ 330-28.1. Restrictions on standing vehicles. [Added 2-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-O-05]
provided above, provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit
any person from operating a snowmobile on any other street in the
Township of Warrington:
(1) As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code for emergency and
bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways; or
(2) For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code.
A. No operator shall enter an intersection or crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction
in which he is proceeding to accommodate his vehicle without
obstructing the passage of other vehicular traffic or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
B. At the following intersections, the Township shall paint stripes on the
cartway indicating the area of the intersection into which a vehicle
should not enter unless there is sufficient space beyond such area to
accommodate the vehicle without obstructing other vehicles or
pedestrians. The Township shall erect signs at each such intersection in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations.
Travel Street Direction of Travel
Intersection/
Driveway
Bristol Road Westbound Stuckert Road
Lower Barness Road East Township Building
access driveway
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35.
§ 330-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-28.1
1:593

ARTICLE III
Sizes, Weights and Types of Vehicles and Loads
§ 330-29. Vehicle weight limits. [Amended 11-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97 17; 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-06; 11-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-O-15]
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,119 it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross weight
in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or street or part
of street, as the case may be:120
Street or Bridge Between Maximum Gross Weight
Kelly Road
[Amended at time
of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Easton Road and
Bristol Road
5 tons, except for emergency
vehicles, school buses, trash
collection vehicles or any other
vehicles making local
deliveries or pickups along the
roadway
Redstone Drive
[Amended at time
of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Kansas Road and
Bradford Avenue
5 tons, except for emergency
vehicles, school buses, trash
collection vehicles or any other
vehicles making local
deliveries or pickups along the
roadway
Upper State Road Entire length 16,000 pounds
§ 330-30. Size restrictions.
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,121 it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:122
119. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
120. Editor's Note: Original Section 301, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
122. Editor's Note: Original Section 302, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which immediately
followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-30
1:595
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
Bradley Road [Added
1-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-O-02;
amended 4-18-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-O-04]
Folly Road and
Lower State Road
Except for emergency vehicles,
school buses and local
residential deliveries,
commercial vehicles in excess
of 7.5 feet in width shall be
prohibited for the section of
Bradley Road extending
between Lower State Road and
a point approximately 550 feet
northwest of the intersection
of Bradley Road and Barton
Lane
§ 330-31. Weight and size restrictions. [Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-16; 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-11; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 330-32. Truck traffic restricted. [Amended 9-17-1996 by Ord. No.
96-8; 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-11; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a passenger
car on any of the following streets or parts of streets, provided that nothing
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,123 it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street, except for local deliveries:
Street or Bridge Between
Restrictions
(tons)
Bradley Road Entire length 5
B. Except for: emergency vehicles; school buses operating on regular
routes; vehicles and combinations of governmental agencies and
utilities or their contractors engaged in construction, maintenance or
utility operations on or along the specified roads; and trucks making
local residential deliveries, vehicles over 25 feet in length are
prohibited on Folly Road between County Line Road and Bristol Road
and on Pickertown Road between Lower State Road and Bristol Road.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(2) of the Vehicle Code and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500.
123. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-30 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-32
1:596
in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle
on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of those
streets or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making local
deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or part of a
street:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 330-33. Traffic restricted during certain hours. [Added
11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-17]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a commercial motor vehicle
on the following roads between the stated hours, provided that nothing
in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency
vehicle, school buses, vehicles and combinations of governmental
agencies and utilities or their contractors engaged in emergency
maintenance on a posted highway or in a location which can be reached
only via a posted highway:
Street Prohibited Hours Between
Pickertown Road
[Repealed
7-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-O-11]
B. "Commercial motor vehicle" is defined as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code, Title 75, Chapter 16, § 1603.124
124. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-33
1:597

ARTICLE IV
Parking Regulations
§ 330-34. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 330-35. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 11-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-12; 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-12; 12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-25; 11-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-12]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Argyle Road Both Entire length
Anderson Way
[Added
11-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-O-12]
Both Entire length
Barness Road Both Entire length
Bluebell Lane Both Entire length
Bradford Avenue Both Entire length
Bradley Road Both Entire length
Brinkworth Avenue Easterly side of Street Road to Spruce
Street
Chestnut Avenue Both Entire length
Columbia Road Both Entire length
Costner Drive East Valley Road to Street Road
Costner Drive West Street Road to Basswood Court
Costner Drive West Valley Road to 900 feet from end of
cul-de-sac
County Line Road North Easton Road and Valley Road
County Line Road North Northwesterly direction for a distance
of 466 feet
Dubree Avenue Both Entire length
Easton Road Both From County Line Road to a point 465
feet north
Elbow Lane Both Entire length
§ 330-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-35
1:599
Street Side Between
Evergreen Avenue Both Entire length
Folly Road Both Entire length
Georges Lane Both Entire length
Grace Lane Both Entire length
Grady Avenue Both Entire length
Greensward North
[Added 8-14-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-O-09]
South Freedoms Way and Wedge Way
Greenwood Circle Both Entire length
Greenwood Terrace Both Entire length
Guinea Lane Both Entire length
Herblew Road Both Entire length
Highland Road Both Entire length
Kansas Road Both Entire length
Kelly Road East Stuckert Road to Bristol Road
Kelly Road West Easton Road to a point 400 feet south
of the Kelly Road entrance to King
Park
Kelly Road West Warrens Circle to Bristol Road
Lisa Drive North Northeast corner of Lisa Drive at
Oxford Drive continuing north then
east ending at an island located on the
northwest curve of Lisa Drive
Lisa Drive South Ted Jim Drive to the end of the drive in
parking area on the south side of Lisa
Drive, continuing along the end of the
parking lot north then west along the
curbline at the northwest corner of
Lisa Drive, continuing along each
island ending at Oxford Drive
Longview Road Both Entire length
Maple Avenue Both Route 611 (Easton Road) and Kansas
Road
Meadow Lane Both Entire length
Mill Road Both Entire length
Mill Creek Road Both Entire length
Neshaminy Avenue Both Entire length
§ 330-35 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-35
1:600
Street Side Between
Oak Avenue Both Entire length
Oxford Drive North Suzann Drive (west) and Route 611
Oxford Drive South Intersection of Route 611 and Ted Jim
Drive
Palomino Drive North From a point approximately 170 feet
west of the intersection of the center
lines of Palomino Drive and Mustang
Road to a point approximately 170 feet
west of the intersection of the center
lines of Palomino Drive and Euclid
Avenue
Park Road Both Entire length
Patty Lane Both Entire length
Paul Valley Road Both Entire length
Philadelphia Avenue Both Entire length
Phillips Avenue East Entire length
Pickertown Road Both Entire length
Poplar Road Both Entire length
Route 611 East From a point 200 feet south of the
southerly boundary of tax parcel no.
50-24-45 (Ranch House) to a point 50
feet north of the northerly edge of the
aforementioned tax parcel
Route 611 West From a point 50 feet south of the
southerly line of tax parcel no.
50-24-23 (Hilltop Market) to a point
200 feet north of the northerly line of
the aforementioned tax parcel
School Lane Both Entire length
Stuckert Road Both Entire length
Stump Road
[Amended
1-14-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-O-01]
Both Entire length, except along
southeasterly side of road, measured
215 feet east of Pickertown Road,
Stump Road intersection to a point
740 feet east of the aforementioned
intersection
Taylor Avenue Both Entire length
Ted Jim Drive Both Entire length, except areas designated
as parking stalls
Titus Avenue Both Entire length
§ 330-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-35
1:601
Street Side Between
Tohickon Lane Both Entire length
Turk Road Both Entire length
Upper State Road Both Entire length
Valley Road Both Entire length
Walnut Avenue Both Entire length
Warrington Avenue Both Entire length
Warwick Road Both Entire length
Woodlawn Avenue Both Entire length
Wodock Avenue Both Entire length
§ 330-36. Parking, stopping, standing, discharge and pickup of
passengers prohibited certain hours. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-12]
Parking, stopping, standing, discharge and pickup of passengers shall be
prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days and between
the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Hours
Brandes Drive Both sides; entire length 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
weekdays when school is
in session
Greyhorse Drive Both sides, from a point
approximately 200 feet
west of the intersection
with Brandes Drive to a
point 175 feet east of the
intersection with
Brandes Drive
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
weekdays when school is
in session
Mustang Road Both sides from the
intersection of the center
lines of Palomino Drive
and Mustang Road to a
point approximately 240
feet south
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
weekdays when school is
in session
§ 330-35 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-36
1:602
Street Side Hours
Palomino Drive Both sides, from a point
approximately 140 feet
west of the intersection
of the center lines of
Palomino Drive and
Bridle Lane to a point
approximately 170 feet
west of the intersection
of the center lines of
Palomino Drive and
Mustang Road
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
weekdays when school is
in session
§ 330-37. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited. [Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Restricted
All streets All trucks with gross weight in excess
of 5,000 pounds
All residential district streets All trucks having a registered gross
weight or combined weight in pounds
at a level of Class 6 or higher
All streets All trucks which have affixed to them a
hazardous material placard designated
and regulated by the United States
Department of Transportation
All Township roadways and
trafficways
1. All trucks and truck tractors, trailers
or combinations with a registered
gross weight or combination gross
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds
2. All motor homes
3. All motor buses
4. All connected or unconnected trailers
5. All other detachable equipment or
accessories
§ 330-38. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
§ 330-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-38
1:603
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 330-39. Special-purpose parking zones.
The following are established as special-purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
All parking spaces designated as handicapped parking spaces unless
issued a special registration plate by the Department of Transportation
designating the vehicle so licensed as being used by a handicapped
person or totally disabled veteran
§ 330-40. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 330-41. Angle parking. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
§ 330-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs, provided
that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement
personnel of the Township of Warrington to report to the appropriate official
all violations of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case: the
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb
§ 330-38 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-42
1:604
section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation;
the location where the violation took place; and any other facts that might
be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article.125
125. Editor's Note: Original Part 5, On-Street Metered Parking, Part 6, Off-Street Metered
Parking, and Part 7, Off-Street Unmetered Parking, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-42
1:605

ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 330-43. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code126 and gives authority to the Township of Warrington to remove and
impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a
manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed
under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 330-44. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township of Warrington shall have authority to remove and impound,
or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime
or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 330-43 of this article, and provided that no
such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to
the provisions of this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code.
§ 330-45. Tow-away zones.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township of Warrington
parking regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 330-46. Approved storage garages; bonding; towing and storage.
[Amended 8-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated hereinbelow. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, and words used in the plural shall include the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
DISABLED OR WRECKED OR ABANDONED OR IMPOUNDED
VEHICLES — An automobile, truck, truck tractor, trailer, motorcycle,
motor home, or other vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, road
or street, which is no longer capable of safe operation on a highway,
road or street and presents a safety hazard to the public by virtue of
126. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-46
1:607
its location on or adjacent to a public highway, road or street in the
Township of Warrington.
FLATBED WRECKER — A flatbed vehicle equipped with a roll body and
winch designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger
and commercial vehicles.
LEASED — Vehicles must be leased for a fixed period of greater than
three years and for a fixed flat rate. Lessor must be a business,
company, entity or corporation whose usual and customary business is
that of leasing motor vehicles.
LIGHT-DUTY WRECKER or WHEEL-LIFT WRECKER — A vehicle
designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger vehicles.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of
Warrington, County of Bucks.
TOWER — A person engaged in the business or offering the services
of a vehicle wrecker, tow truck, car carrier or other vehicle, whereby
disabled or wrecked or abandoned vehicles are towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled or wrecked or
abandoned by use of a vehicle so adapted to that purpose.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warrington, County of Bucks.
B. License required. No person shall offer his/her services to or be called
by the Township or its Police Department as a tower for the purpose of
removal of disabled or wrecked or abandoned vehicles unless that
person is the holder of a current towing license as hereinafter provided.
C. Application for license.
(1) Application for a towing license shall be made to the Township
upon a form available from the Township, which form shall require
the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the business for
which the towing license is sought.
(b) The type of business organization under which the business is
operated (i.e., sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
etc.).
(c) The name, home and business address and telephone numbers
of all the owner(s), or in the case of a corporation,
stockholder(s), for which the towing license is sought.
(d) A list of the tow trucks, vehicle wreckers, car carriers or other
vehicles available for service to the Township, including a
description of each vehicle or piece of equipment (type, make,
model, year, etc.), the name and address of the owner/lessee of
§ 330-46 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-46
1:608
each vehicle or piece of equipment and their location and
hourly availability.
(e) The address and description of the premises upon which
disabled or wrecked vehicles will be towed to and/or stored,
including the size of the area on the premises available for
storage of vehicles, the approximate number of vehicles which
may be stored in the area, whether said area is fenced and a
description of any security precautions or protection methods
for vehicles stored in said area.
(f) A certificate of insurance or other proof acceptable to the
Township that the applicant has obtained the general liability
and garage keeper's liability insurance required for the
issuance of a towing license.
(2) The application shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police within 45
days of receipt of the application. The Chief shall thereafter advise
the applicant of whether the license has been approved or
disapproved. [Amended 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-2]
(3) Towing licenses shall be issued for a period of two years,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the
second year. Any applicant whose application for a license has been
received and approved during the year, said license will expire on
December 31 of the second year as if issued the January 1 of the
first year. [Amended 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-2]
(4) Applications shall be reviewed and approved or denied in the
chronological order in which they are received by the Township. An
application shall not be deemed received by the Township unless it
is completed and contains all the items set forth herein.
(5) In the event that there are fewer than three licensed towers
approved by the Township, the Township may issue licenses during
the calendar year in order to increase the number of licensed
towers to three. The number of licensed towers shall not exceed a
total of three. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-06]
(6) Applicants must execute an agreement to indemnify the Township
for any and all losses or expenses incurred by virtue of any acts
performed in the course of service.
D. Standards for issuance of towing license. A towing license shall be
issued to applicants who meet all the following requirements:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) The following vehicles shall be owned or leased exclusively by the
applicant, garaged on the premises from which the applicant's
towing business is conducted and available on call for the service at
the request of the Township or its Police Department.
§ 330-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-46
1:609
(a) Two light-duty wreckers or one light-duty wrecker and one
wheel-lift wrecker.
(b) One flatbed wrecker.
(c) One heavy-duty wrecker.
(2) All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall bear a sign indicating
the name and telephone number of the applicant's towing business,
and the applicant shall make said vehicles available for the
verification of the Township.
(3) A six-foot-high fenced-in storage yard or other secure facility, open
or closed, shall be located on the premises from which the
applicant's towing business is conducted, and such yard or storage
area shall be authorized by the appropriate zoning, use, occupancy
or other municipal permits. A storage area must be available to
hold a minimum of 20 vehicles and a building that is capable of
storing at least two vehicles inside. The applicant shall install
screening and comply with all the provisions of the State and
Federal Highway Beautification Acts.
(a) The applicant shall permit inspection of the storage yard or
facility by the Township.
(b) The Chief of Police shall cause an inspection to be made of the
wrecker vehicle to insure that it complies with the
requirements and standards as given.
(4) The applicant's place of towing business shall be located within the
Township boundaries in order that the response time to a call for
service is immediate.
(5) All applicants shall maintain the following insurance and present
proof thereof to the Township, upon request:
(a) General public liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000.
(b) Garagekeepers legal liability insurance in the minimum
amount of $100,000.
(6) Each policy required herein shall contain an endorsement
providing 10 days' notice to the Township of Warrington in the
event of any material change or cancellation for any cause. Written
notice to the Township of Warrington shall be the responsibility of
the issuing company.
(7) All of the aforesaid vehicles shall be equipped with a two-way
communication system such as two-way radios or mobile
telephones.
§ 330-46 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-46
1:610
E. Issuance of license. A towing license shall be issued to each applicant
whose application has been approved by the Chief of Police. [Amended
1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-2]
F. License status. A towing license issued by the Township on condition of,
and with the express agreement of the licensee that, the licensee shall,
at all times, act as independent contractor to and not as an employee of
the Township or its Police Department and that payment for services
rendered pursuant to said license shall be by the owner, operator or
custodian of the disabled, wrecked or abandoned vehicle.
G. Duties of licensees.
(1) All licensees shall keep and maintain all of the vehicles listed on its
applications in a safe and operable condition and in a condition
which shall pass the motor vehicle inspection standards for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said vehicles shall be immediately
available to answer calls for service by the Police Department. All
licensees shall not use or employ a vehicle that is not listed on the
towing license application (or filed an amendment to the
application listing any new equipment).
(2) All licensees shall ensure any operator of their equipment
possesses a current and valid Pennsylvania driver's license for the
class vehicle they are operating. The licensee is further responsible
to ensure that his/her operator obeys all laws of the Vehicle Code127
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) All licensees shall respond within 15 minutes from their receipt of
the Police Department's call requesting service to the arrival of the
licensee's appropriate towing vehicle at the location of the disabled
or wrecked or abandoned vehicle, except in bad weather or adverse
road conditions.
(4) Fees charged by the licensee, when towing or storing towed
vehicles as an independent contractor to the Township of
Warrington, shall be established by resolution. The rates shall be
determined by obtaining the input of the licensees and the current
prevailing rate for the area. Licensees shall not charge fees in
excess of those established by resolution. [Amended 1-23-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-O-2]
(5) All licensees shall be responsible for removing vehicular parts and
debris from the highway.
(6) All wreckers must be equipped with the following:
(a) Broom.
(b) Fire extinguisher (ABC type, not less than 10 pounds).
127. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-46
1:611
(c) Light bar, amber in color.
(d) Sand or oil dry (for minor oil or fuel leaks).
(e) Shovel.
(f) Portable rear lighting for towed vehicles.
H. Township police duty tow.
(1) All disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be removed from the
roadway immediately following an accident, in accordance with the
Vehicle Code128 of Pennsylvania.
(2) If the owner or operator cannot remove the disabled or wrecked or
abandoned vehicle or refuses or fails to have the vehicle removed
within a reasonable time, a Township police officer shall call the
towing licensee assigned to the police duty tow to effect such a
removal. Requests by an owner/operator will be honored for
outside wreckers if, within the officer's opinion, traffic will not be
impeded and the vehicle is to be towed away within a reasonable
time.
(3) The Police Department shall establish rules and regulations for the
rotation of assignments, and the use of the duty tow by Township
police officers.
I. Suspension and revocation of license. [Amended 1-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-O-2]
(1) The Township reserves the right to suspend the license of an
operator at any time for any of the following reasons:
(a) An inspection by a Township Police Officer determines that the
required equipment is missing, inoperable or unsafe.
(b) The operator does not respond to a call requesting service or
does not respond within 15 minutes of their receipt of a call
requesting service.
(c) The operator charges fees that exceed those approved by the
Township.
(d) The Chief of Police receives a complaint about the operator.
(2) Any suspension of an operator's license shall continue, without
rebate of either the application fee or license fee, until such time as
the Township determines the applicant is in full compliance with
the terms and conditions of this article.
(3) The Township shall give the operator warnings or notice that the
licensee is in violation of the provisions and terms of this regulation
128. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-46 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-46
1:612
prior to any formal action to suspend the license. The Township
shall permit the licensee to correct deficiencies within the time
frame as follows:
(a) In the case of a nonsafety violation, the licensee shall have 10
days in which to correct the deficiencies.
(b) In the case of safety-related violations, the licensee shall have
until the next call for a tow to correct the deficiencies.
(4) A towing license shall be revoked upon a finding by the Township of
any of the following grounds:
(a) The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false
statement or omission of a material fact, and in this event, the
license shall be null and void and as if the application had
never been filed.
(b) The licensee failed to perform or violated any of the duties of a
licensee set forth herein.
(c) The licensee no longer meets all the standards for issuance of a
towing license.
(d) The licensee's application is found to be defective in any way or
contains misinformation or omissions of fact, and in this event,
the license shall be null and void and as if an application had
never been filed.
(e) The licensee failed to correct safety-related or nonsafetyrelated
deficiencies within the time periods provided above.
(f) The licensee's license has been suspended three times.
(g) Failure of the licensee to comply with any of the terms of this
article, when, in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, such
failure is willful and intentional or when such failure or the
reckless conduct of the licensee or its operator jeopardizes the
personal safety of a police officer or any other individual.
(h) On more than one occasion, the operator fails to respond to a
call requesting service or does not respond within 15 minutes
of receipt of a call requesting service.
(i) On more than one occasion, the operator charges fees that
exceed those approved by the Township.
(j) The Chief of Police receives numerous validated complaints
about the operator.
(5) Complaints.
(a) Any complaints against the towing service that the owner or
person in charge of any vehicle that this Department has
§ 330-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-46
1:613
§ 330-47. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 330-48. Reclamation costs. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a fee of $50, of which $25 shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 330-49. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township of Warrington shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 330-50. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code129 if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person
for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 330-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 330-52. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
caused to be towed wishes to make should be in written form
to the Chief of Police.
(b) The Chief of Police shall make a determination of the merit of
such complaint and take such action as necessary to correct
the matter if the complaint is validated.
129. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 330-46 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-52
1:614
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 110 et seq., as
amended).
§ 330-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-52
1:615

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergency
[Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-10]
§ 330-53. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice, the Chief of Police (or designee) may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the Township of
Warrington through radio, newspaper, website, or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use
of the same media.
§ 330-54. Alternate side of street parking.
§ 330-55. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
A. Whenever snow falls to a depth of two inches or more, all parking upon
the streets or highways of the Township is hereby prohibited. When and
where a resident of the Township has access to a garage, driveway or
other facility for off-street parking or when and where a vehicle of a
nonresident is parked adjacent to premises the owner or occupier of
which has access to a garage, driveway or other facility for off-street
parking, said vehicles shall be placed in the off-street parking facility. In
cases where a resident of the Township does not have access to a
garage, driveway or other facility for off-street parking or where a
vehicle of a nonresident is parked adjacent to premises the owner or
occupier of which does not have access to a garage, driveway or other
facility for off-street parking, then, and only in such event, shall parking
be permitted upon the street or highway; provided, however, that such
parking on the street or highway shall be only on one side thereof as
follows: during even-numbered years, parking shall be on the evennumbered
side of the street, and during odd-numbered years, parking
shall be on the odd-numbered side of the street; provided, further, that
where parking restrictions are permanently in effect, such restrictions
shall prevail, notwithstanding the provisions of this section.
B. Any vehicles parked on Township streets or highways not in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection A shall be towed at the owner's
expense and the owner fined in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 330-56 of this
article; or
§ 330-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-55
1:617
§ 330-56. Snow emergency routes.
The following roads are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
Bristol Road Valley Road and Upper State Road
County Line Road Valley Road and Upper State Road
Easton Road County Line Road and Doylestown
Township line
Folly Road County Line Road and Bristol Road
Limekiln Pike County Line Road and Upper State Road
Lower State Road County Line Road and Bristol Road
Pickertown Road Bristol Road and Upper State Road
Street Road Valley Road and Lower State Road
Stump Road County Line Road and Pickertown Road
Upper State Road County Line Road and Bristol Road
Valley Road County Line Road and Bristol Road
§ 330-57. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to pay
a fine, as provided by the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), and all
costs incurred by the Township, for each and every offense.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with proper tires for snow and ice or chains.
§ 330-55 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-57
1:618
ARTICLE VII
Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 330-58. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Township of
Warrington:130
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 330-59. Pushcart use restricted.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Board of Supervisors as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Board of
Supervisors. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Township of Warrington, set by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The permit shall be
granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon his signing
an agreement with the Board of Supervisors that he shall be bound by
the conditions imposed by the Board of Supervisors and made a part of
the permit, dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
130. Editor's Note: Original Section 1001, Subsection 2, regarding violations, which
immediately followed the table below, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-59
1:619
§ 330-60. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, chapter or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township of Warrington, or upon any roadway unless that roadway
is on a portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 330-5
of Article I or § 330-26 of Article II of this chapter, provided that nothing
in this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.131
131. Editor's Note: Original Section 1003, Subsection 3, regarding violations, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-59 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-60
1:620
ARTICLE VIII
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 330-61. Traffic-control signals.
At all locations in the Township of Warrington where official traffic-control
signals are installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by
pedestrian-control signals installed under § 330-62 of this article, shall obey
the directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 330-62. Pedestrian-control signals.
§ 330-63. Pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated:
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
article.
§ 330-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-63
1:621
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 330-64. Pedestrians cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian: (a) to cross any roadway in a
business district within the Township of Warrington except in a crosswalk;
and (b) to cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the Township of Warrington, except in a crosswalk; provided that nothing
in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in a crosswalk at any
location where that crossing is prohibited by § 330-62 of this article:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 330-65. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
§ 330-63 WARRINGTON CODE § 330-65
1:622
Chapter 337
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 294.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 337-1. Legislative intent.
The provisions of this chapter are designed to secure, promote and protect
the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of
the residents of Warrington Township by regulating the use of motorized
dirt bikes and all-terrain vehicles within the Township and in order to
alleviate problems, such as but not limited to loud, unnecessary and unusual
noises within the Township, damage and destruction of personal property,
unauthorized use of private lands, disturbances through the creation of
unnecessary dust and debris, and other inconveniences caused by said
motorized dirt bikes and all-terrain vehicles to the residents of Warrington
Township.
§ 337-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV — A motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not
less than three low-pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited
in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry
weight less than 600 pounds. Motorized go-carts are included.
ESTABLISHED RIDING AREA — Trails or area on a lot used by a motorized
dirt bike and/or ATV.
LOT or LOTS — A lot in the Township of Warrington which is part of an
approved subdivision, the plan or map of which has been recorded with
the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, or a lawful lot described by metes
and bounds, the deed of which has been recorded with the Bucks County
Recorder of Deeds, or one for which the Township has granted a waiver
from platting.
MOTORIZED DIRT BIKES — A two-wheeled vehicle being capable of crosscountry
travel on natural terrain without benefit of a road or trail.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township.
§ 337-3. Requirements and restrictions.
§ 330-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 337-3
1:623
A. The use of motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) is not allowed on lots of
less than two acres in size.
B. The riding area for a motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) is to be
located no closer than 150 feet from a lot line or 100 feet if a six-foothigh,
board-type fence has been constructed along the lot line by the lot
owner.
C. Dust and noise control measures are to be maintained by the lot owner.
These dust and noise control measures are to be enforced by the
Township if lot owners of lots that are adversely affected by dust and
noise due to motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) use file a written
complaint with the Township.
(1) Dust-control measures shall include but are not limited to the
planting of twelve-foot-high coniferous trees planted 10 feet on
center or the construction of a six-foot-minimum board-style fence.
(2) A motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) must have a federally
approved spark arrestor, the noise emission may not exceed 99
decibels at a distance of 20 inches at idle, and mufflers may not be
altered to increase motor noise or have a cutout bypass or similar
device.
D. No more than two riders that are unrelated to the immediate household
members that reside in the dwelling on the lot may operate a motorized
dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) on the lot.
E. Motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) may only be operated on the lot
during the following times: Monday through Friday, 12:00 noon through
6:00 p.m.; Saturdays, 10:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.; and Sundays, 12:00
noon through 5:00 p.m. Operation of a motorized dirt bike(s) and/or
ATV(s) may be continuous for two hours. After two hours, there should
be no riding on the lot for one hour.
F. The operation of a motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) shall not be
allowed on any designated wetlands or floodplain areas as defined by
Chapter 370, Zoning, and Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, as in effect at the time.
G. Any unvegetated riding area must be watered down before, during, and
after usage as needed to limit dust.
H. A motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) shall not be operated in such a
manner as to damage or destroy any real or personal property of
another. In addition to any other penalties for the violation of this
chapter, a violator of this section shall be liable to make restitution for
any damage caused to private or public property.
I. Motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) shall not be operated on any
sidewalk or within the right-of-way of any public or private street being
maintained or used as a thoroughfare for legally licensed vehicular
§ 337-3 WARRINGTON CODE § 337-3
1:624
§ 337-4. Exemptions.
The following uses are exempt from this chapter:
§ 337-5. Enforcement.
The police and/or code enforcement officers of Warrington Township are
charged with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any rules
and regulations promulgated by Warrington Township.
§ 337-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by
the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate
officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable
relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. This chapter
may be enforced initially by violation ticket (citation); see Chapter 38,
Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets for Certain Offenses.
traffic unless the operator has a valid operator's license and the
motorized vehicle or ATV is properly registered and licensed with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a motor vehicle. All provisions of
the Vehicle Code and Township ordinances regulating equipment and
operation shall apply to such use. All other regulations under the Motor
Vehicle Code shall apply.132
A. Any motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) used by Township or any other
governmental body in conducting official business.
B. Any motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) used in agriculture work.
C. Any motorized dirt bike(s) and/or ATV(s) used in snow clearing.
132. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 337-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 337-6
1:625
Chapter 353
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 140.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 181.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 257.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
§ 337-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 337-6
1:626
ARTICLE I
Drought Contingency Plan
[Adopted 10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10 (Ch. 26, Part 2, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 353-1. Plan adopted.
The Warrington Township Drought Contingency Plan Ordinance of March
2002, as revised September 2002, is adopted and can be viewed in its
entirety at the Township office.
§ 353-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-1
1:627

ARTICLE II
Well Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 02-14 (Ch. 26, Part 3, of the 1995
Code of Ordinances); amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-10;
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 07-06]
§ 353-2. Purpose.
Warrington Township is in the Southeastern Pennsylvania protected area
as designated by the Delaware River Basin Commission. The purpose of
these rules and regulations is to establish minimum standards for quality,
quantity, location, construction, alteration or abandonment of water wells
and water well installation; also, to require a permit for the construction
of a water supply, including production wells, test wells, test borings and
monitoring wells, the installation of pumping equipment and other
appurtenances, and the drilling of bore holes used for the installation of
ground-source heat pump equipment; also, to license all well contractors
and pump installation contractors. After the effective date of adoption of
these rules and regulations, no well (either individual, semipublic, public or
geothermal bore hole) shall be constructed, repaired or modified nor any
pump be installed for new construction contrary to the provisions of these
regulations.
§ 353-3. Scope.
Except where clearly noted in the text, the provisions of this article shall
apply to all wells serving individual, semipublic water supply systems and
bore holes drilled for the installation of closed-loop ground-source heat
pump equipment. Nothing in this article is construed to exempt a public
water system in Warrington Township from the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water Act, 35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq. Note: All
locations, construction, alterations, abandonment and permitting of
individual private well water supplies will be governed by ordinances of the
County of Bucks, Pennsylvania, and administered by rules and regulations
set forth from time to time by the Bucks County Board of Health.
§ 353-4. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in the this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED WELL — Any well where the drilling process has been
completed in excess of 180 days and the well has not been approved for
use as a supply by the Department; or wells that have not been used as a
supply on a continuous basis for a period of one year; or wells which are
in such a state of disrepair that continued use for the purpose of obtaining
groundwater is impracticable (such impracticability shall be determined by
the Department); or any well which has been replaced by a new well or
a public water supply. Test wells and monitoring wells shall be considered
§ 353-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-4
1:629
abandoned wells when their use on a regular or prescribed basis has been
discontinued.
ABANDONMENT — The process of properly filling and sealing a well in
accordance with these regulations.
AGRICULTURAL WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply used specifically for
irrigation of crops, irrigation of recreational or institutional grasslands, or
the watering of farm animals or other livestock, where the use of such water
supply shall not be intended for human consumption.
ALTERATION — Any action which necessitates entering a well with drilling
tools; treating a well to increase yield; altering the physical structure or
depth of the well; blasting; removal or replacement of well casing; or
modifications concerning grouting or curbing.
ANNULAR SPACE — The space between two cylindrical objects, one of
which surrounds the other, such as the space between a drill hole and a
casing pipe and a liner pipe.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute.
API — American Petroleum Institute.
APPROVAL TO USE — Written approval to use the well obtained from the
Department in accordance with § 353-12H within 90 days of the completion
of the well drilling process or, if new construction, within 90 days of the
completion of the well drilling process.
AQUIFER — A geological formation that contains and transmits water.
ASTM — American Society for Testing Materials.
AWWA — American Water Works Association.
BACKFILLING — The process of sealing a bore hole for the purpose of
abandoning a well or enclosing the closed loop of a ground-source heat
pump system.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted
water from a plumbing fixture or vessel or other sources into a potable
water supply pipe due to negative pressure in such pipe.
CASING — An impervious durable pipe placed in a well to prevent the walls
from caving in and to seal off surface drainage or undesirable water, gas or
other fluids and prevent them from entering the well.
CLOSED-LOOP GEOTHERMAL BORE HOLE — A boring drilled to facilitate
the installation of a pipe loop or tubing for a ground-source heat pump
system, whether circulating water, heat transfer fluid or refrigerant using
direct exchange.
COLIFORM — All of the aerobic and facultative anaerobic, gram-negative,
non-spore-forming, rod-shaped bacteria which are capable of fermenting
lactose with gas formation within 48 hours at 35° C.
§ 353-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-4
1:630
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A water system which serves at least
15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at
least 25 year-round residents.
CONSTRUCTION OF WELLS — All acts necessary to obtain groundwater,
artificially recharge groundwater or acts necessary to install geothermal
appurtenances; provided, however, that such term does not include an
excavation made for the purpose of obtaining or for prospecting for oil,
natural gas, minerals or products of mining or quarrying, or for inserting
media to repressure oil, or natural gas formations or for storing petroleum,
natural gas or other products and services. Construction of wells includes
the location and excavation or drilling of the well and installation of
geothermal appurtenances but excludes the installation of pumps and
pumping equipment.
COUNTY — County of Bucks, Pennsylvania, or the Bucks County Board of
Health.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
occur between the drinking water in an individual water supply well or a
public water system and a system containing a source or potential source
of contamination, or allowing treated water to be removed from any public
water system and returned to the public water system. The term does not
include connections to devices totally within the control of one or more
public water systems and connections between water mains.
DECOMMISSIONED WELL — Any well that is no longer equipped in such a
manner as to be able to draw groundwater. This shall include wells where
the pump, piping and/or electrical components have been disconnected or
removed.
DEPARTMENT — Warrington Township Sewer and Water Department.
FLOWING WELLS — A well that yields water by artesian pressure at the
ground surface.
GEOTHERMAL WELL — A well installed for the purpose of heating or
cooling a facility. These shall include wells drilled as supply and/or return
wells for open-loop systems, or closed-loop geothermal bore holes.
GEOTHERMAL WELL INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR — Any individual in
immediate supervision of and/or responsible for the drilling of bore holes
used for the purpose of geothermal heating or cooling of a facility and who
is licensed as a well contractor and geothermal well installation contractor
by the Department. This individual is responsible for boring, pipe-loop
installation and backfilling of bore holes used for the installation of closedloop
ground-source heat pump systems.
GROUND-SOURCE HEAT PUMP EQUIPMENT — Any components of a
heating or cooling and pipe loops for use in closed-loop applications using a
heat transfer fluid or direct exchange systems.
§ 353-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-4
1:631
GROUNDWATER — Water within the earth below the water table within
the zone of saturation. Groundwater includes both water under water table
conditions and confined within deep aquifers.
GROUT — A permanent watertight joint or connection made by filling with
concrete, neat cement or other approved impervious material between the
casing and the undisturbed formation surrounding the well or between two
strings of casing.
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY — A system, including wells, pumps and
piping equipment, which supplies water to a private structure and does not
meet the criteria of "semipublic water supply" or "public water supply."
INSTALLATION OF PUMPS AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT — The procedure
employed in the placement and preparation for operation of pumps and
pumping equipment, including all construction involved in making entrance
to the well and establishing seals, but not including repairs to existing
installations.
MONITORING WELL — A well used to observe water levels and/or obtain
samples of groundwater for the purpose of water quality analysis. Test wells
shall be considered monitoring wells under this definition.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Any new building or structure, whether
residential, commercial or industrial, on a property. New construction also
includes any change in use of an existing structure.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public water system which is not
a community water system.
NSF — National Sanitation Foundation.
PITLESS ADAPTER — A device or assembly of parts which will permit water
to pass through the wall of the well casing or extension thereof and which
provides access to the well and to the parts of the water system within the
well in a manner to prevent entrance of pollution into the well and the water
produced.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the public for
human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or regularly
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of
the year. The term includes collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities under control of the operator of the system and used in connection
with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used in connection with the
system. The term also includes a system which provides water for bottling
or bulk hauling for human consumption. Water for human consumption
includes water that is used for drinking, bathing and showering, cooking,
dishwashing or maintaining oral hygiene.
PUMP INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR — Any individual engaged in the
business of installing or repairing pumps, pumping equipment, drop pipes,
pitless adapters and the other equipment used for the extraction and
conveyance of water from the aquifer to the distribution, heating or cooling
system of the structure to be served.
§ 353-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-4
1:632
PUMP INSTALLATION FORM — Form WTWSD-02, which includes the
Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department (WTWSD) well permit
number, permittee's name and address, township, the site location, depth of
pump, pump installer's name, license number, signature and date.
PUMPS AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or materials
utilized or intended for use in withdrawing or obtaining groundwater,
including but not limited to piping, seals and tanks, together with fitting and
controls.
RELOCATION — Any change in location of a proposed well which deviates
from the permitted location.
SECOND WELL — Any well drilled on the same property where an existing
well, permitted as or intended to serve as a water supply, already exists.
SEMIPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — A water supply system, including wells,
pumps and piping equipment, which supplies water to one or several
facilities such as industrial or commercial establishments, parks, camps,
hotels, motels, school, institutions, and eating and drinking establishments,
or a water supply which services two or more dwelling units and is not a
public water system as defined by the Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water Act
(35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq.).
TEST WELLS — Wells drilled for the sole purpose of measuring
groundwater availability. Test wells shall be considered as monitoring wells
under these regulations.
WELL COMPLETION FORM — Form FM-TGS-15 and Form WTWSD-01-1,
which includes the WTWSD permit number, the owner's name and address,
the specific site location, the type of cement used for grouting, the number
of bags of cement used for grouting, the date the well was drilled, the depth
of the well, the well distance to the house, the name of the well driller,
the well driller's Warrington Township license number and the well driller's
signature.
WELL CONTRACTOR — Any individual in immediate supervision of and/or
responsible for the construction, test pumping or equipping or development
of any well. Such individual shall have a minimum of three years' hands-on
experience in the actual drilling, casing and grouting of water wells and be
licensed by Warrington Township.
WELL DRILLER'S LOG — Form FM-TGS-15 (also called "Topographic and
Geologic Survey"), which includes the month, day and year the well was
drilled in addition to all other information required on the form.
WELL SEAL — An approved device or method used to protect a well casing
or water system from the entrance of any external pollutant at the point of
entrance into the casing of a pipe, electric conduit or water-level measuring
device.
WELL SYSTEM — When there are two or more wells being utilized in an
individual, semipublic or public water supply system.
§ 353-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-4
1:633
WELLS — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug,
jetted or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation
is for the location, acquisition or artificial recharge of groundwater or for
the installation of ground-source heat pump equipment. This includes but is
not limited to test wells, test borings, geothermal and monitoring wells, in
addition to wells to be utilized as individual or semipublic or public water
supplies.
§ 353-5. Licenses.
§ 353-6. Drilled water supply wells.
A. Any individual engaging or intending to engage in business as a well
contractor or pump installation contractor shall first obtain from the
Department a license to conduct such business. The Department shall
license all well contractors, geothermal well installation contractors or
pump installation contractors. Geothermal well installation contractors
must also be licensed as a well contractor. Each such applicant must
demonstrate professional competence and an understanding of the
Warrington Township regulations in order to qualify for such license.
This subsection shall not apply to any (persons) individuals who
perform labor or services at the direction and under the direct
supervision of a licensed well contractor or pump installation
contractor.
B. Licenses issued pursuant to this subsection are not transferable and
shall be renewed annually. A license will be renewed for an ensuing
year by making application not later than 30 days after the expiration
date and paying the annual renewal fee, which shall accompany said
application.
C. After 30 days elapse from the date of expiration of the license, a license
to engage in the business as a well contractor, geothermal well
installation contractor or pump installation contractor will be issued
only upon completion and submission of the appropriate fee.
A. Location.
(1) The source of supply shall be from a water bearing formation
drawn not less than 40 feet from the ground surface.
(2) Cap wells shall be located at a point free from flooding and at a
higher elevation (wherever possible) and at the following distances
to existing or potential sources of pollution.
Source Pollution
Minimum isolation distances from the proposed well to the
features listed below:
§ 353-4 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:634
Water Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Delineated wetlands or floodplains 25
Lakes, ponds, spring-prone areas or other
surface waters
25
Rainwater pits 25
Storm drains, retention basins, stormwater
stabilization ponds
25
Sewage Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Biosolids disposal areas and septage
disposal sites
300
Farm silos, barnyards, manure pits or tanks
or other storage areas of animal manure
100
Subsurface sewage absorption areas,
elevated sand mounds, cesspools, sewage
seepage pits, community and single-family
spray irrigation systems, etc.
100
Septic tanks, aerobic tanks, sewage pump
tanks, holding tanks
50
Gravity sewer lines and drains carrying
domestic sewage or industrial waste (except
when the sewer line is cast-iron pipe with
either watertight lead-caulked joints or
joints filled with neoprene gaskets, or if
solvent-welded Schedule 40 (or SDR
equivalent) or better polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipe)
50 (10)
Sewage drains carrying domestic sewage or
industrial waste under pressure (except
welded steel pipe or solvent-welded
Schedule 40 or equivalent or better PVC
pipe or concrete-encased pipe)
50 (10)
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:635
Chemical Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Preparation area or storage area of
hazardous spray materials, fertilizers or
chemicals; salt piles
300
Surface or subsurface containers or tanks of
over 1,000 gallons used for the storage of
materials which cannot be properly
renovated by passage through the soil; this
includes but is not limited to gasoline and all
other petroleum products, (except where
tank installation meets current PADEP
underground storage tank regulations;
documentation must be supplied)
300 (100)
Surface or subsurface containers or tanks of
1,000 gallons or less used for the storage of
materials, which cannot be properly
remediate by passage through the soil; this
includes but is not limited to gasoline and all
other petroleum products; for example, the
type of tanks frequently found in homes
using oil for heating purposes
30
Driveways, parking lots or paved areas;
curbed driveways (6 inches minimum),
parking lots or paved areas
10; 5
Dedicated road rights-of-way 15
Property lines, rights-of-way, easements 10
Metal or masonry storage buildings on a
cement slab
10
Any other source of pollution As approved
(3) Individual neighboring well: 50 feet.
(4) Any proposed deviation from the distances prescribed in
Subsection A(2) above must be approved in writing by the
Department Manager, with reasons stated for such deviation.
B. Construction.
(1) Casing.
(a) All wells serving as a water supply shall be equipped with a
watertight and durable wrought-iron, steel or other type of
approved casing equivalent to Schedule 40 280 wall thickness.
The section of casing shall be joined together by threaded
§ 353-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:636
couplings or joints, by welding, or by any other watertight
approved joint or coupling. The casing shall be carried to a
minimum depth of 40 feet and (then) extended an additional
five feet into firm bedrock or other impervious strata and
grouted in place. Well casing material other than wrought iron
or steel must be resistant to the corrosiveness of the water and
to the stresses to which it will be subjected during installation
and the grouting operation. Casing and grouting material must
be compatible. The criteria established in AWWA Standard
A100-15 must be followed. Casings shall terminate a minimum
of 18 inches above the surrounding, finished ground surface
grade. All casings for water supply or geothermal return wells
shall be fitted with an insect-resistant well cap. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
(b) Ferrous casings shall be new pipe meeting ASTM or API
specifications for water well construction, have additional
thickness and weight if minimum thickness is not considered
sufficient to assure reasonable life expectancy of the well, be
capable of withstanding forces to which it is subjected and
have full-circumference welds or threaded pipe joints.
(c) Watertight well casing must be placed at a sufficient depth to
prevent the entrance of pollution from surface runoff and
polluted aquifers.
(2) Grout materials and placement.
(a) All grout information (type of cement or bentonite and number
of bags of cement or bentonite used for grouting) must be
submitted in writing on Form WTWSD-01 to the Department by
the well driller within 30 days of completion of the well drilling
process.
(b) In all well installations, an annular space shall be provided
between the well casing and the earth formation. The annular
space shall be completely filled with approved grout materials,
in one continuous operation, under pressure from the bottom
to the natural land surface, within 24 hours after completion of
the drilling. In the event that grouting is done following the
completion of all drilling operations, care must be taken to
prevent the entrance of drillers mud into the annulus during
the completion of the bore hole by the use of a rubber packer
or other acceptable method. The annular space shall be
completely cleared of all obstructions prior to the placement of
the grout material. Exterior grouting methods must be used in
this instance. The casing shall be sealed effectively against
entrance of water from water bearing zones which are subject
to pollution, through which the casing may pass, by grouting a
minimum of 10 feet above and 10 feet below the polluted or
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:637
undesirable water-bearing zone. During the installation of the
pitless adapter, grout material may be removed from the
exterior of the casing in order to provide a watertight seal
between the casing and the pitless adapter.
(c) After the grout has been placed in the annular space, drilling of
the bore hole may proceed for a maximum of four hours; and if
not completed within that time period, a curing time of 36
hours must be provided before drilling may resume. A curing
time of 12 hours for Type III portland cement must be provided
immediately following the placement of the grout. Drilling is
not permitted during the curing period. If casings of smaller
diameter are used in the lower portions of the well, effective
watertight seals shall be provided between the casings where
they telescope for a minimum distance of four feet.
(d) The annular space of all well installations must be filled with
one of the following listed grout materials:
[1] Neat cement grout shall consist of a mixture of API Class G
(or Class B similar to ASTM C150 Type II) and water in the
ratio of 0.67 cubic foot (0.019 m3) of water per ninety-fourpound
(42.7 kilograms) sack weighing approximately 228
pounds per cubic foot. A maximum of 6% by weight of
bentonite and 2% by weight of calcium chloride may be
added.
[2] Pozmix-cement grout shall consist of a mixture of 50% by
volume of Pozzolan A (74 lbs./cu. ft.3) (1185 kg/m3) and
50% by volume of API Spec. 10, Class G cement with 0.77
cubic feet (0.02 m3) of water per 84 pounds (38.2
kilograms) of mixture. To this mixture of 2% by weight of
calcium chloride, at the discretion of the contractor.
[3] Concrete grout shall contain 5.3 sacks of Portland cement
(ASTM C150 Type II) per cubic yard of concrete and a
maximum of seven gallons (0.026 m3) of water per ninetyfour-
pound (42.7 kilograms) sack of cement. The maximum
slump shall be four inches. The aggregate shall consist of
47% sand and 53% coarse aggregate, conforming to ASTM
Designation c-33. The maximum size aggregate should be
0.75 inches. Concrete grout shall not be placed in an
annulus of less than three inches.
[4] Sand cement grout shall consist of a mixture of Portland
cement (ASTM C150 Type II), sand and water in the
proportion of not more than two parts by weight of sand to
one part of cement with not more than six gallons (0.022
m3) of water per ninety-four-pound (42.7 kilograms) sack
of cement.
§ 353-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:638
[5] Bentonite grout shall be a pure bentonite with at least 20%
solids by weight when mixed with water. Hydration of the
bentonite must be delayed until bentonite mix has been
placed down the well. This can be done by using additives
with the dry bentonite or in water; mixing calcium
bentonite with sodium bentonite or by using granular
bentonite which has less surface area.
[6] In all well installations, if rapid loss of grout material
occurs during placement, coarse fill material (e.g., sand,
gravel, crushed stone, dry cement) may be used in the
zone or zones in which the rapid loss is occurring. The
remainder of the annular space shall be grouted as
provided below. In no case shall pouring, dumping or
shoveling of grout material into the annular space be
deemed an approved method of grout placement.
(3) Grout placement.
(a) Grout pipe outside casing.
[1] The minimum annular space of 1 1/2 inches around the
entire outside of the casing shall be provided by drilling a
bore hole three inches larger than the outside diameter of
the casing to be inserted. All grout shall be placed by
pumping through the grout pipe. The entire interval to be
grouted shall be open and without obstructions. Washing
or jetting with water is recommended for cleaning the bore
hole and may serve to remove obstructions caused by
casing which otherwise would prevent a proper grout. It is
recommended that the grout pipe extend from the surface
to the bottom of the interval to be grouted. The grout pipe
may remain extended to the bottom of the interval during
and after grouting, or it may be raised slowly as a grout is
placed, provided that the discharge end of the grout pipe
remains submerged in the emplaced grout at all times
until grouting is completed. In the event of interruption in
the grouting operations, the bottom of the grout pipe shall
be raised above the grout level and should not be
resubmerged until the air and water have been displaced
from the grout pipe.
[2] Grouting depths greater than 30 feet. The minimum length
of grout pipe shall be inserted into the annular space is 30
feet.
[3] Grouting depths of 30 feet and less. Grout may be placed
by a tremie pipe inserted only a short distance
(approximately five feet into the annular space, provided
that the entire interval to be grouted is clearly visible from
the surface and is dry. An annular space larger than the
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:639
minimum 1 1/2 inches may be required to assure visibility
from the surface.
(b) Grout pipe inside casing. The bottom of the casing is fitted with
a packer arrangement, also referred to as a "cementing shoe"
or "float shoe," and the casing is placed in the bore hole a short
distance off the bottom. The float shoe allows grout to be
pumped through the grout pipe and upward into the annular
space while preventing grout leakage into the casing during
grouting and after removal of grout pipe. Grouting is continued
until cement appears at the surface, at which time the grout
pipe is disconnected from the float shoe. The float shoe is
drilled out after the grout sets and hardens sufficiently.
(c) Interior method two plug. The first plug separates the grout
from the fluid in the casing, and the other separates the grout
from the water pumped in above it. First, the casing is placed a
short distance off the bottom. After pumping water through the
casing to circulate fluid in the annular space and clear any
obstructions from the hole, the first plug is inserted, and the
casing is capped. A measured volume of grout is pumped in
which is sufficient to fill the annular space. The casing then is
opened, and the second plug inserted. A measured volume of
water is pumped in above the second plug until it is pushed to
the bottom of the casing and most of the grout is expelled up
and into the annual space. The water in the casing is held
under pressure to prevent the backflow of grout until it has set
and hardened.
(d) Interior method upper plug. The casing is placed a short
distance off the bottom, and the water is pumped into the
casing to circulate fluid through the annular space to clear any
obstructions from the hole. A measured quantity of grout
slightly greater than that needed to fill the annular space is
pumping into the capped casing. Because this grout is in direct
contact with the drilling fluid, there will be a narrow zone of
weak grout between the drilling fluid and good grout; however,
this zone should remain inside the casing and not be forced
into the annular space. The casing is opened, and a drillable
plug is inserted. A measured volume of water is pumped in
above the plug until it is pushed to the bottom of the casing and
most of the grout is expelled up and into the annular space.
The water in the casing is held under pressure until the grout
sets and hardens.
(e) Interior method capped casing. The casing is placed a short
distance off the bottom, and water is pumped into the casing to
circulate fluid in the annular space and clear any obstructions
from the hole. The grout pipe passes through an airtight cap at
the top of the casing and is positioned three to four feet above
the bottom of the casing. The grout pipe is assembled so that it
§ 353-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:640
can be pulled through the cap a distance of about 20 feet
after the injection of grout is completed. A bleeder valve is
provided to release air from inside the casing as it is filled with
water. The first step is to fill the casing and annular space with
water. With the upper end of the casing closed, grouting is
started by forcing the cement through the grout pipe upward
into the annular space. Grouting is continued until the cement
overflows around the casing at ground surface. Just enough
water is pumped to clear the cement from the grout pipe, and
the grout pipe is lifted free of the grout. Both the casing and
grout pipe shall be kept tightly closed under pressure until the
cement sets and hardens.
(f) Grout displacement method. The hole is filled with the
estimated volume of grout required to fill the annular space,
and the casing is lowered into the hole. The bottom of the
casing is closed in a tight, drillable plug. Guides often are used
to keep the casing centered in the hole. As the casing is
lowered, the grout is forced upward around it to fill the annular
space. If the pipe does not sink to the bottom under its own
weight, it is filled with water.
(g) Unconsolidated formations. When drilling through an
unconsolidated formation, a steel drive shoe shall be required.
Grouting shall be done in accordance with the following:
[1] If caving conditions are experienced on wells deeper than
30 feet, the annular space shall be grouted from the point
where caving occurred or from a depth of 30 feet,
whichever is greater, to land surface.
[2] If the annular space cannot be grouted in accordance with
these regulations, the well shall be abandoned and sealed
in accordance with § 353-9 of this article.
(h) Other grouting methods and materials may be used subject to
prior written approval of the Department.
(4) Packers. Packers, when used, shall be of materials that will not
impart taste, odor, toxic substances or bacterial contamination to
the well water.
(5) Well screens. Well screens, when used, shall:
(a) Provide the maximum amount of open area while still
maintaining structural strength.
(b) Have the size of openings in the screen based on a sieve
analysis of the material contained in the surrounding
geological formation or gravel pack.
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:641
(c) Be constructed of materials resistant to damage by chemical
action of groundwater or cleaning operations.
(d) Have sufficient diameter to provide adequate specific capacity
and low-aperture velocity. Usually, the entrance velocity should
not exceed 0.1 foot per second.
(e) Be installed so that the pumping water level remains above the
screen under all operating conditions.
(f) Be designed and installed to permit removal or replacement
without adversely affecting watertight construction of the well.
(g) Be provided with a bottom place or wash-down bottom fitting
of the same material as a screen.
(6) Gravel packs. Gravel packs, when used:
(a) Shall be well rounded particles, 95% siliceous material, that
are smooth and uniform, free of foreign material, properly
sized, washed and disinfected immediately prior to or during
replacement.
(b) Shall be placed in one uniform continuous operation.
(c) Gravel refill pipes, when used, shall be Schedule 40 steel pipe
incorporated within the pump foundation and terminated with
screwed or welded caps at least 12 inches above the pump
house floor or concrete apron.
(d) Gravel refill pipes located in the grouted annular opening shall
be surrounded by a minimum of 1.5 inches of grout.
(e) Protection from leakage of grout into the gravel pack or screen
shall be provided.
(7) Pit installations. Pit installations are used where the casing
terminates below the ground surface. Where well pits are used,
such pits shall be maintained free of water at all times. The floor of
the pit shall be a watertight reinforced concrete platform at least
four inches thick poured around the casing and shall be provided
with a watertight seal. The floor of the pit shall extend at least two
feet from the center of the casing in all directions. In all cases, the
pit shall be sized to allow adequate working space. The casing shall
extend above the floor for at least 12 inches. An insect-resistant
well cap shall be installed. The surface of the floor shall be pitched
toward a drain which has a minimum diameter of four inches and
discharged by gravity to the surface of the ground in an area not
subject to flooding or to a basement which is effectively protected
against flooding. Drain openings shall be effectively screened to
prevent the entrance of insects and rodents. The drain shall not be
connected to any sewer or other drain. The pit shall have
watertight reinforced concrete walls four inches thick or equivalent
§ 353-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:642
which provide for an effective watertight seal against the floor. The
top of the pit shall be a watertight reinforced monolithic concrete
slab at least four inches thick, which shall be sealed with the wall
so as to effectively prevent the entrance of water. The top of the
pit shall not be more than six inches below the ground surface.
A durable watertight manhole shall be installed in the top of the
pit centered over the casing and effectively sealed with the top
to prevent the entrance of water. This manhole shall be at least
24 inches in diameter. It shall extend at least three inches above
the surrounding ground surface and be covered by an impervious
durable cover of concrete, steel or equivalent material which
overlaps the manhole vertically by at least two inches. The manhole
cover shall be effectively secured to the manhole by bolting, locking
or equivalent means and shall be kept so secured. Pit installations
shall not be used in areas subject to flooding by groundwater or
surface water or where the groundwater level rises to within one
foot of the bottom of the proposed pit. Where pipes enter the
pit, the annular space between the pipes and the wall shall be
effectively sealed by a watertight permanent seal.
(8) Pitless installations. Pitless installations are those installations
where the casing terminates above the ground surface.
(a) Where pitless installations are used, they shall be of a design
which provides an effective seal against the entrance of
groundwater or surface water into the well, access casing and
into the piping leading to the pump. All buried suction lines
shall be effectively encased or otherwise protected to prevent
external damage or contamination. Pitless installations must
be so designed as to be structurally sound and to provide for
ready removal of drop piping without excavation. The access
casing shall be effectively protected against corrosion and
shall extend at least 18 inches above the natural ground
surface and to a point below the frost line. The ground level at
this point shall be elevated above the adjacent ground level
and graded to drain away in all directions. The top of the
access shall be effectively sealed against the entrance of
waters, insects and rodents. An insect resistant cap shall be
installed. The pitless adapter shall not be submerged in water
or used in areas used by automobiles and other vehicles.
(b) Where surface installations (i.e., hand pumps, pump rooms,
etc.) are used, a watertight reinforced-concrete platform at
least four inches thick and extending for at least two feet in all
directions from the center of the casing shall be poured around
the casing to provide an effective watertight seal with the
casing, or it shall be made watertight with an effective
permanent seal. The surface of the platform shall slope to the
edges. The casing shall extend through the slab for a least 12
inches and shall be effectively sealed against the entrance of
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:643
contamination. An insect-resistant well cap shall be installed
where appropriate. All pumping equipment shall be protected
against freezing. If a pump room is proposed, it shall be so
sized to allow adequate working space.
(9) Venting. Where venting is required, an overlapping cover or pipe
with the opening facing downward shall be required. Such venting
shall be effectively protected against the entrance of insects and
rodents. An insect-resistant well cap shall be installed. In no case
shall openings be less than 12 inches from the ground or, in the
case of pit installations, the floor.
(10) Individual water supply system standard.
(a) An individual water supply system shall produce not less than
480 gallons of water in a two-hour period, at least twice each
day, 12 hours apart.
(b) If the sustained yield of the individual well or individual well
system is not capable of meeting the total individual water
supply system standard, sufficient storage shall be required.
Bore hole capacity and/or a storage tank shall provide storage
capacity.
(11) Minimum yield for individual wells.
(a) All potable water supply wells intended to serve as an
individual water supply shall be approved for yield in
accordance with this subsection. Replacement wells servicing
existing improved properties may be exempt from this
requirement or wells servicing new construction may be
released from this requirement at the discretion of the
Manager or his authorized representative.
(b) The criteria for approval shall be a minimum well yield of one
gallon per minute.
(c) For wells with yields of two gallons per minute or less, a
minimum of 400 gallons of storage capacity shall be provided.
Bore hole storage shall be measured from the pump level to the
top of the static water column. Wells with yields between two
gallons and four gallons per minute shall provide the storage
capacity required to meet the individual water supply standard
described in Subsection B(10).
(d) If the well does not meet the yield requirement of Subsection
B(11)(b), a second well shall be required. If the combined yield
of this well system does not provide the required yield, the
Department will allow the use of this well system, utilizing the
appropriate release agreement, provided the well system
meets the individual water supply system standard in
§ 353-6 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-6
1:644
Subsection B(10). The permittee may propose to construct
additional wells in an attempt to meet the yield requirement.
(e) The minimum well yield requirements set forth in this
Subsection B(11) are deemed sufficient to supply an adequate
quantity of water for normal indoor household or equivalent
usage. A supplemental source of water may be needed to
support outdoor or other nonconsumptive uses.
(f) A report (Form WTWSD-01-1) that documents the well testing
shall be submitted to the Department, that contains the
following:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of the well
driller and personnel conducting the test.
[2] A complete description of the test well(s) that includes the
horizontal and vertical dimensions of the well(s), the
casing installed with specifications and the specifications
of the grouting material used.
[3] Date the well(s) was drilled.
[4] Depth of the well(s).
[5] Method used to drill the well(s).
[6] Type of casing and grouting used.
[7] Distance of the well from water-related, sewage-related,
chemical-related or individual neighboring wells.
[8] Location and distance to public sewer lines.
[9] Type and quantity of storage to be provided (if applicable).
[10] A list of rock formations identified during drilling.
[11] The static water level immediately prior to the testing for
yield.
[12] A hydrograph of the depth to the water surface during
pump testing and the recovery period at the test well(s)
showing corresponding pump and discharge rate in
gallons per minute and the time at which readings were
taken.
[13] A statement of water quality conditions and degree of
compliance with § 353-13B(2).
[14] A mapping of well location on the property showing all
other data required by this article.
[15] Recommended depth for the pump.
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-7
1:645
§ 353-7. Groundwater monitoring wells and test wells.
A. Monitoring wells.
(1) Due to the variability in the information to be obtained,
groundwater monitoring wells shall not be subject to strict
compliance with the isolation distances given in § 353-6 of this
article. The construction of each monitoring well must first receive
written approval of the Manager or his authorized representative in
the form of a permit. Each monitoring well must be designed to
minimize potential contamination of the aquifer and to maximize
the information obtained from each installation. Analysis and
reports prepared on monitoring wells must be submitted to the
Department.
(2) Continued upkeep and safe operation and maintenance of all
monitoring wells shall be the ultimate responsibility of the property
owner.
(3) Whenever a property on which a monitoring well is located is sold
or subsequently changes ownership, the Department shall be
informed of the change. All information regarding the owner and
any entity responsible for operation and maintenance of the well
shall be kept current at all times.
(4) The property owner shall be responsible to inform the Department
of the operational status of the well. This shall be required on an
annual basis within 30 days of the anniversary of the original
issuance date of the permit for each monitoring well.
(5) When a monitoring well is no longer going to be actively used, it
shall be considered as an abandoned well according to § 353-4 of
this article and is required to be sealed in accordance with the
abandonment procedures given in § 353-9.
(6) Failure to comply with the above requirements relating to
ownership, reporting and the operation, maintenance or
abandonment of any monitoring well may result in legal action
being initiated against the property owner by this Department.
B. Test wells.
(1) Test wells require a permit and must meet the isolation distances
and construction standards of § 353-6B of this article for water
supply wells.
(2) Test wells are temporary and therefore are not permitted as
permanent supply wells. Once the intended use of the well has been
completed, the well shall be considered abandoned according to
§ 353-4 of this article and shall be sealed according to § 353-9.
(3) Test wells may be converted for use as a permanent supply well. To
be converted for use as a supply well, the owner shall submit a new
§ 353-7 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-7
1:646
§ 353-8. Pumps and other equipment.
application and the applicable fee for a new well permit to the
Department and meet the requirements of § 353-12 of this article.
A new plot plan shall be required and the original well driller's
geologic log (No. FM-TGS-15) and well completion form (No.
WTWSD-01 and WTWSD-01-1) must be submitted.
(4) The converted test well will not be granted approval for use until a
copy of the pump completion information form (No. WTWSD-02)
and a water quality analysis showing that the water meets the
requirements of § 353-13 is submitted to this Department. In
addition, documentation that the supply well meets the individual
supply system standard in § 353-6B(10) and minimum yield
requirements in § 353-6B(11) must be submitted to this
Department prior to well approval.
(5) Failure to comply with these regulations regarding test wells may
result in the initiation of legal action against the property owner by
this Department.
A. Head pump installations.
(1) The pump head shall be designed and constructed to prevent
contamination from reaching the water chamber and other interior
surfaces of the pump.
(2) The pump shall be designed and constructed to provide an effective
watertight seal with the well casing or stored water reservoir.
(3) The pump cylinder or foot valve shall be installed below the
pumping level of the well.
(4) The pump shall be designed where necessary for protection against
freezing.
(5) All pump information must be submitted in writing on Department
form WTWSD-02 within 30 days of the installation of the pump.
B. Power pump installations.
(1) The base of a pump installed directly over a well casing or pipe
sleeve shall be designed to provide an effective watertight seal with
the casing or pipe sleeve.
(2) All power pumps shall be installed on a firm base in an area free
from flooding.
(3) Where power pumps are installed in pits, the pits shall meet the
requirements of § 353-6B(7). In addition, the pit shall be ventilated
with a pipe of a diameter of at least 1 1/2 inches.
§ 353-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-8
1:647
§ 353-9. Abandonment of wells.
The Department must be notified in writing within 30 days by the well
contractor and/or property owner when a well meets the criteria of an
abandoned well under § 353-4 of this article. All wells considered to be
abandoned shall be filled and sealed by a Department-licensed well
contractor in accordance with the procedures for abandonment listed in this
subsection. Written notification and proper documentation of abandonment
shall be submitted to the Department within 30 days from the point that
the subject well has met the criteria of or otherwise been determined to
be an abandoned well according to § 353-4. One of the following methods
of abandonment described below must be used in accordance with the
geological formations penetrated and in such a manner as to prevent the
bore hole being sealed from acting as a channel for pollution or the escape
of subterranean gases. A report, as required above, of the method of sealing
shall be filed with the Department (Form WTWSD-05).
(4) Location and installation of the pump and all related equipment
shall permit convenient access, removal, maintenance and repair.
(5) The pump suction opening shall be placed at least two feet below
the maximum drawdown of the water in the well. However, the
pump suction opening shall be placed at a sufficient distance from
the bottom of the well so as to prevent agitation of accumulated
sediment.
C. Well cap replacement. Whenever a pump is repaired or replaced, the
pump installer shall ensure that an insect-resistant well cap is installed
on the well. Caps other than insect-resistant caps shall be replaced with
insect-resistant caps. If an existing insect-resistant cap is to be
reinstalled on a well, the pump installer shall inspect the condition of
the cap and either clean or replace the cap as necessary to ensure that
the integrity and operation of the well is maintained. The new well cap
should be a watertight locking cap with O-ring seals.
A. A well in unconsolidated deposits shall be filled with neat cement grout
or concrete grout.
B. The section of a well in a cavernous or creviced rock (such as cavernous
limestone or diabase, creviced granite, etc.) shall be filled with concrete
or neat cement grout or alternate layers of concrete or neat cement
grout, gravel or stone aggregate. The filling shall be completed at the
top by a layer of neat cement grout, concrete grout or bentonite
extending at least 20 feet (6.1 meters) above the top of the cavernous
rock or to the ground surface.
C. The section of a wall in sandstone strata shall be filled with neat cement
grout, concrete grout or sand. The filling shall be completed at the top
of the formation by a layer of neat cement grout, concrete grout or
bentonite extending at least 20 feet (6.1 meters) above the top of the
sandstone or to the ground surface.
§ 353-8 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-9
1:648
§ 353-10. Disinfection.
D. The flow in a flowing well shall be confined and the well filled in
accordance with preceding paragraphs, or the well shall be sealed by
pressure grouting.
E. Abandonment of wells containing subterranean gases requires special
precautions, and a casing in such a well shall be sealed with neat
cement grout, concrete grout or bentonite.
F. Debris or obstructions that may interfere with sealing operations shall
be removed from the well.
A. Following the completion of the construction of an individual,
semipublic water or public supply and installation of the pumping
equipment, or alterations, repairs or maintenance work, the well shall
be pumped continuously until the water discharged is clear. The well,
pump, piping system and other fixtures shall be filled with water
containing a concentration of not less than 100 parts per million of free
chlorine. A portion of the chlorine solution shall be recirculated directly
to the well in order to ensure proper agitation. The water shall not be
used for a period of 24 hours. Other combinations of concentration and
time intervals may be used as are demonstrated to be equally effective.
B. Disposal of the purged water shall be at a point so as to minimize
adverse effects to aquatic life, and, further, the purged water shall not
be discharged into any subsurface sewage disposal system. One ounce
(28 g/0.8 kg) of dry calcium hypochlorite (70% available chlorine),
dissolved in 52.5 gallons (200 liters) of water, makes a 100 ppm
strength disinfectant solution. Various proportions can be worked out
using the approximate quantities shown in the following table:
Diameter of the
Well Casing
Water Standing in
Well
Amount of Dry
Powder (HTH or
Equivalent) to make
at least 110 ppm
Chlorine Solution
4 inches (10.16 cm) 100 feet (31 m) (65.5
gallons) (247 1)
3 tablespoonfuls or 1/4
cup (36.7g)
6 inches (15.24 cm) 100 feet (31 m) (147
gallons) (556 1)
7 tablespoonfuls or 1/2
cup (82.3 g)
8 inches (18.32 cm) 100 feet (31 m) (261
gallons) (998 1)
12 tablespoonfuls or 3/
4 cup (146.2 g)
10 inches (25.4 cm) 100 feet (31 m) (408
gallons) (1,554 1)
1 1/4 cups (228.5 g)
12 inches (30.5 cm) 100 feet (31 m) (587
gallons) (2,222 1)
1 3/4 cups (328.7 g)
§ 353-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-11
1:649
§ 353-11. Cross-connections.
§ 353-12. Permit procedure.
A. Every potable water distributing pipe shall be protected against crossconnection
with, and backflow from, any plumbing fixture or other
piece of equipment or appliance capable of affecting the quality of the
potable water by having the outlet end from which the water flows
spaced a minimum distance of twice the diameter of the water supply
pipe above the flood level rim of the receptacle into which the potable
water flows, except:
(1) Where it is not practicable to provide this minimum distance, the
connection to the fixture, equipment or appliance shall be equipped
with a cross-connection-prevention assembly of a type and location
approved by the Department.
(2) For semipublic supplies, the Department shall require a crossconnection-
prevention device of a type and location approved by
the Department be installed at any fixed potable water outlet to
which a hose may be connected. This subsection shall apply to all
semipublic water supplies constructed after the effective date of
this article. Existing semipublic water supplies shall be subject to
this requirement within one year from the effective date of this
section.
B. Public water systems shall comply with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water Act (35 P.S. 721.1 et seq.).
A. All individual, semipublic or public water supplies and geothermal
wells, monitoring wells and test wells shall be constructed in strict
compliance with the specifications set forth in this section of these rules
and regulations.
B. All individual, semipublic or public water supplies and geothermal
wells, monitoring wells and test wells constructed pursuant to these
rules and regulations shall be constructed by a duly licensed well
contractor, geothermal well installation contractor or pump installation
contractor who is licensed as set forth in this section of the rules and
regulations. The licensed well or geothermal well installation
contractor is responsible for taking all reasonable precautions to
ensure the maintenance of all isolation distances as set forth in these
regulations. This includes but is not limited to visual site inspections,
drilling the well in the location specified on the well permit and
confirmation of these distances by the property owner.
Note: All locations, construction, alterations, abandonment and
permitting of individual private well water supplies will be governed by
ordinances of the County of Bucks, Pennsylvania and administered by
rules and regulations set forth from time to time by the Bucks County
Board of Health.
§ 353-11 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-12
1:650
C. The installation, repair or alteration of any well, casing, water supply
line for new construction, well pit or pitless adapter constitutes the
installation of a water supply or well and requires a permit prior to the
beginning of the installation of a water supply system or of any
building(s) for which such a system is to be installed. Geothermal wells
are required to be permitted. No permit will be required by the
Department for the installation of a water service line that is connected
to a public source, the repair or replacement of a well pump, or for
treatment processes in a public water system; provided, however, that
the disinfection procedures outlined in § 353-10 of this article shall be
strictly adhered to.
D. The application for a permit for the installation of an individual
semipublic water supply, geothermal well, monitoring well or test well
must be made by a well contractor appropriately licensed by the
Department, in the name of the real property owner or equitable owner
with written documentation of the Department. All well permit
applications for new construction must be issued in the same name as
the issued sewage permit, except for those instances where the sewage
permit has received prior approval from the Department. No well
permit can be issued for a property proposing new construction unless
there is a valid sewage permit in effect at the time of application.
(1) The application shall contain such information as the Department
deems necessary, including the information found in the
Department water well permit application (Form WTWSD-01) and
information as may be required by the Department to ensure that
the proposed construction complies with this section.
E. Permits shall be issued or denied within seven working days after
receipt of a completed well application. When the Department has
found an application to be incomplete, or the Department is unable to
verify the information submitted, the applicant shall be notified in
writing that the additional information or clarification is required. The
Department's time for acting upon a permit shall be extended 15 days
beyond the date of receipt of the supplementary or amendatory
information.
(1) A permit denial and/or approval to use the water supply shall be
withheld in those areas of the Township where the Department has
been notified by the state or federal agencies or other sources that
the area is unsuitable for the installation of on-site water wells due
to known groundwater contamination unless the following are met:
(a) The water well must be tested prior to use and on a yearly
basis for all known and suspected contaminants in the area.
(b) Where the water quality analysis shows that the contaminant
level exceeds the maximum contaminate levels allowed by the
Safe Drinking Water Act,133 the water must be treated by the
§ 353-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-12
1:651
appropriate treatment unit before approval to use can be
granted.
F. When the Department is satisfied that the application is complete and
the proposed design meets the requirements found in this section, a
permit will be issued.
(1) If the well contractor hired to drill the well is not the contractor
named on the issued permit application, the Department must be
notified in writing prior to the installation of the well.
(2) The well must be drilled in the permitted location. Any deviation
from the permitted location must be approved in writing by the
Department prior to the start of the drilling process. Failure to
comply with this requirement will result in legal action being taken
against the property owner and/or well drilling contractor.
(3) If construction or installation of an individual, semipublic water
supply, geothermal well and any building or structure for which
such water supply system or ground-source heat pump equipment
is to be installed has not commenced within three years from the
date of issuance of the permit, said permit shall expire. A new
permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of said
construction or installation.
(4) Permits for monitoring wells and test wells shall expire three years
from the date of issuance if construction of the permitted well has
not commenced, and a new permit shall be required prior to
construction of the well.
G. A permit shall be revoked by the Department at any time for any one or
more of the following reasons, which shall be incorporated into a
written revocation:
(1) When any change has occurred in the physical conditions of any
lands which will materially affect the operation of an individual,
semipublic or public water supply;
(2) When information material to the issuance of the permit has been
falsified;
(3) When the decision of the Department fails to conform with the
provisions of this section; or
(4) When the permittee has violated the provisions of this section.
H. No individual, semipublic or public water supply may be used and no
structure served by an individual, semipublic or public water supply
may be occupied unless the individual, semipublic or public water
supply receives an "approval to use" from the Department. No
geothermal well, whether open- or closed-loop, may be used without
133. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq.
§ 353-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-12
1:652
being given approval to use by the Department. The approval to use
will only be issued after submission of properly completed: (i) well
driller's topographic and geologic survey (Form FM-TGS-15); (ii) the
Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department well permit (Form
WTWSD-01); (iii) a water quality report for water supply and openloop
geothermal wells, completed by a Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) approved laboratory which complies
with all parameters outlined in § 353-13, Water quality; (iv) a
satisfactory site inspection; (v) pump completion form (WTWSD-02) for
supply wells; (vi) well completion form (FM-TGS-15).
(1) A community public water system may not be used until the owner
receives approval from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) No monitoring well or test well shall be used until it has received
written approval for use from the Department.
I. If an emergency condition exists, that is, if the lack of water poses an
immediate and significant danger to the health and welfare of persons,
livestock or domestic fowl or crops, then the Department shall issue a
permit within 24 hours of receipt of the completed permit application. It
is the responsibility of the well contractor and/or property owner or
tenant to substantiate that an emergency condition exists by
submission of a signed statement to the Department. Emergency
permits will not be issued over the telephone except in such instances
where the Department may be closed for a period of time in excess of 24
hours, and then only to replace an existing water supply where the lack
of water poses an immediate and significant threat to human health or
when the Department determines that other exceptional circumstances
exist. When permits are issued over the telephone, the well contractor
must submit the required signed statement and the completed well
application to the Department by 9:00 a.m. on the next regularly
scheduled Department workday.
(1) The drilling process for an emergency well must begin within 24
hours of receipt of the permit or verbal approval or said permit/
verbal approval is void, except where inclement weather conditions
or other abnormal circumstances occur.
(2) The well contractor must have the well permit and/or verbal
approval well permit number in his possession at the specific job
site during all aspects of the well drilling process.
J. Within 30 days of the completion of the well drilling process, the well
contractor must submit written drilling and grouting information to the
Department utilizing Forms WTWSD-01 and WTWSD-02 in addition to
the Well Driller's Log Form FM-TGS-15. Approval to use the well will
not be granted until all of the requirements outlined in § 353-6B and
Subsection H have been satisfied.
§ 353-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-12
1:653
§ 353-13. Water quality.
(1) Within 30 days after the completion of the pump installation
process for supply wells, the pump installation contractor must
submit written information to the Department as described in
§ 353-8 (Form WTWSD-02).
(2) Second wells on existing properties or agricultural/irrigation wells
on farm/commercial properties must receive "approval to use" from
the Department no more than 90 days from the completion of the
drilling process.
(3) Failure to comply with these regulations will result in legal action
being taken against the property owner/equitable owner and/or
well contractor and/or pump installation contractor. Neither the
well contractor nor the pump installation contractor shall refuse to
submit the information required in Subsection J and J(1) due to the
nonpayment for his or her services.
A. Water quality for public water supplies shall be regulated by the
Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water Act (35 P.S. 721.1 et seq.).
(1) All water samples to be tested must be drawn by a trained
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) certified laboratory
employee or a Township-licensed well driller. Qualified engineers
or environmental consultant may also draw samples.
(2) All water test results to be submitted to the Department must
contain the following information: (i) permittee's name; (ii) address
of origin of sample; (iii) WTWSD-01; (iv) the name of the person
who took the water sample; (v) statement indicating if the sample
was treated or untreated.
(3) Only an original laboratory analysis report of the water quality of a
supply well will be accepted for final approval to use.
(4) Falsification of any document submitted to this Department may
result in the initiation of legal action against the property owner
and/or the responsible party.
B. Water quality for new individual and semipublic water supplies shall
conform with the following:
(1) Microbiological water quality requirements. Procedures for testing
for microbiological contaminants shall be approved by and
conducted by a laboratory certified by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the technique used. Evidence of such tests shall
be given to the Department verifying that the tests have been
conducted by a laboratory approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
§ 353-12 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-13
1:654
(2) Microbiological, physical and chemical water quality requirements.
Individual and semipublic water supplies must meet the following
standards: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
Secondary Contaminants
SMCL
(mg/L)
pH* 6.5 to 8.5 units
Temperature* N/A degrees
Chloride 250
Sulfate 250
Total dissolved solids 500
Color 15 color units
Odor 3 threshold odor numbers
Turbidity 0.5 to 1 NTU**
Iron 0.3
Manganese 0.05
Copper 1
NOTES:
SMCL = Secondary maximum contaminant level
* Can be measured in the field
** Performance standard
Microbiological Contaminants
MCLG
Total coliforms* 0
NOTES:
MCLG = Maximum contaminant level goal
* If positive, analyze for fecal coliform
Inorganic Chemicals
MCL
(mg/L)
Arsenic 0.010
Barium 2.0
Cadmium 0.005
§ 353-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-13
1:655
Inorganic Chemicals
MCL
(mg/L)
Chromium 0.1
Lead 0.005
Mercury 0.002
Nitratre + Nitrite (as Nitrogen) 10.0
Volatile Organic Chemicals
MCL
(mg/L)
Benzene 0.005
Carbon Tetrachloride 0.005
o-Dichlorobenzene 0.6
para-Dichlorobenzene 0.075
1,2-Dichloroethane 0.005
1,1-Dichloroethylene 0.007
cis-Dichloroethylene 0.07
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene 0.1
Dichloromethane 0.005
1,2-Dichloropropane 0.005
Ethylbenzene 0.7
Monochlorobenzene 0.1
Styrene 0.1
Tetrachloroethylene 0.005
Toluene 1.0
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene 0.07
1,1,1-Trichloroethane 0.2
1,1,2-Trichloroethane 0.005
Trichloroethylene 0.005
Vinyl Chloride 0.002
Xylenes (Total) 10.0
Synthetic Organic Chemicals
Alachlor 0.002
Atrazine 0.003
§ 353-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-13
1:656
Synthetic Organic Chemicals
Chlordane 0.002
Dibromochloropropane 0.002
Ethylenedibromide 0.00005
Hexochlorocyclopentadiene 0.05
Lindane 0.0002
Methoxychlor 0.04
Simazine 0.004
Carbofuran 0.04
2,4D 0.07
Endothal 0.1
NOTES:
MCL = Maximum contaminant level
(a) All water quality tests must be conducted for each category
listed in Subsection B(2) by a laboratory, certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, verifying that the tests have
been conducted by a laboratory approved by the PADEP.
(b) If total coliform, turbidity or nitrates + nitrites are not within
the specified standards noted in Subsection B(2), treatment of
the water supply is required to achieve compliance with the
standards.
(c) If iron, manganese, chloride, color, pH, MBAS or odor is in
excess of the above listed standards in Subsection B(2),
treatment is recommended.
(d) When a treatment unit has been installed to correct a condition
requiring treatment [Subsection B(2)(b)], this Department
must conduct an inspection to verify the installation of the
treatment unit(s), as well as receive written information
including the make and model number of any installed
treatment unit(s). Treatment units must be installed according
to the manufacturer's specifications.
(e) When the parameters listed in Subsection B(2) are not within
the specified limits in the initial water testing process, this
Department requires two consecutive (minimum 24 hours
apart) passing results without treatment (other than
disinfection as per § 353-15 of this article) to be submitted or
one passing result accompanied by a written description of the
treatment unit (when a treatment unit has been installed).
§ 353-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-13
1:657
§ 353-14. Water source replacements.
(3) For either individual or semipublic water supplies, additional
analyses and treatment of the water may be required if the Bucks
County Department of Health or the Department has reason to
suspect that harmful substances are present in the water in
amounts that are significantly adverse to human health, safety or
comfort.
(a) In those areas identified as "areas of concern" due to their
proximity to either suspected or confirmed Superfund sites,
leaking underground storage tanks and other areas of
documented groundwater contamination, the Department will
require testing of new wells for the contaminants known to be
associated with the specific site.
C. All individual private well supplies must be tested every third year for
total and fecal coliform. Tests must be performed by a qualified lab or
through the Bucks County Department of Health testing program. The
Department will notify residents of the test due dates. The well owner
will be required to submit the original copy of the test results to the
Department.
A. Whenever a public water supply or another well replaces an existing
well, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to have the
existing well properly abandoned by a licensed well contractor in
accordance with § 353-9, Abandonment of wells, of this article. No well
may exist in a decommissioned state (Form WTWSD-03).
B. All wells that are to be abandoned, or wells that are removed from use
or a usable status such as decommissioned wells or any well that meets
the definition of an abandoned well according to § 353-4, shall be
abandoned according to the requirements of § 353-9, Abandonment of
wells (Form WTWSD-05).
C. A well that has been replaced by another well shall not be required to
be abandoned if the property owner has made written request to the
Department to maintain the well for purposes that will not endanger
groundwater, the environment or public health and has received
written approval to maintain the well from the manager or his
authorized representative (Form WTWSD-04).
D. A well that has been replaced by a public water supply shall not be
required to be abandoned if the property owner has submitted a written
request to the Department for approval to continue to maintain the well
and has received written approval to maintain the well from the
manager or his authorized representative (Form WTWSD-04).
E. Wells that have been replaced by public water supplies may not be used
or maintained where any federal, state or local agency has determined
§ 353-13 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-14
1:658
§ 353-15. Agricultural water supplies.
§ 353-16. Geothermal wells.
that the continued use or maintenance of the well could interfere with
the cleanup of contaminated groundwater or a contaminated site.
F. Any well given approval by the Department when replaced by a public
water supply cannot have any kind of hard connection with the public
water supply.
G. Well permits will not be issued in areas where a public water supply
exists if the location of the new well is within the cone of influence of an
existing municipal well.
A. Agricultural water wells must meet all Department isolation
requirements as noted in § 353-6A(2).
(1) Wells used specifically for irrigation of crops, irrigation of
recreational or institutional grasslands or other nonconsumptive
use must be tested for coliform bacteria and nitrates.
(2) Test results must be submitted to the Department prior to the use
of the well. It will not be required that the supply be treated if the
parameters are outside of the standard listed in § 353-13B(2).
B. Wells used for watering dairy livestock must be tested for pH, coliform,
bacteria and nitrates, and the results must be submitted to the
Department prior to usage.
(1) If total coliform is not within the specified standards noted in
§ 353-13B(2), treatment is recommended.
(2) If the pH of the water is below 6.7 or the nitrates are higher than 30
ppm, treatment is recommended.
(3) Wells used solely for watering livestock in the field must be tested
for coliform bacteria and nitrates, but treatment will not be
required if the parameters are outside the standards listed in
§ 353-13B(2).
A. Open-loop geothermal systems.
(1) The geothermal delivery and return wells that depend on
groundwater supplies for heating and cooling must meet all
Department isolation distance requirements listed in § 353-6A(1).
(2) The geothermal delivery well must be tested for all specified water
quality standards listed in § 353-13B(2).
(3) If the geothermal delivery well will also be used as a drinking water
supply, all Department water quality requirements listed in
§ 353-13B(2) must be met.
§ 353-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-16
1:659
B. Closed-loop geothermal bore holes.
(1) Location.
(a) The following minimum isolation distances to existing or
potential sources of pollution shall be maintained.
Source of Pollution
Minimum isolation distances from the proposed closed-loop
bore hole to the facilities listed below:
Water Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Delineated wetlands, floodplains, lakes,
ponds or other surface waters
10
Rainwater pits 10
Storm drains, retention basins,
stormwater stabilization ponds
10
Sewage Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Surface sewage absorption areas,
elevated sand mounds, cesspools,
sewage seepage pits
50
Spray irrigation site perimeter, sewage
sludge and septage disposal sites
50
Septic tanks, aerobic tanks, sewage
pump tanks, holding tanks
25
Sewer drains, public sewer laterals 5
§ 353-16 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-16
1:660
Chemical Related
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Preparation area or storage area of
hazardous spray materials, fertilizers or
chemicals, salt piles (if bore hole is
cased and grouted inside and out)
300 (150)
Surface or subsurface containers or
tanks of greater than 1,000 gallons
used for storage of materials which
cannot be properly renovated by
passage through soil; this includes but
is not limited to gasoline and all other
petroleum products (if bore hole is
cased and grouted inside and out)
300 (150)
Surface or subsurface containers or
tanks of 1,000 gallons or less used for
storage of materials which cannot be
properly renovated by passage through
soil; this includes but is not limited to
gasoline and all other petroleum
products; for example, the type of tanks
frequently used in homes using oil for
heating purposes
30
Miscellaneous
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
Dedicated road right-of-way 10
Property lines, rights-of-way, easements 5
Any other source of pollution As approved
(b) Any proposed deviation from the isolation distances prescribed
in Subsection B(1)(a) above must be approved in writing by the
Director, with reasons stated for such deviation.
(2) Construction.
(a) Closed-loop geothermal bore holes shall be located, drilled and
finished in a manner that will protect the bore hole structure
from damage from surface activities or other natural
occurrences so that the quality of the groundwater cannot be
affected.
(b) The well contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that the
bore hole is drilled in the permitted location. Deviation from
§ 353-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-16
1:661
§ 353-17. Fees.
A fee schedule will be established for these rules and regulations and
adopted annually by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 353-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the permitted location must receive prior written approval
from this Department. The well contractor shall be responsible
for drilling the bore hole and the final backfilling after the pipe
loop has been installed.
(c) Casings are not required. Casings may be necessary to hold the
bore hole open during the drilling process. Casing may be left
in the bore hole at the discretion of the well contractor. When a
casing is used, grouting the annular space is required.
(d) The pipe loop is to be installed by a contractor who is certified
in the proper method of heat fusion specified by the pipe
manufacturer. The well contractor shall be responsible for
insuring that the pipe loop is installed in accordance with the
specifications of the ground source heat pump system
manufacturer, the pipe manufacturer and that the bore hole is
properly backfilled.
(e) Backfilling shall be according to the specification of the
ground-source heat pump equipment manufacturer. When
sand is the specified backfill material, the bore hole shall be
constructed in the same manner as a water supply well. A
casing is required to be used, and the annular space is required
to be grouted.
(f) If the closed-loop bore hole penetrates bedrock, it must be
grouted from a depth of 15 feet into the bedrock to the top of
the bore hole.
(g) The recommended backfilling material for these bore holes
shall be bentonite. The bentonite shall conform to the grouting
standard specified in § 353-6B(2)(d)[5].
(3) Permitting. Closed-loop geothermal bore holes shall be permitted
in accordance with § 353-12. Each bore hole must be permitted
using a single application. A separate fee will be charged for each
bore hole.
§ 353-16 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-18
1:662
the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 353-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-18
1:663

ARTICLE III
Public Water System
[Adopted 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-04 (Ch. 26, Part 4, of the
1995 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 353-19. Purpose.
This article is an ordinance establishing a system of public water within the
Township; authorizing the construction of a public water system therefor
and therein; prohibiting the construction of private wells by owners or
occupiers of properties adjoining or adjacent to said public water areas;
requiring connection to the public water system; requiring permits,
prohibiting certain uses; providing for penalties; providing for rules and
regulations; providing for specifications; and providing for the collection of
assessments, rentals including fees, meter fees, maintenance fees, penalties
and interest by lien, etc.
§ 353-20. Authorization.
It is ordained and enacted by the Supervisors of Warrington Township,
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and is hereby ordained by authority of same,
as follows.
§ 353-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Buildings located within
150 feet of the public water system.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
occur between the drinking water in an individual water supply well or a
public water system and a system containing a source or potential source
of contamination, or allowing treated water to be removed from any public
water system and returned to the public water system. The term does not
include connections to devices totally within the control of one or more
public water systems and connections between water mains.
DEPARTMENT — The Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department.
FEES — Water rates, tapping fees, meter fees, inspection fees, permit fees
and any other fees associated with the public water system and adopted
annually or as required by the Board of Supervisors.
FIRE HYDRANT — A discharge pipe with a valve and spouts or spouts at
which water may be drawn from a water main for fire-fighting, water system
maintenance or public health and safety considerations.
NOTICE — A written or printed notice, which shall be served upon the
owner if he be found within the Township; or if he cannot be found with the
Township, said notice may be served by any of the following methods:
§ 353-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-21
1:665
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Refers to any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and for which structure public water is or may be required.
ORDINANCES — Such ordinances of the Township of Warrington herein, or
heretofore or hereafter adopted, concerning public water systems or private
wells.
PERSON — Includes individuals, associations, partnerships, limited
partnerships, joint-stock companies and corporations.
PRIVATE WELL — Any water supply serving a particular tax parcel within
Warrington Township. This definition includes all wells as described or
defined in Article II of this chapter.
PROPERTY — Each lot or piece of land adjoining, abutting on or which is
adjacent to the public water systems.
PUBLIC WATER — Any water supply and distribution system operated by
the Department or any water supply and distribution system designated
by written agreement with Warrington Township to operate within the
Township boundaries.
PUBLIC WATER DISTRICT — Such area as shall hereinafter be defined or
designated from time to time by the Supervisors of Warrington Township for
the provision of public water.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the public for
human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or regularly
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of
the year. The term includes collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities under control of the operator of the system and used in connection
with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used in connection with the
system. The term also includes a system which provides water for bottling
or bulk hauling for human consumption. Water for human consumption
includes water that is used for drinking, bathing and showering, cooking,
dishwashing or maintaining oral hygiene.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warrington, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 353-22. Administration.
By registered or certified United States mail addressed to the last
known address of the owner;
A.
By leaving the same with the owner's agent or the party in possession;
or
B.
By posting the same on the most public part of the premises concerning
which the notice is directed.
C.
A. Public water area. A distribution system of public water is hereby
established and ordained, including such distribution system as is
§ 353-21 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-22
1:666
currently displayed on the Warrington Township Water System Map,
latest edition, which is incorporated herein by reference.
B. Public water extensions. Any extension of the public water system
beyond that displayed on the Warrington Township Water System Map
shall be designated by ordinance, and said ordinance shall be
incorporated by reference thereto in the provisions of this article and
any amendments thereto.
C. The public water system hereinbefore or hereinafter established, and
designated on the maps and plans which are made part of this article
and any ordinance adopted, shall be laid, as far as practicable, along
and within the lines of the public roads and highways of said Township,
as on said plans or maps designated; and where such system diverges
from said public roads or highways, as shown on the plan and maps, and
passes through private property, the consent of the owners of such
private property shall be first obtained by recorded easement, if
possible; and if not, such public water system shall be constructed
through such private property upon providing for compensation in
accordance with the Act of Assembly in such a case made and provided.
D. In all cases where it becomes necessary to extend the Township public
water system into an adjoining borough or township for the purpose of
supplying water, the Supervisors of Warrington Township shall approve
an agreement with such borough or township, or any of their authorized
agencies, regarding rights-of-way through private property, ownership,
maintenance and joint use of such lines.
E. All persons owning an occupied building now erected upon property,
which building is within 150 feet of the public water system, shall at
their own expense connect such building with the public water system
within 90 days after notice to do so from the Township or notice to do so
from the Warrington Township Water and Sewer Department.
(1) All persons owning a property accessible to the public water
system upon which a building is later erected within 150 feet of the
public water system shall, upon the time of such erection and at
their own expense, connect such building with the public water
system.
(2) All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter is located within 150 feet of the public water system
shall, at their own expense, connect such building to the public
water system within 90 days after receipt of notice to do so.
(3) All connections with said public water system shall be made only
upon application and permit in prescribed form and shall be made
in accordance with such rules and regulations and upon such terms
and conditions as the Department shall from time to time adopt and
prescribe. Said rules and regulations, when adopted, shall have the
same force and effect as if set at length in this article.
§ 353-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-22
1:667
§ 353-23. Rules and regulations.
§ 353-24. Specifications.
(4) After the expiration of the periods specified in Subsection E of this
section, if any owner of an occupied building on property accessible
to the public water system shall have failed to connect such
property with the public water system as required by said notice,
the Department may cause to be served on the owner of such
property so failing to connect to said public water system, and also
upon the occupants of the building in question, a copy of this article
and a written or printed notice requiring such connection to be
made; and such notice shall further state that its requirements
shall be complied with within 90 days from the date thereof.
(5) Upon failure of any such owner, who has been duly notified as
hereinabove provided, to comply with the requirements of any such
notice or with the provisions of this article, the Department shall
cause the necessary connection to be made and, upon completion
of the work for the same, shall render a bill covering the cost of said
work to the owner of such premises.
(6) In the event that any property owner shall fail to pay the
assessment as hereinabove provided, it will be the duty of the
Department to take the necessary action to effect the collection of
such unpaid bills in the manner provided by law.
(7) All persons owning an occupied building now erected upon
property accessible to the public water system where said property
is served by a private well system may maintain the private well
under the conditions set forth in Article II of this chapter.
(8) All persons owning an occupied building now erected upon
property accessible to the public water system where said property
is served by a private well system may abandon such well under
conditions set forth in Article II of this chapter.
(9) All persons owning an occupied building now erected upon
property accessible to the public water system are prohibited from
drilling or constructing a private well for the purpose of domestic
or household water supply. This includes all commercial and
industrial properties.
A. The Department will maintain a set of rules and regulations for the
Warrington Township public water system. These rules and regulations
will be adopted by the Board of Supervisors and thereby be
incorporated as part of this article.
B. These rules and regulations may be updated from time to time to assure
the security and the public safety of the Warrington Township public
water system.
§ 353-22 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-24
1:668
§ 353-25. Fees.
§ 353-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 353-27. Other public water systems.
§ 353-28. Effect on other provisions.
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere
with any existing ordinance or enactment or with any rule or regulation or
permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may be
inconsistent or in conflict with any provision of this article.
A. The Department will maintain a set of specifications for the Warrington
Township water system. These specifications will be adopted by the
Board of Supervisors and thereby be incorporated as part of this article.
B. These specifications may be updated from time to time to assure the
security and the public safety of the Warrington Township public water
system.
A. Annually, the Warrington Township Board of Supervisors will adopt a
fee schedule, including all water rates, tapping fees, meter fees,
inspection fees, permit fees and any other fee associated with the public
or a private water system.
B. This fee schedule may be modified within the annual time period if
required to reflect changes in economic conditions, legislation or any
other condition which may impact the financial well-being of the public
water system.
A. From time to time as required, the Township may allow other public
water suppliers whose distribution system exists within the Township or
on its borders with adjoining townships or boroughs to serve
Warrington Township residents.
B. Any Warrington Township resident who is served by said other public
water suppliers will be subject to all rules, regulations, specifications,
fees and penalties of said supplier.
§ 353-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-28
1:669

ARTICLE IV
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-03]
§ 353-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 353-30. Application and policy.
§ 353-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
double the diameter (2 x D) of the supply pipe measured vertically above
the top of the rim of the vessel. In no case shall the air gap be less than one
inch.
A. To protect the public water supply from contamination or pollution by
isolating, within the consumer's water system, contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the
public water supply system.
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's water supply and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems
containing process fluids.
C. To provide for the maintenance and continuation of a cross-connection
control program which prevents the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's water supply.
A. This article shall apply to all premises (commercial and noncommercial)
served by the Township's water supply system.
B. The Township and the consumer have the joint responsibility for
protection of the public water supply from contamination or pollution
due to backflow. If the Township requires an approved backflow
prevention device, the Township or its authorize representative, shall
give notice to the consumer to install such an approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The
consumer shall install such an approved device or devices at his own
expense within 90 days of receiving notification. Failure, refusal, or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such a device or devices
shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises
until such a device or devices have been installed.
§ 353-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-31
1:671
APPROVED — A backflow prevention device or method that has been
accepted by the Township as suitable for the proposed use.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (AVB) — A fixture outlet device
containing an optional shutoff valve followed by a valve body containing
a soft-seated float-check, a check seat and an air inlet port. If the shutoff
valve is open, the flow of water causes the float to close the air inlet port.
If the shutoff valve is closed, the float falls and forms a check valve against
backsiphonage and at the same time opens the air inlet port. If no shutoff
valve is provided, the flow of water will determine the opening and closing
of the air inlet port.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the premises
of, or available to, the customer except connections to other approved
community water supply systems.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from a source other
than its intended source. Backflow can result from either backsiphonage or
backpressure.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or other means which will prevent
the backflow of water or any other substance into the public water supply
system.
BACKPRESSURE — The backflow of water or a mixture of water and
other substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source, into a
public water supply system due to an increase of pressure in the fixture or
customer source to a value that exceeds the system pressure.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of water or a mixture of water and
other substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source, into a
public water supply system due to a temporary negative or sub-atmospheric
pressure within the public water supply system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system, located on the
consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
consumer's water system.
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply
in the event of backflow from the customer's facility. Though containment
control prevents contamination of the public water supply, it offers no
protection to the water distribution system within the facility. Reduced
pressure zone devices are used for containment control.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking water
by wastewaters, processed fluids, or any water of a quality less than
accepted drinking water quality to a degree which would create an actual
§ 353-31 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-31
1:672
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
occur between the drinking water in a public water system and a system
containing a source or potential source of contamination, or allowing
treated water to be removed from any public water system, used for any
purpose or routed through any device or pipes outside the public water
system, and returned to the public water system. The term does not include
connections to devices totally within the control of one or more public water
systems and connections between water mains.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — An evaluation of the potential risk to health and
the adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA) — An assembly composed of
two single, independently acting, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valves
including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.
FIXTURE OUTLET PROTECTION — Cross-connection control which
isolates all free-flowing fixture outlets (i.e., faucets) from the water
distribution system within a facility. Fixture outlet protection prevents
backflow contamination of both the facility water system and the public
water supply. Examples of fixture outlet protection devices include
atmospheric vacuum breakers, hose-bibb vacuum breakers, and pressure
vacuum breakers.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and wellbeing
of its users. The word "severe," as used to qualify "health hazard,"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected
to result in significant morbidity or death.
HOSE-BIBB VACUUM BREAKER (HBVB) — A fixture outlet device which
contains a soft-seated, spring-loaded, air inlet valve and is designed to be
attached to an outlet having a hose connection thread.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION — An arrangement or device that will
allow alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
INTERNAL PROTECTION — Cross-connection control which isolates all
non-outlet, water-use appliances within a facility (e.g., kitchen appliances,
air conditioners, boilers, process tanks, photo developing equipment) from
the water distribution system within the facility. Internal protection
prevents backflow contamination of both the facility water system and the
public water supply. Reduced pressure zone devices and double check valve
assemblies are used for internal protection.
NON-HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water
system or its operation that creates, or may create, an impairment of the
quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public
§ 353-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-31
1:673
health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic
qualities of such water for domestic use.
NON-POTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal, culinary, or
any other type of domestic use.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of
federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees and
agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation, municipality,
municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of federal or state
government.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard, or to impair the usefulness
or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard
to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such
waters for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, personal,
culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of DEP.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB) — A fixture outlet device containing
an independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valve and an
independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded, air inlet valve on the
discharge side of the check valve.
PROCESS FLUIDS — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's water system. This
includes, but is not limited to:
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — Warrington Township.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
out of the year. The term includes any collection, treatment, storage, and
distribution facilities under control of the operator of the system and used
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters; sanitary quality;
C. Cooling waters;
Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
D.
E. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid or gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes;
F.
G. Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
§ 353-31 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-31
1:674
in connection with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment
storage facilities not under such control which are used in connection
with the system. The term also includes a system which provides water
for human consumption via bottling, vending machines, retail sale, or bulk
hauling methods. The term includes the water supply system operated by
Warrington Township.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE DEVICE (RPZD) — A device which contains
two independently acting, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valves, together
with a soft-seated, spring-loaded, diaphragm-activated, pressure
differential relief valve located between the two check valves. During
normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these
two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, shall maintain the pressure
between the checks at less than the supply pressure by opening to the
atmosphere. The device must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK VALVE (RDCV) — A nontestable backflow
prevention device that is used for containment control of residential homes
and consists of two independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded,
consecutive check valves.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water supply system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
line, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system or to the
consumer's potable water system.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township.
§ 353-32. Water system.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
public water supply system under the control of the Township up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
D. The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all facilities beyond the
service connection which are utilized in conveying water from the
public distribution system to points of use.
§ 353-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-33
1:675
§ 353-33. Cross-connections prohibited.
§ 353-34. Surveys and investigations.
§ 353-35. Where protection is required.
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
water supply system or consumer's water system may exist, unless such
cross-connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the
Township.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water supply may enter a public or consumer's water system
unless such auxiliary water supply, as well as the method of connection
and use of such supply, has been approved by the Township.
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times upon
notice by the Township, or its authorized representative, for the
purposes of surveying for, or investigating, actual or potential crossconnections.
B. On request by the Township, the consumer shall furnish information on
water use practices within his premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic
surveys of water use practices on his/her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his/her water
system.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer's water
system where, in the judgement of the Township, an actual or potential
hazard to the public water supply system exists.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system where the following
conditions exist:
(1) Systems having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Township and
approved by DEP.
(2) Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply
system. This shall include systems having sources or auxiliary
systems, which contain process fluids or waters originating from
the public water supply system, which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the water purveyor.
§ 353-33 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-35
1:676
§ 353-36. Type of protection required.
The type of protection required under § 353-35 of this article shall depend
on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
(3) Systems having internal cross-connections that are not correctable,
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to
determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
(4) Systems where, because of security requirements or restrictions, it
is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection
survey.
(5) Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections.
(6) Others specified by the Township.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Township
determines that no actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply system exist:
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
(2) Laboratories;
(3) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
(4) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping station or stormwater
pumping station;
(5) Food or beverage processing plants;
(6) Chemical plants;
(7) Metal plating industries;
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants;
(9) Radioactive material processing plants;
(10) Car wash or truck wash; or
(11) Others specified by the water purveyor.
A. An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with substances that are
dangerous to public health and could cause a severe health hazard, and
where such a device would be technically feasible and/or practical.
B. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health
hazard.
§ 353-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-36
1:677
§ 353-37. Backflow prevention devices.
§ 353-38. Installation.
C. An approved air gap separation, an approved reduced pressure zone
device, or an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances
that would be objectionable but not dangerous to health.
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this article shall be of a
model or construction approved by the Township or its designated
representative and shall comply with the following:
(1) Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the receiving vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
(2) A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure zone device
shall be approved by the Township and shall mean a device that has
been manufactured in full conformance with standards established
by the American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) entitled:
(a) ASSE/ANSI 1015 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow
Assemblies;
(b) ASSE/ANSI 1013 Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle
Backflow-Prevention Assemblies;
(c) ASSE/ANSI 1047 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle
Detector Assemblies;
(d) ASSE/ANSI 1048 Standards for Double Check Detector
Assemblies.
(3) Said ASSE standards are herein adopted by the Township. Final
approval, however, of the reduced pressure zone device and the
double check valve assembly shall be evidenced by a certificate of
full approval, issued by an approved testing laboratory, certifying
full compliance with the said ASSE standards.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Township at the
time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for inspection
and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirement of
§ 353-37A of this article provided the Township is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the public water supply system. Whenever the
existing device is moved from the present location, or requires more
than minimum maintenance, or when the Township finds that the
maintenance of the device constitutes a hazard to health, the device
shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this article.
§ 353-36 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-38
1:678
§ 353-39. Inspection and maintenance.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be installed at
a location, and in a manner, approved by the Township. The device(s)
shall be installed by a person properly qualified. Installation of the
devices shall be at the expense of the water consumer.
B. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the
water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior
to any other connection.
C. Pits or vaults shall be water-tight, flood-free, and maintained free from
standing water by means of either a sump and pump or a suitable drain.
Such a pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer, nor permit
flooding of the pit or vault by reverse flow from its point of discharge.
An access ladder and adequate lighting, natural or artificial, shall be
provided to permit maintenance, inspection, and testing of the backflow
prevention device.
D. When installing a backflow prevention assembly the installer must
comply with the IPC and ASSE/ANSI standards and be aware of all
OSHA safety considerations when installations are performed. Major
safety considerations are thermal expansion and assembly discharge
damage. Thermal expansion can cause hot water tanks and other
storage vessels to explode when there are no provisions made for
thermal expansion. Township strongly recommends the installation of a
thermal expansion tank on hot water heaters to prevent the hot water
heaters relief valve from discharging or, more importantly, from
exploding. Many backflow prevention assemblies discharge large
amounts of water for various reasons. This discharge of water could
obviously pose a hazard when the valves are discharging onto or around
electrical equipment. Equipment damage or electrocution could occur.
The installer must ensure that valve discharge will not cause safety
hazards or property damage. Thermal expansion is a concern anytime
substances are confined (in a closed system) and are heated.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices are required by this article to have inspections,
tests, and overhaul made in accordance with the following schedule, or
more often where inspections indicate a need.
(1) Air separation shall be inspected at the time of installation, and at
least every 12 months thereafter.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months
thereafter. These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed, and at least every 30
months.
§ 353-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-39
1:679
§ 353-40. Booster pumps.
§ 353-41. Violations.
(3) Reduced pressure zone devices shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months
thereafter. These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every five
years.
(4) Pressure vacuum breakers shall be inspected and tested for the
capability to prevent backsiphonage at the time of installation and
at least every 12 months thereafter. These devices shall be
dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever
needed and at least every 12 months.
B. Inspections, tests, and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall be
made at the expense of the water consumer, and shall be performed by
a person certified to inspect, test, and overhaul backflow prevention
devices.
C. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this article are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense
of the consumer without delay.
D. The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections,
and repairs. Records of installation, inspections, tests, repairs, and
overhaul shall be submitted to the Township or the Township's
designee, within 30 days, on a form provided by the Township.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the Township. Bypasses are only permitted when matched protection
is provided meaning that the bypass must contain the same level of
protection as the primary service line. On a parallel service connection,
backflow prevention assemblies must be of the same size and type.
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to, or
within, any premises, such a pump shall be equipped with a lowpressure
cut-off device designed to shutoff the booster pump when the
pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 10
pounds per square inch gauge pressure or less for a period of 30
seconds or longer.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-pressure
cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Township, at
least once a year, that the device is operating properly.
A. The Township may deny or discontinue, after issuing reasonable notice,
the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention
§ 353-39 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-41
1:680
§ 353-42. Hydrant use restriction.
Only authorized persons shall be permitted to use hydrants. Tampering with
the hydrants by unauthorized persons is prohibited. Any person wishing to
use the hydrants (other than the Township and fire companies) must be
permitted. Permits may be obtained from the Township.
device required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained in
a manner acceptable to the Township, or if it is found that the backflow
prevention device has been removed or by-passed, or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low-pressure cut-off
device required by this article is not installed and maintained in
working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this article and to the satisfaction of the Township.
§ 353-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-42
1:681
Chapter 370
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. I.
Construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 181.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
305.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 310.
§ 353-42 WARRINGTON CODE § 353-42
1:682
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 370-101. Title. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
This is a chapter permitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting, and
determining the use of land, watercourses and other bodies of water; the
size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance,
alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the area and dimensions
of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures as well
as courts, yard, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied
by uses and structures; the density of population and intensity of use; the
location and size of signs; creating zoning districts and establishing the
boundaries thereof; continuing the office of Zoning Officer, continuing a
Zoning Hearing Board; and providing for the administration, amendment,
and enforcement of the ordinance including the imposition of penalties.
§ 370-102. Short title. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Warrington Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1985."
§ 370-103. Purpose. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the Warrington
Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, with consideration for the
character of the Township, its various parts, and the suitability of the
various parts for particular uses and structures and is enacted for the
following purposes:
§ 370-104. Community development objectives. [Amended
3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
In addition to the purposes found listed in § 370-103, this chapter is enacted
to assist in achieving the goals and objectives as stated in the Warrington
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: public
health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, provisions of
adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading
space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds, and
other public requirements, as well as;
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve the natural, historical, and cultural resources, and
farmland considering topography, soil type and classification, and
present use.
D. To encourage the revitalization of established urban centers.
§ 370-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-104
1:683
Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and Act 537 Sewage Facilities
Plan Update, as amended, and the following specific community
development objectives:
A. To achieve the best use of land within the Township, ensuring that
varying land uses will complement one another and to control the
indiscriminate scattering of commercial, industrial and other urbantype
land uses into a predominantly rural and agricultural area.
B. To establish realistic population densities in order to ensure adequate
circulation, health standards, privacy and open space and in order to
provide utilities, protection, services, and facilities in the most
economical and efficient manner.
C. To encourage a land use pattern that will improve the efficiency,
convenience and safety of existing and future road systems in order to
provide better internal circulation and movement of people and goods
throughout the Township.
D. To guide the location and siting of future development and to establish
development standards so as to minimize the negative impacts on the
natural environment while preserving the environment, which includes
the cultural and historical resources of the Township.
E. To stimulate the local economy by encouraging controlled and
appropriate commercial, industrial, residential and recreational growth
which will provide for local employment, local shopping, and local
recreational opportunities, which will strengthen the local tax base and
at the same time minimize the negative aspects of these growth
pressures.
F. To encourage and promote the provisions of a reasonable range and
variety of housing types to meet the needs of all Township residents,
newly formed households, growing families and senior citizens.
G. To strive for coordination of land use planning and zoning between
adjacent communities and among regional municipalities.
H. To encourage the imagination of architects and site planners by
providing for innovative residential, commercial, and industrial
concepts as opposed to rigid, inflexible, conventional land use controls.
I. To maintain and enhance Warrington Township as a desirable place in
which to live, work, shop and play, by the employment of high standards
to guide the quality of future and existing development while at the
same time providing community facilities and services on a sound fiscal
basis.
J. To use the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, as a
guide for making decisions regarding the physical development of land
and as the basis for evaluating proposed actions affecting physical
development of land in Warrington Township.
§ 370-104 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-105
1:684
§ 370-105. Construal of provisions. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-05]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals
and the general welfare of the Township and its citizens. It is intended
that these minimum requirements be implemented in a way allowing
appropriate flexibility in the future development of the Township and that
the Board of Supervisors use sound professional judgment in any decisions
concerning the implementation of these minimum requirements for the
ultimate benefits of the Township and its citizens. It is not intended by
this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations
previously adopted or permits previously issued by the Township which are
not in conflict with any provisions of this chapter, nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants,
building restrictions or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of the building, or requires a larger open space than is imposed or
required by such ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits or by easements,
covenants, building restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 370-106. Township exemption. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No.
00-16; amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to facilities owned by
Warrington Township or facilities owned by a municipal authority created
by Warrington Township that are intended for legitimate governmental or
public health or safety purposes. The requirements of this chapter shall
apply to occupiable space owned by Warrington Township or a municipal
authority created by Warrington Township. For the purpose of this section,
"Township facilities" shall mean water wells, pump stations, and similar
utilities, including protective sheds and other structures; public and school
district bus shelters; and Township-owned communications facilities.
§ 370-107. Applicability. [Added 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
A. No building, structure, area of a use or land shall be used, subdivided,
occupied, erected, moved, structurally altered, enlarged, constructed,
converted, maintained, extended, created, reconstructed, replaced,
changed in use, excavated or expanded in intensity except pursuant to
the regulations and procedures of this chapter.
B. This chapter permits, prohibits, regulates, restricts and determines:
(1) Uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water.
(2) Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal, and use of structures.
§ 370-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-107
1:685
(3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by
uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards, and other open
spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures.
(4) Density of population and intensity of use.
(5) Protection and preservation of natural resources and agricultural
land activities.
§ 370-107 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-107
1:686
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 370-201. Word usage.
§ 370-202. Definitions. [Amended 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4;
7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-12; 8-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-15; 3-7-1989
by Ord. No. 89-2; 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A; 11-22-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-17; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
96-1; 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6; 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1;
3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6; 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 6-9-1998
by Ord. No. 98-13; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6; 2-8-2000 by Ord. No.
00-5; 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10-A; 2-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1;
2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 01-2; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-05;
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-09]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached from
the main building, but on the same lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the main use of land or of a
building, but on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.
A. Definitions are included in order to facilitate the interpretation of this
chapter for administrative purposes and the carrying out of duties by
appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purpose
of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation,
company, partnership, trust or individual.
(3) The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or
occupied."
(4) The word "building" includes "structure."
(5) The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel."
(6) The word "shall" is always mandatory.
(7) The word "may" is always permissive.
(8) The word "floodplain" shall be substituted for "floodway" in all
sections of this chapter except in §§ 370-3603 and 370-3707F(4).
§ 370-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:687
ACTIVE RECREATION AREA — An area(s) of a site or lot generally flat, dry
and clear of any trees or other vegetation other than grass and suitable for
active recreation such as baseball, football, soccer, tennis or basketball.
AGE-QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER COMMUNITY — A residential
community consisting of clusters of not less than four single-family
detached dwellings, having a common courtyard area as an appurtenance,
which shall be permanently occupied by no more than three persons, at
least one of whom shall be 55 years of age or older, and further providing
that no person under the age of 19 shall occupy a dwelling for more
than three months in a calendar year. Such development may also provide
the following facilities and services for the exclusive use of the residents:
physical therapy facilities, clubhouse, auditorium, recreation facilities and
other ancillary personal services deemed to be appropriate by the Board of
Supervisors. The provision of nursing beds or other long-term medical care
facilities are neither required nor shall they be permitted.
AGE-QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A residential community
consisting of single-family detached dwellings which shall be permanently
occupied by no more than three persons, at least one of whom shall be 55
years of age or older, and further providing that no person under the age of
19 shall occupy a dwelling for more than three months in a calendar year.
Such development may also provide the following facilities and services for
the exclusive use of the residents: physical therapy facilities, clubhouse,
auditorium, recreation facilities and other ancillary personal services
deemed to be appropriate by the Board of Supervisors. The provision of
nursing beds or other long-term medical care facilities are neither required
nor shall they be permitted.
AGE-QUALIFIED TOWNHOUSE/COURTYARD WITH A GARAGE — A singlefamily
attached dwelling unit with one dwelling unit from ground to roof,
having an individual outside access, a common yard area, with an attached
garage and attached side by side through the use of common or garden
walls. There shall be not more than 19 dwelling units per building; provided
that no greater than eight dwelling units shall face in any one direction prior
to turning at a ninety-degree angle to form a courtyard or an "L" shape. All
units shall be permanently occupied by no more than three persons, at least
one of whom shall be 55 years of age or older, and further, providing that
no person under the age of 19 shall occupy a dwelling for more than three
months in a calendar year.
AGRICULTURAL SOILS, PRIME — Soils classified as prime farmland in map
unit descriptions in the most recent version of the Bucks County Soil Survey
in effect, as published electronically by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, as amended from time to time.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-04; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
AIRFIELD, PRIVATE — Land used for the takeoff, landing, storage and
maintenance of heavier-than-air aircraft of less than 12,500 pounds gross
weight and associated hangars, office and other accessory structures.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:688
ALLUVIAL SOIL — Deposits of unconsolidated materials, such as gravel,
sand, silt, clay, and various mixtures of these, deposited by running
water.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — A source of energy generated from solar, wind,
geothermal or a similar renewable energy source, capable of adding energy
and utility provisions to a permitted use.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-16]
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — A private facility capable of converting
alternative energy sources into a viable energy source and utility provisions
for a permitted use. Such facilities may include solar panels, windmills,
wind turbines, geothermal systems and/or other similar renewable energy
technologies.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
ANAEROBIC DIGESTION — A process in which microorganisms break
down biodegradable material (biomass) in the absence of oxygen. It can be
used for industrial or domestic purposes to manage waste and/or to release
energy for cooking, heating or electric generation. All such facilities shall be
prohibited as an alternative or emerging energy facility.[Added 6-24-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities defined below.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02]
AREA DEVOTED TO BURIAL — Any land area for which an occupancy
permit has been issued and which, within the specifications of this chapter,
is approved for burial.
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY — A premises, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter, assisted-living services, assistance
or supervision and supplemental health care services are provided for a
period exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives
of the operator, who require assistance or supervision in matters such
as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation from the
The following soils in Warrington Township are alluvial:
(1) Bowmansville-Knauers silt loam (Bo).
(2) Hatboro silt loam (Ha).
(3) Rowland silt loam (Ro).
A.
Soils are described and delineated in the most recent version of the
Bucks County Soil Survey in effect, as published electronically by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from time to
time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
B.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:689
residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for selfadministration.[
Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08]
ATTACHED ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative or
emerging energy facility that is physically mounted, attached and/or
connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted
principal building in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and
building code requirements.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BLOCK — A parcel of land bounded on all sides by one or any combination of
the following: streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, excluding sidings
and spurs, corporate boundaries of Warrington Township.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers
or walls, including tents, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars,
mobile homes, or other structures on wheels, or having other supports,
and any unroofed platform, terrace or porch having a vertical face higher
than three feet above the level of the ground from which the building is
measured. A building may include more than one dwelling unit.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section
areas, excluding cornices, unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves
and gutters of all buildings on a lot.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of a lot in which buildings may be
erected, as determined by the minimum required front, side and rear yard
setbacks.
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard or setback required for the
district in which the lot is located, to be measured from the ultimate rightof-
way; the setback line.
CARTWAY — Actual improved or unimproved traveling surface commonly
understood as that area set aside for the passage of motor vehicles. Edge of
cartway where no curb exists shall be defined as curbline. Cartway widths
and classifications shall be those specified in Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or utility or light pole.[Added 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
COLUMBARIUM — A structure of vaults lined with recesses for the storage
of cinerary urns.
COMMON PARKING AREAS — Designated parking areas for more than
five vehicles located and intended for nonrestricted public use for residents
and patrons and which shall be required to conform to all ordinance
requirements.134
COMMUNITY CENTER — A community center shall include an educational,
social or recreational center operated by the Township or by an educational,
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:690
philanthropic or religious institution which is not conducted as a
commercial enterprise and which is not a use which is customarily carried
on as a for-profit business and which does not include residential facilities
for chronically ill or other persons who need institutional care due to illness,
disability, or who are part of a criminal justice program.[Added 1-23-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-O-1]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Warrington Township Growth
Management Plan and 537 Sewage Facilities Plan Update, pursuant to
and meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and especially §§ 10301 through
10303.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is not appropriate to a particular zone
district as a whole but which may be suitable in certain localities within
the district only when specific conditions and factors prescribed for such
cases within this chapter are present. Conditional uses are allowed or
denied by the Board of Supervisors after recommendations by the Planning
Commission.[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
CONTRACTING — Shall include office and supply shops as well as building
supplies, cement, electric, heating, plumbing, masonry, painting,
landscaping and roofing, provided all outside storage of building materials
shall be screened with a twenty-five-foot-wide landscape buffer as required
within § 370-3607 herein, and all storage areas shall be located at the rear
of the property.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store offering primarily groceries,
prepared food items and other small consumer items intended for quick
carry-out trade. Where sale of gasoline or fuel is proposed, the use shall be
located only in a district where a motor vehicle service station is permitted
and only where the requirements for a motor vehicle service station are
met.
CREMATORIUM — A structure which houses a crematory furnace for the
incineration of the dead.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A residential street with one end open for
vehicular and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a
vehicular turnabout.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-O-09]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
134. Editor's Note: The definitions of "communications antenna," "communications equipment
building," and "communications tower," which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:691
subdivision of land or a land development.[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-04]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a parcel of
land, including a plot of subdivision, all covenants related to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities. The development plan shall include all other information,
maps, application forms, drawings and supporting documentation as
required by this chapter and Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 2-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
DWELLING TYPES —
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A single-family residence on an
individual lot with private yards on all four sides of the house.
A.
TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — Two dwelling units accommodating
two families which are attached side by side through the use of a
common party wall and having one side yard adjacent to each dwelling
unit.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — Two dwelling units accommodating two
families which are located one over the other, and having two side
yards.
C.
FOUR-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — Four dwelling units accommodating
four families, two units of which are located directly over the other two
units; a combination of both the single-family semidetached and the
two-family detached structures.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY ZERO LOT LINES — A dwelling unit accommodating
a single-family dwelling with one side yard and one abutting wall which
shall not be a party wall to the adjacent dwelling which shall be of the
same type.
E.
PATIO HOUSE DWELLING — A single-family detached or semidetached
unit, with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having individual
outside access. The lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall of four feet to
six feet in height in a compatible material, finish and design. All living
spaces, i.e., living rooms, den and bedrooms, shall open into a major
open area or patio. The units have common off-street parking.
F.
ATRIUM HOUSE DWELLING — A single-family, attached, one-story
dwelling unit with individual outside access. The lot shall be fully
enclosed by a wall at least seven feet high. A private yard, herein called
an "atrium," shall be included on each lot. All living spaces, i.e., living
rooms, den, and bedrooms, shall open into the atrium.
G.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:692
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building having two or more dwelling
units which may have either a common or independent outside access.
Said units may be arranged horizontally one above the other or
vertically separated by party walls. It is the intention to include within
this definition of "multifamily dwelling" all recognized architectural
types or structures accommodating two or more dwelling units in the
same building, whether the individual units are for lease or sale.
H.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in an owner-occupied,
single-family residence for which no rent or other fee is chargeable,
and which is used exclusively as living quarters by a person or persons
related by blood or marriage to the owner.
I.
TOWNHOUSE — Includes the following dwelling types:
TOWNHOUSE WITH A GARAGE — A single-family attached
dwelling unit with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having an
individual outside access, an individual yard area with an attached
garage, and is attached side by side through the use of party walls.
There shall be no more than eight dwelling units per building, and
a maximum of 35% of the units shall be allowed at this maximum.
(1)
TOWNHOUSE WITHOUT A GARAGE — A single-family attached
dwelling unit with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having an
individual outside access, with an individual yard area, without an
attached garage, and is attached side by side through the use of
party walls. There shall be no more than eight dwelling units per
building, and a maximum of 50% of the units shall be allowed at
this maximum.
(2)
TOWNHOUSE/COURTYARD — A single-family attached dwelling
unit with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having an
individual outside access, a common yard area, without an attached
garage, and is attached side by side through the use of party
walls. There shall be no more than 19 dwelling units per building;
provided that no greater than eight dwelling units shall face in any
one direction prior to turning at a ninety-degree angle to form a
courtyard or an "L" shape.
(3)
J.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Multifamily dwelling units where individual
dwelling units share a common outside access. They share with other
units a common yard area, which is the sum of the required lot areas
of all dwelling units within the building. There shall be no more than
six dwelling units sharing a common access, and no apartment building
shall exceed 300 feet in length without having a through access for fire
equipment to the rear of the building.
K.
MULTIPLEX — A single-family attached unit with independent outside
access. Units must be arranged in a variety of configurations: side by
side, back to back, or vertically with no more than five units in any
building, but they shall not average more than four units per building
in the development.
L.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:693
ELECTRONIC NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality through the
Internet of the time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing, pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 10109.[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
EMERGENCY — A condition that:[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02]
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Fire, ambulance, rescue and other emergency
services of a municipal or volunteer nature; a community meeting room
is permitted as accessory to the emergency services center.[Added
1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-1]
EMERGING ENERGY — A source of energy generated from technology
advancements in renewable energy sources, other than solar, water, wind
or geothermal sources, including but not limited to hydrogen fuel cells,
biomass or low-head hydro capable of providing energy and utility
provisions to a permitted use.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
EMERGING ENERGY FACILITY — A private facility capable of converting
emerging energy sources into a viable energy source and utility provisions
for a permitted use.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA —
MID-RISE APARTMENT DWELLING — Buildings where individual
dwelling units share a common outside access and elevators serve each
floor. Each unit shares with other units a common yard area, which
is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the
building.
M.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
Those portions of a site, excluding resource protection areas, which
are environmentally sensitive, but the degree of sensitivity will be
dependent upon location, type of project, alternative and mitigating
protection methods, and similar parameters related to a specific site
or project. Sensitive areas which must be recognized, evaluated and
addressed include:
(1) Streams, Type II.
(2) Water body, Type II.
(3) Transition areas.
(4) Prime agricultural soils.
A.
Evaluation and regulation of sensitive areas shall be in accordance with
criteria presented in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
B.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:694
EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or cabinet containing
communications equipment required for the operation of a tower-based
wireless communications facility or a non-tower wireless communications
facility.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding communications
towers and communications antennas, as defined herein.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having a financial interest in the
alternative and/or emerging energy facility, including their successors and
assigns.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
FAMILY — Any number of persons living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, provided that this shall not be interpreted to include
more than three roomers or boarders.
FARM BUILDINGS — Any building located on one acre or more of land and
used for the storage of agricultural equipment or farm produce, or housing
livestock or poultry. The term "farm building" shall not include dwellings.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-02]
FLAG — That portion of a flag lot containing the buildable area of a flag lot.
No portion of the staff shall be included in the flag.[Added 6-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
FLOODPLAIN RESTRICTION OVERLAY — An area or areas of special
restriction in addition to those of existing zoning based on the flood hazard
areas delineated by the one-hundred-year floodplain line and/or elevations,
as established in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Township of
Warrington, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration (FEMA/
FIA), and dated March 21, 2017, or the more recent revision thereof,
and Article XXXVI and § 370-3603, of this chapter.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
FOREST — Woodland comprising:
FREESTANDING ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative or
emerging energy facility that is not physically mounted, attached and/or
connected (except utility and energy transfer connections) to a permitted
principal building. All such facilities shall be considered a separate or
accessory structure that has the abilities to convert and convey energy
One or more acres of wooded land where the largest trees measure at
least six inches diameter at breast height (dbh) or 4.5 feet from the
ground; or
A.
A grove of trees forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure
at least 10 inches dbh.
B.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:695
to the principal use in accordance with all pertinent zoning, utility and
building code requirements.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
GARDEN CENTER — A garden center is a type of retail store for the sale
of nursery products, plants, garden supplies, flowers and lawn furniture,
provided: greenhouse(s) may be permitted as an accessory use, provided
that all applicable setbacks for the district are met and the maximum
impervious surface is not exceeded; landscape contracting may be
permitted as an accessory use, provided that the use does not exceed 20%
of the site area or one acre, whichever is less.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY — Energy generated due to variations in the
subsurface temperature of soil, and/or use of hot springs, ground- or surface
water temperature gradients. There are two basic types of geothermal
systems, closed loop and open loop. Closed-loop systems that take
advantage of soil temperature gradients can be either horizontal or vertical
and utilize piping buried at different depths in the earth's soil. Openloop
systems utilize either ground- (well) or surface (lake/stream) water
as the heat exchange medium, taking advantage of water temperature
gradients in the earth or in bodies of surface water. Open-loop systems are
strictly prohibited in Warrington Township.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-16]
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY FACILITY — A passive or mechanical energy
generation facility, whose main purpose is to convert geothermal energy
into thermal energy to a permitted use. Such facilities may use closedloop
piping, heat exchangers, and mechanical infrastructure and related
appurtenant facilities.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
GROSS BUILDABLE SITE AREA — That portion of the gross site area
remaining after subtracting the reserved land (RL) areas and the totally
unusable land (TUL) areas. It is the area on which density calculations are
based.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including easements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center of
joining partitions and from outside wall faces. It is all of the area on which
tenants pay rent but is not limited to public or common areas such as public
toilets, corridors or stairwells, elevator lobbies or enclosed mall spaces.
GROSS SITE AREA (GSA) — The gross lot area as defined by the deed
line.135
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical dimension measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade at the perimeter of the building to
the highest point of the roof.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling or in a building accessory thereto and carried on by the inhabitants
residing therein, providing that the use is clearly incidental and secondary
135. Editor's Note: The definition of "height of a communications tower," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:696
to the use of the dwelling purpose, the exterior appearance of the structure
or premises is constructed and maintained as a residential dwelling, and no
goods are publicly displayed on the premises other than signs as provided
herein.
NONPROFESSIONAL — An occupation for gain or support conducted
only by immediate members of a family residing on the premises and
conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building; provided
no article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced on
the premises by members of the family, and further provided that the
total area of such occupation shall in no case occupy more than 25% of
the floor area of the dwelling, and no more than one commercial vehicle
shall be permitted.
A.
PROFESSIONAL — An occupation for gain or support conducted by
a member of a recognized profession entirely within the dwelling or
accessory building; provided that not more than three persons not in
residence in the dwelling are employed, and further provided that the
total area of such occupation shall in no case occupy more than 25% of
the floor area of the dwelling.
B.
NO-IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation for gain or support
conducted only by immediate members of a family residing on the
premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory
building, provided all of the following criteria are met: [Added
7-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-09]
The business is compatible with the residential use of the property
and surrounding residential uses.
(1)
No article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be
produced on the premises by members of the family residing on the
property.
(2)
The occupation shall occur only in the dwelling, and the total area
of such occupation shall in no case occupy more than 25% of the
floor area of the dwelling.
(3)
(4) No commercial vehicles may be permitted.
(5) No clients or customers are permitted to visit the premises.
No employees are permitted other than the residents of the
dwelling.
(6)
(7) No outside equipment storage is permitted.
(8) No modification of the dwelling.
No advertising of the home address as a business location is
permitted.
(9)
(10)No bulk deliveries or pickups are permitted.
C.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:697
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Includes churches, meeting houses, mosques, and
temples.
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils classified as hydric in map unit descriptions located
in the most recent version of the Bucks County Soil Survey, as electronically
published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, as amended from
time to time.[Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04; amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Any area(s) with surface considered to be
impervious or nonpervious, such as buildings, walks, roads, parking spaces,
loading areas, etc.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include but are not limited to streets,
sidewalks, pavement roofs, or driveway areas. Any surface areas designed
to be pavers, gravel, or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious
surfaces.[Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
INDEPENDENT SENIOR RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A residential
community consisting of townhouse and/or multifamily dwellings of which
not less than 50% are restricted for permanent occupancy by no more than
three persons, at least one of whom shall be 55 years of age or older, and
further providing that no person under the age of 19 shall occupy a dwelling
for more than three months in a calendar year. Such development may also
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(11)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(12)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(13)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(14)
(15)The business may not involve any illegal activity.
Local: 400 seats or less in the sanctuary or main worship space; allows
for traditional religious instruction (excluding a school or day care),
meetings, social events, and other activities directly related to religious
use; church offices and residence by an officiating clergyman are
permitted.
A.
Community: 401 or more seats in the sanctuary or main worship space;
allows for traditional religious instruction, meetings, social events,
religious day schools and day care; church offices and residence by an
officiating clergyman are permitted.
B.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:698
provide the following facilities and services for the use of the residents:
clubhouse, community room and recreation facilities.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
collection, storage and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discharged material or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles, or part thereof, for sale or other use
or disposition of the same. The deposit or storage of two or more motor
vehicles not having valid inspection stickers issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, or two or more wrecked or broken vehicles,
or the major part of two or more such vehicles is prohibited except in a
junkyard district. Storage of motor vehicles not having a valid registration
sticker in a residential district is especially prohibited.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
No material shall be placed in any junkyard in such a manner that it is
capable of being transferred out of the junkyard by wind, water or other
natural causes.
A.
B. The boundaries of any junkyard shall at all times be clearly delineated.
All paper, rags, cloth and other fibers and activities involving the same,
other than loading and unloading, shall be within fully enclosed
buildings.
C.
All junkyard materials and activities not within fully enclosed buildings
shall be surrounded by a fence at least eight feet in height and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in such fence shall be similarly
constructed and maintained and shall be kept locked at all times when
the junkyard is not in operation. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D.
All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the
breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin. When necessary,
this shall be accomplished by enclosure in containers, raising of
materials above the ground, separation of types of materials,
preventing the collection of stagnant water, extermination procedures,
or other means.
E.
No burning shall be carried on in any junkyard except in suitable
containers at appropriate locations and times. Fire hazards shall be
prevented by organization and segregation of stored materials, with
particular attention to the separation of combustibles from other
materials and enclosure of combustibles where necessary, by the
separation of combustibles where necessary, by the provision of
adequate aisles for escape and firefighting, and by other necessary
measures.
F.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:699
LANDOWNER — Any person(s) or entity owning property within Warrington
Township.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
LANDSCAPE PARKING RESERVE — An area equal to a prescribed
percentage of required parking spaces within each parking area put into
landscape material. The calculation of "landscape parking reserve" shall
exclude all end-of-parking-bay islands or other green areas remaining as a
result of parking and circulation road design.
LIMITED-ACCESS SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A multistory climatecontrolled
building used primarily for self-storage, containing separate
lockers/storage areas and where both business and residential customers
directly access their lockers/storage areas subject to certain restrictions
set by the operator of the facility. A limited-access self-storage facility shall
be subject to the following requirements:[Added 12-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-24]
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
All storage shall be performed in a completely enclosed building via one
or more loading areas and/or doors.
A.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:700
LOT — A parcel of land on which a main building and any accessory building
are or may be placed, together with the required open spaces.
LOT AREA, GROSS — The gross site area defined by the deed line.
LOT AREA, NET — Deeded lot area remaining after subtracting rights-ofway.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting on two or more streets
at their intersection or on two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle less than 135°.[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, DEVELOPED — See "lot, improved."[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-14]
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — See "lot, through."[Amended 6-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, FLAG — A lot consisting of a "flag" and a "staff," both held in fee
simple, which does not meet minimum frontage requirements.[Added
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
No exterior doors shall be used for direct storage, except on the side of
the building where the loading areas are located, and so long as such
doors are not adjacent to residential homes. However, doors shall be
permitted to access the office/retail portion of the building, the loading
areas, and the common areas of the building and for emergency access.
B.
C. No outside storage.
D. The property shall have direct frontage and access on an arterial road.
A security gate shall be provided that restricts access to the loading
areas.
E.
A rendering or photo of the proposed building shall be provided to
the Township and approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
conditional use hearing.
F.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:701
LOT, IMPROVED — A lot with buildings or structures.[Added 6-10-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, ISOLATED — An undeveloped, substandard lot in separate ownership
from surrounding property and not meeting area or bulk requirements for
the zone in which it is located.[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A through lot with frontage on two parallel
streets with vehicular access restricted to only one of the streets.[Added
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, SUBSTANDARD — A parcel of land that has less than the minimum
area or minimum dimensions required in the zone in which the lot is
located.[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts on two parallel streets or that fronts
on two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.[Added
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:702
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
MAILED NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality by first-class mail of the
time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered at the hearing, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10109.[Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
MAUSOLEUM — A stone building with place for entombment of the dead
above ground.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT — Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et
seq.[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a medical marijuana permit issued by the
Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act to dispense medical
marijuana. The term does not include a Health Care Medical Marijuana
Organization under Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a
natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other entity,
or any combination thereof, which holds a medical marijuana permit from
the Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act to grow and
process medical marijuana. The term does not include a Health Care
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:703
Medical Marijuana Organization under Chapter 19 of the Medical
Marijuana Act.[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PERMIT — An authorization issued by the
Department of Health to a medical marijuana dispensary or a medical
marijuana grower/processor to conduct activities under the Medical
Marijuana Act.[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
MINI WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings with individual,
controlled access compartments for rental storage of materials and
merchandise and from which they may be distributed, but not sold.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park
owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED HOME —
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership, which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Such use shall include a municipal
administration building, police barracks, library, public works facility, road
maintenance facilities, public water or wastewater facilities or recreation
building.[Added 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-1]
NET GROSS BUILDABLE SITE AREA (NGBSA) — That portion of the gross
buildable site area remaining after subtracting the partly unusable land
areas. It is the area on which the common open space requirement is
calculated.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCFs shall
A single-family structure intended for permanent occupancy or use as
an office or place of assembly, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. Such a structure arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations. For floodplain management purposes, this definition shall
also include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
A.
The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be
synonymous in this chapter.
B.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:704
not include support structures for antennas and related equipment.[Added
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot that does not conform to the dimensional
regulations of this chapter for the district in which it was located, but which
lot was held in single and separate ownership at the effective date of this
chapter, and lawful at the time it was established.[Amended 12-15-1987
by Ord. No. 87-20; 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE —
NONCONFORMING USE —
NONPARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — Any landowner except those on
whose property all or a portion of an alternative and/or emerging energy
facility is located pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
NURSING HOME — All skilled nursing and intermediate care facilities
operated for profit and nonprofit as defined in the Human Services Code,
Act 92 of December 28, 2015, and as may be amended.136[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A structure or part of a structure not designed to comply with the
applicable use provisions in this chapter or amendments heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited
to, nonconforming signs.
A.
A structure that does not conform to a dimensional regulation
prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is located or
to regulations for off-street parking, off-street loading or accessory
buildings, but which structure was in existence at the time of the
effective date of this chapter and was lawful at the time it was
established. [Amended 12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20; 6-10-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
B.
A use, whether of land or of a structure, which does not comply with
the applicable use provisions of this chapter or amendments heretofore
or hereafter enacted where such was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
A.
A use of a building or lot that does not conform to a use regulation
prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is located, but
which was in existence at the effective date of this chapter, was lawful
at the time it was established, and is duly recorded under the provisions
of § 370-3601. [Amended 12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20; 6-10-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
B.
136. Editor's Note: See 62 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:705
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A building located on a parcel of land utilized
as a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of Warrington
Township.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
OPEN SPACE —
Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenities, buffers or
transition areas which is freely accessible to all residents. It is land
protected by the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, to ensure that it remains in such
uses. Open space shall be a parcel or parcels of land, or an area
of water, or a combination of land and water on a site which are
logically interrelated, interconnected, and designed for the stated use.
Open space does not include streets or rights-of-way, required yards or
lot areas or parking areas. Open space shall be substantially free of
structures but may contain such improvements as finally approved as
appropriate for the recreation of the residents. Open space may include
environmentally sensitive areas, unless otherwise noted below.
A.
Open space shall consist of two types, common and active open space:
COMMON OPEN SPACE (COS) — All open space, except active
open space. Common open space may contain subsurface and
drainage structures, utilities, etc., as determined to be necessary
by the Township, provided they are properly restricted and subject
to necessary easements to the satisfaction of the Township.
(1)
ACTIVE OPEN SPACE (SOS) — A parcel of land which is generally
flat, dry and clear of any vegetation other than grass, and which
is suitable as an active recreation area and developed according
to the Township's Comprehensive Plan standards. The recreation
facilities and design of open space shall be subject to the approval
of the Board of Supervisors. Common recreation areas shall not be
considered part of an active open space area.
(2)
B.
Common open space may be set aside and maintained in one or a
combination of the following ways upon approval of the Township.
Active open space may only use the "dedicated" or "development" form
of ownership.
DEED-RESTRICTED AREAS — Required open space which is
contained within the deeded lot areas of individual residential
lots. Deed-restricted open space shall not be used to calculate the
minimum lot areas required by Township ordinances; shall not be
used as part of the required front, side or rear yards; and shall be
kept free of all structures which would limit or preclude the use or
access of the open space areas, except for those structures or other
facilities associated with storm drainage or other utilities.
(1)
DEDICATED OPEN SPACE — An area or areas dedicated in fee
simple to the Township for use by all residents. Land to be
dedicated shall be of a size, dimension, character and location
(2)
C.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:706
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the alternative and/or emerging energy facility.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
PARKING BAY — A length of parking stalls measured along the narrow
dimension, whether contiguous or not, along which residents or patrons
must walk to get to residential or commercial uses.
PARKING RESERVE AREA — An area(s) held in reserve for future parking
expansion.
PARKING SPACE — That area defined by paint stripes or some other means
of delineation which is meant solely for the occupation of a motor vehicle.
Further, in calculating impervious coverage area required by parking
requirements, 450 square feet shall be allotted for each car. This figure
includes space assigned to moving lanes, access drives, and patron loading
and unloading areas. It does not include areas allotted for commercial
loading and unloading. These areas shall be calculated based on actual
suitable for use as park and open space, and shall have suitable
access as determined by the Board. In general, land to be dedicated
shall have an area of not less than five acres. If a tract of less
than five acres would result, the Board may require such land to
be located on the periphery of the development so that a tract of
sufficient size will result when additional open space is obtained via
dedication when adjacent land is developed. In no case, however,
shall an area of less than 2.5 acres be dedicated if it would be
impractical or impossible to secure additional adjacent land in the
future.
DEVELOPMENT OWNERSHIP OF COMMON OPEN SPACE —
Areas set aside for open space use and governed by the
establishment of an organization of development residents for the
ownership and administration of the area pursuant to § 705(d)(1)
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247), as
amended.137
(3)
If it is determined that open space land as represented on a subdivision
or land development plan is not suitable with regard to the size, shape,
location, access or provisions for maintenance, the Township may, at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, require that open space
be provided through payment of a fee in lieu of land and/or facilities.
This fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the acreage that
would otherwise be dedicated pursuant to this section, as stated in the
adopted Fee Schedule. Such payment shall be made to the Warrington
Township Parks and Recreation Board, to be used for the acquisition,
development, or improvement of open space land that will be available
and accessible to and that will benefit the residents of the development.
This option is available in all zoning districts within the Township in
which open space is required.
D.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(d)(1).
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:707
designed areas. It does not include green areas left as a result of parking
area and circulation road designs.
PARTIALLY UNUSABLE LAND (PUL) — That portion of the resource
protection area containing land which has environmentally sensitive
features making it only partially usable for development and including areas
with slopes greater than 8% forest areas.
PASSIVE RECREATION AREA — An area(s) of a site or lot which may be
steeply sloped, heavily vegetated, wet or containing ponds, lake shores or
streams and generally suited for woodland walks, nature study, fishing and
picnicking.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY — A premises, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter, and personal assistance or
supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours, for four or more
adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services
in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but who do require assistance
or supervision in activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily
living.[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08]
PERSONS — Individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
companies, firms, partnerships, limited-liability companies, corporations
and other entities established pursuant to statutes of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, provided that "person" does not include or apply to the
Township or to any department or agency of the Township.138[Added
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A development for an area
of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity
for a number of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not
necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot
coverage, and required open space to the regulations established in any
zoning district created from time to time under the provision of this chapter,
but in which development is governed by the standards and requirements
of Article IX herein.
PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIALS — Pictures, drawings, video recordings,
movies, photographs or other depictions or printed or electronic matter and
paraphernalia, which, if sold knowingly to a child under 18 years of age,
would violation the criminal laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
effect a the time of the sale.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-06]
PRIVATE ENERGY AND UTILITY PROVIDER — A principal use owned,
operated and/or maintained by a private or independent utility company
for the purposes of providing energy within a defined service area or grid
system in accordance with the provisions established by the Public Utility
Commission and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
138. Editor's Note: Former definition of "Planning Department," added 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:708
PRIVATE PARKING AREAS — Designed parking areas for five or less
vehicles located and intended for the use of specific lot owners or residents
and which shall not be required to conform to building setback
requirements.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — A private or municipal corporation organized and
existing for the distribution and sale of water, electricity, gas or the
collection and disposal of sanitary waste or sewage in accordance with the
law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate governing
body.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.
RENEWABLE ENERGY — Energy that comes from resources which are
continually replenished, such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves,
hydroelectric, biomass, hydrogen and geothermal heat.[Added 6-24-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
RESERVED LAND (RL) — That portion of the gross site area consisting of
existing road and utility rights-of-way and easements; all ultimate rightsof-
way for existing streets as specified in Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, and/or all
future street rights-of-way and other land reserved by virtue of the official
Township Map; and all land shown on previously recorded subdivision and/
or development plans as reserved from development for use as open space
or resource protection.
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS —
That portion of the gross site area which contains certain natural
resources subject to environmental limitations which must be
protected. This land includes areas of a site which are either totally
or partially unusable land as a result of the existence of certain
environmental features and includes such areas as follows:
(1) Streams, Type I.
(2) Water body, Type I.
(3) Wetlands.
(4) Steep slopes.
(5) Forest.
(6) Prime agricultural soils.
A.
Type I streams and water bodies, as well as wetlands, shall represent
totally unusable lands which cannot be developed because of the
existence of natural resources, which must be fully protected, and
B.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:709
RESTRICTED RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA — That portion of the
resource protection areas regulated by environmental restriction standards
to determine the extent which protection areas cannot be disturbed. Totally
unusable lands shall be those restricted areas with 100% limitations.
Partially unusable lands shall be those restricted areas with less than 100%
limitations.
RETAIL STORE — Shops and stores selling commodities and goods to
consumers. Not included under this use are the over-the-counter sale of
alcoholic beverages in taverns and bars, and stores with greater than 15
square feet of floor area devoted to the display of pornographic materials.
For the purposes of this definition, any retail store that provides for gasoline
or fuel sales for motor vehicles directly to retail customers shall be
considered to be a motor vehicle service station. No drive-through is
permitted.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-06]
RIGHTS-OF-WAY —
SCHOOL — Any public, parochial or private place of instruction under
the supervision of a state or lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing
body and with standards of instruction meeting the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but excluding privately operated schools of
trade, avocation or business.
SENIOR LIVING COMMUNITY — A development consisting of residential
living units exclusively for persons who are 55 years of age or older, and for
married couples with one spouse or both spouses being 55 years of age or
older. Such developments shall provide nursing facilities, living units, health
care services, and meals for residents (with or without common dining
facilities). Such development may also provide the following facilities and
services for the exclusive use of the residents: physical therapy facilities,
auditorium, recreation facilities, on-site service shops, and other ancillary
services deemed to be appropriate by the Board of Supervisors.
SERVICE BUSINESS DEALING WITH CUSTOMERS — Beauty parlor,
barbershop, shoe repair shop, dressmaking, travel agency, tailor, millinery,
photographer, copy service, fax mailbox, photographic studio or similar
shop.[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-05]
SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the required
minimum distance between any building to be erected and the adjacent
ultimate right-of-way. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the
which are regulated by state or federal statutes. Steep slopes and forest
areas represent partially unusable lands.
EXISTING — The preset legal right-of-way as established by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate governing body
and currently in existence.
A.
ULTIMATE — The legal street; the area or public way owned or
acquired by the Township at the time of subdivision by dedication. That
line from which all future property setbacks are measured. The street
line.
B.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:710
front street ultimate right-of-way line which abuts the property upon which
said building is located and shall be parallel to said ultimate right-of-way
line.
SITE AREA, GROSS — The gross lot area as defined by the deed line.
SITE AREA, NET — The net site area shall have the same definition as
"gross buildable site area." Wherever a reference to the "net site area"
exists in this chapter, it shall be substituted with the term "gross buildable
site area."
SOLAR ENERGY — Energy that is derived from the sun and typically
involves the use of photovoltaic (PV) panels to directly convert sunlight to
electrical energy, flat-panel thermal collectors used for hot water, space
heaters, swimming pools and greenhouses, and high-intensity mirror
collection systems for heating of fluids to temperatures sufficient to power
steam electric-generating facilities. Mirror solar collection systems are
specifically prohibited from use in Warrington Township.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — A passive or mechanical energy generation
facility whose main purpose is to convert solar (sun) energy into electrical
or thermal energy to a permitted use. Such facilities may use PV or thermal
collectors and include mechanical or electrical infrastructure and related
appurtenant facilities.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
STAFF — That portion of a flag lot containing a private right-of-way
providing direct access from a flag lot to a public right-of-way. The staff shall
extend from the ultimate right-of-way line of the public right-of-way to the
rear property line of the flag lot. No portion of the staff shall be included in
determining the minimum lot area of a flag lot.[Added 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-14]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02]
STEEP SLOPE AREA — That portion of a site with a gradient in excess of
8%.
STREAM — Any stream, channel or stream protection area for conveyance
of surface water, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent
flow. Streams shall be classified as follows:
TYPE I — Area along a water conveyance facility supported by
stormwater runoff from a watershed area of 100 acres or more. The
width of each stream shall be determined by the more extensive limits
of the following:
A.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:711
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the ultimate right-ofway.
STRUCTURE — Any thing built, constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02]
TOTALLY UNUSABLE LAND — The portion of the resource protection area
containing land which cannot be developed and including the following:
FLOODPLAIN — One-hundred-year flood line and/or elevations as
delineated in the Flood Insurance Study for Warrington Township,
as prepared by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development/Federal Insurance Administration.
(1)
(2) Alluvial soils.
CALCULATED FLOOD LIMIT — Line and/or elevations as
established by analysis of the drainage areas using approved
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service or United States Corps of Engineers methods
for one-hundred-year frequency storm event.
(3)
TYPE II — Area along a water conveyance facility supported by
stormwater runoff from a watershed area of less than 100 acres. The
width of each stream shall be determined by the more extensive limits
of the following:
(1) Alluvial soils.
CALCULATED FLOOD LIMITS — Line and/or elevation as
established by analysis of the drainage area using approved United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service or United States Corps of Engineer's methods for a onehundred-
year storm event.
(2)
B.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10% or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
A. Stream, Type I.
B. Water body, Type I.
C. Wetlands.
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:712
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including but not limited to self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 2-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
TOWNHOUSE VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT — A type of planned residential
development consisting of a mixture of varying townhouse dwelling types to
promote flexible and diverse design standards for townhouse development.
TOWNSHIP — Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.[Added
2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs) — The attaching of
development rights to specified lands which are desired by a municipality
to be kept undeveloped, but permitting those rights to be transferred from
those lands so that the development potential which they represent may
occur on other lands where more intensive development is deemed to be
appropriate.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
VARIANCE — The permission granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a public hearing that has been properly advertised as required
by the appropriate municipal code, for an adjustment to some regulation
which, if strictly adhered to, would result in an unnecessary hardship, and
where the permission granted would not be contrary to the public interest,
and would maintain the spirit and original intent of this chapter.
VIDEO GAME ARCADE — A place of business open to serve the general
public where four or more coin-operated or slug-operated amusement
machines are maintained.[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-05]
WATER BODY — Body of water, either natural or artificial, such as a lake,
pond, etc., which retains surface water year around and has a normal water
level in excess of six inches in depth. Water bodies shall consist of the
following types:
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas. Wetland areas
TYPE I — Water body with one acre or more of standing water. The limit
of this water body as regulated by this chapter shall be the top of bank,
or a minimum horizontal dimension of five feet from the maximum
water surface elevation.
A.
TYPE II — Water body with less than one acre of standing water as
defined above.
B.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:713
demonstrate hydric characteristics of soils, vegetation, and/or water table
as specified by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.[Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A mechanical energy or electric-generating
facility whose main purpose is to convert wind to mechanical energy or
supply electricity to a permitted use. Such facilities may include windmills,
wind turbines, blades, spirals, helixes and accessory structures, which may
also include buildings, pumping stations, grinders, substations, electrical
infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant facilities.[Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a generator, which may include
a nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer pad, and supporting energy and
transmission apparatus.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
WINDMILL — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy
into mechanical work, which may include a tower, rotor, gears, shafts, axles
and supporting mechanical energy conversion devices. Windmills may be of
the horizontal or vertical type.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
WINDMILL HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the
tower foundation to the highest point of the windmill rotor plane for vertical
windmills, and the distance from the surface of the tower foundation to the
highest point of the vertical shaft hub supporting the rotor for horizontal
windmills.[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line-of-sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public ROW or other
Township-owned land or property.[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility, or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.[Added 2-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
WOOD-FIRED BOILER — An alternative energy facility designed to burn
wood or other organic fuels, which transfers heated air or liquid through
a piping or ventilation system to a principal use. All such systems are
§ 370-202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-202
1:714
generally contained within an accessory structure that is not intended
for habitation by humans or animals. An outdoor wood-fired boiler may
also be as an outdoor wood-fired furnace, outdoor wood-burning appliance,
outdoor hydraulic heater and/or hot-water stove. All such facilities shall be
prohibited as an alternative or emerging energy facility.[Added 6-24-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
YARD — The following types of yards are hereby established:
FRONT YARD — In residential districts, the required open space, across
the full width of the lot, extending from the street line to the nearest
structure of the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, gutters, or
cornices.
A.
SIDE YARD — The required open space extending from the required
front yard to the required back yard, except as provided for accessory
buildings, extending from the side line of the lot to the nearest
structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, gutters, or
cornices. The width of the side yard shall be measured at right angles
to the side line of the lot.
B.
REAR YARD — The required open space, the full width of the lot except
as provided for accessory buildings, extending from the rear line of the
lot to the nearest structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging
eaves, gutters or cornices. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured
at right angles to the rear line of the lot or if the lot is not rectangular,
then in the general direction of the side yard line.
C.
§ 370-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-202
1:715

ARTICLE III
Classification of Districts
§ 370-301. Classes of districts. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1; 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07;
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Warrington is hereby
divided into districts designated as follows:
RA Residential Agricultural
RA-2 Residential Agricultural
RA-3 Residential Agricultural
RA-4 Residential Agricultural
PRD Planned Residential Development
PRD-M Planned Residential Development — Mobile Home Parks
R-1 Low-Density Residential
R-1-C Residential District
R-2 Medium-Density Residential
R-2I Residential Infill
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
IU Institutional Use District
I-U-A Institutional Age-Qualified Residential Community
I-U-A-1 Institutional Age-Qualified District 1
I-U-B Institutional - Senior Residential Community Multifamily
C-1 Commercial 1
C-2 Commercial 2
PI-1 Planned Industrial Residential
PI-2 Planned Industrial — Mobile Home
OI Professional Office — Light Industry
CR/O Corridor Residential/Office District
CR/O-IU Corridor Residential/Office-Institutional Use District
Loop Overlay District
CBD Central Business District
OS/P Open Space/Parkland District
Q Quarry
CE Cemetery District
J Junkyard
§ 370-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-302
1:717
§ 370-302. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
The Zoning Map of Warrington Township, which is dated March 3, 1992, is
incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be, with all notations,
references, and data shown thereon, made a part of this chapter.
§ 370-303. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on said
map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 370-304. Resource protection. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No.
88-12; 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A]
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of streets
and streams, and lot or property lines as they exist on plans of record at
the time of the adoption of this chapter, unless such district boundary
lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows a lot line, and where it does not scale more than
10 feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions,
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map.
D. In case further uncertainty exists, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the intent of the map as to location of district boundaries.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the resource protection overlay is to identify
those areas in which environmental restrictions must be applied in
order to achieve the resource protection objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan. It is the intent of these regulations to identify only
those areas in which development must be restricted in order to protect
valuable environmental resources.
B. Establishment of overlay district.
(1) The boundary and limits of "resource protection areas" are
generally as shown on the environmental restrictions overlay map
of the Warrington Township Growth Management Plan. The
boundaries of a resource protection overlay district shall be subject
to a resource protection area study on a site-specific basis. The
precise boundary of the overlay district and the enforcement of the
development limitations shall be subject to requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Additional requirements for the protection and preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas, other than those listed in this
chapter as resource protection areas, shall be regulated in Chapter
§ 370-302 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-304
1:718
305, Subdivision and Land Development, under § 305-327,
Environmental performance standards.
C. Applicability. The resource protection regulations and standards
contained herein shall be applicable to all zoning districts in Warrington
Township.
D. Procedure for establishing land use intensities.
(1) To establish the permitted land use intensity for any tract of land,
the applicant shall prepare maps and perform the calculations
specified in §§ 370-305 to 370-307 herein.
(2) Following determination of the gross buildable site area, the
applicant shall develop a site plan based upon the zoning
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
(3) The number of dwelling units permitted on the tract shall be
determined by one of the following methods:
(a) Where minimum lot areas are determinative of land use
intensities (that is, where no maximum density requirements
are specified), the maximum number of units shall be
determined by the maximum number of lots that can be sited
on the tract. In making this determination, restricted resource
protection areas must be designated as common open space
except where specifically permitted as part of lot areas in
§ 370-305.
(b) Where maximum density requirements are determinative (that
is, where maximum density requirements are specified and
minimum lot areas may or may not be specified), the maximum
number of dwelling units shall be determined by the density
applied to the gross buildable site area (GBSA).
E. Procedures for delineating the environmental restriction and
establishing the gross buildable site area. To establish the gross
buildable site area and net gross buildable site area for any tract
proposed for development, the applicant shall prepare the following
maps and perform the following calculations (which calculations are to
be made in accordance with § 370-307).
(1) Submit a map at the same scale as the gross site area map, locating
all reserved land (RL) and resource protection areas.
(2) The reserved land area map shall include the following:
(a) All existing roads and utility rights-of-way and easements.
(b) All ultimate rights-of-way for existing streets as specified in
Appendix C of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, and/
§ 370-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-304
1:719
or all future street rights-of-way and other land reserved by
virtue of the official Township Map.
(c) All land shown on previously recorded subdivisions or land
developments for use as open space or for natural resource
protection.
(3) The resource protection areas map shall include the following:
(a) Identification of areas.
[1] Streams, Type I.
[2] Water body, Type I.
[3] Wetlands.
[4] Steep slopes shall be mapped as follows:
[a] Areas containing slopes of 25% or more.
[b] Areas with a slope of between 25% and 15%.
[c] Areas with a slope of between 15% and 8%.
[5] Forest areas.
[6] All prime agricultural soils within the RA Residential
Agricultural District only. [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-O-04]
(b) Mapping of area. The area of each individual component of the
resource protection area shall be computed and the acreage
shall be itemized and shown on the map. Areas of overlap shall
be indicated. Where alternative methods of identifying
protection areas are indicated, the map shall indicate the
parameters used. For example, both the HUD floodplain and
soil lines shall be indicated for stream delineation.
(4) The restricted resource protection area shall be determined by
applying the environmental restriction standards to the total of
each individual component of resource protection areas.
(5) The gross buildable site area (GBSA) shall be calculated by
subtracting the total of the reserved land (RL) and the portion of
the restricted area designated as totally unusable land (TUL) from
the gross site area (GSA).
(6) The net gross buildable site area shall be calculated by subtracting
the portion of the restricted protection area designated as partially
unusable land (PUL) from the gross buildable site area (GBSA).
§ 370-304 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-305
1:720
§ 370-305. Environmental restriction standards. [Amended
7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-12; 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A;
3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 95-5]
A. Streams, Type I. All Type I streams shall represent totally unusable land
and shall be 100% restricted for purpose of calculating restricted
resource protection areas. Such restricted land must be designated as
common open space and may only be disturbed for purposes of roads,
dams, culverts, water-impounding basins and stormwater and utility
construction. Such construction must be in accordance with state and
federal regulatory agency approval. No structures or impervious
surfaces shall be permitted.
B. Water body, Type I. All Type I water bodies shall represent totally
unusable land and shall be 100% restricted. This land must be
designated as common open space and may only be disturbed for road
or bridge construction in accordance with state and federal regulatory
agency approval. No structures, filling, pipes or diverting of water shall
be permitted except as stated above.
C. Wetland. All wetlands shall represent totally unusable land and shall be
100% restricted. This land must be designated as common open space
and may not be disturbed except as permitted by state and federal
regulatory agencies. If wetland disturbance is approved by state and
federal regulatory agencies, the area shall still be considered 100%
restricted for purposes of determining building densities.
D. Steep slopes.
(1) In areas of steep slopes (i.e., those slopes in excess of 8%), a
portion of the area will be considered restricted resource
protection area as partially unusable land and shall be subject to
certain development limitations. A restricted area shall be based on
the severity of the slope. Regardless of allocation of restricted area,
it shall not be disturbed by regrading or stripping of vegetation.
(a) Slopes between 8% and 15%: A minimum of 60% of this area
shall be considered restricted.
(b) Slopes between 15% and 25%: A minimum of 70% of this area
should be considered restricted.
(c) Slopes in excess of 25%: A minimum of 85% of this area shall
be considered restricted.
(2) Within the RA Residential Agricultural District, the Township may
waive the partly usable land restrictions and recommend greater
encroachment into the areas of steep slopes in order to ensure the
best design of a site for agricultural purposes.
E. Forest.
§ 370-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-305
1:721
§ 370-306. Calculation of gross buildable site area and net gross
buildable site area.
A form for calculating gross buildable site area shall be provided by the
Township to an applicant upon request and shall be completed according to
the requirements herein and shall be submitted to the Township for review
with the required map.
§ 370-307. Open space requirements and application. [Amended
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
Required common and active open space shall be calculated using Form
307,139 provided by the Township. The required open space calculations,
designated areas and recreational facilities shall be so noted on the
subdivision and land development plan(s) in the preliminary or sketch plan
submission. Open space requirements are applicable to all residential and
commercial subdivision and land development and to all planned residential
developments, except for conservation residential developments pursuant
to § 370-405.
(1) Forests in varying degrees provide wildlife habitat, recreational
opportunities and buffers between adjacent land uses. Forests also
mitigate environmental stress by reducing stormwater runoff,
filtering groundwater recharge, controlling erosion and
sedimentation, moderating regional micro-climates and purifying
air. Structures are to be located in forested areas with a minimal
amount of clearing. Forests are an important part of the
environment and protecting 50% of a forest on a development site
is the minimum standard.
(2) In order to promote forest protection, the Township requires
protection of a minimum of 50% of a forest on a site and 80% when
it is associated with another environmentally sensitive resource.
139. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-305 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-307
1:722
ARTICLE IV
RA Residential Agricultural District
§ 370-401. Purpose. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8;
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
The purpose of the RA Residential Agricultural District is to provide areas
within the Township where a low-density rural atmosphere is preserved;
to provide area where continued agricultural use of the land is feasible,
particularly where prime agricultural soils have been identified; to
discourage development patterns which would make agricultural
preservation and a rural residential atmosphere impossible; to discourage
higher densities of development in areas where public utilities, particularly
sewer and water, are not planned to be provided; and to otherwise achieve
the goals and objectives of the Township as set forth in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan for Growth Management in Warrington Township,
Pennsylvania.
§ 370-402. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8;
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-1; 7-9-2002
by Ord. No. 02-06]
The following uses may be permitted as a use by right:
A. Agricultural uses, including the keeping of livestock on lots of three
acres or more. Agricultural uses, include the growing of nursery stock
and tilling of the soil, shall be limited to one head of livestock or 10 fowl
per 40,000 square feet of lot area. Any building or area used for the
keeping or raising of livestock or fowl shall be situated not less than 100
feet from any street line, property line or dwelling, other than the
owner's dwelling.
B. Greenhouse as principal or an accessory use to any permitted or
conditional use within this district, provided:
(1) The minimum site area for such use shall be five acres.
(2) The maximum permitted impervious surface ratio of the site shall
be 20%.
(3) Parking. No less than one off-street parking space per two
employees.
C. Municipal use.
D. Agricultural sales/roadside stands for the seasonal sale of farm or
nursery products produced on the premises, provided:
(1) Only farm produce or nursery material may be sold.
(2) Farm produce and nursery material shall be limited to crops
harvested from plants and plant material.
§ 370-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-402
1:723
(3) At least 50% of the produce or plant material must be grown or
raised on the premises or in the immediate region.
(4) Access/exit to the tract must be controlled by two points. Access/
exit points shall be no more than 24 feet wide.
(5) Sales building or stands shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way.
(6) Parking. No less than one off-street parking space for each 200
square feet of building floor area or a minimum of four spaces,
whichever is greater. All parking shall be behind the legal right-ofway.
E. Kennel. The keeping of more than six dogs that are more than six
months old for breeding, training, selling or boarding for a fee is
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
(2) No animal shelter or runway shall be located closer than 300 feet
from any residential building other than the owner's.
(3) The total number of dogs on the property shall not exceed 25.
(4) Parking. No less than one off-street parking space for each
employee plus one space for each eight animals in capacity, except
for training, where one space shall be provided for each three
animals.
F. Riding academy. Riding academy, livery or boarding stable, subject to
the following provisions:
(1) A lot area of not less than 10 acres shall be required.
(2) Dwellings and accessory farm buildings shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations for agriculture and horticulture.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) No more than one horse per acre shall be permitted.
(4) Horse shows shall be permitted only by approval of the Township
Park and Recreation Board and shall be limited to a specified
number each year for each riding academy.
(5) Parking. No less than one off-street parking space shall be provided
for every three persons present at such facilities when they are
used to capacity.
G. Nursery. The outdoor raising of plants, shrubs and trees for sale and
transplantation. Such material may be field grown or grown within a
greenhouse, provided the following conditions are met:
§ 370-402 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-402
1:724
§ 370-403. Conditional uses. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
94-15A; amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 7-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-06; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-05]
The following uses shall be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the provisions of
§ 370-3602:
(1) The minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(2) Any building or structure shall meet the yard, lot width and setback
requirements for the applicable zoning district for single-family
detached dwelling. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Landscape contracting is permitted as an accessory use to a
nursery operation, including outdoor storage of landscape building
supplies, provided that it does not exceed 20% of the area of the
total nursery operation or one acre, whichever is less.
(4) There shall be a planted buffer with a minimum width of 25 feet
that surrounds all greenhouses and the area of any storage of
landscape building supplies from any adjoining property.
(5) Agricultural sales/roadside stands may be permitted as an
accessory use.
(6) A garden center may be permitted as an accessory use only within
applicable commercial or industrial districts.
H. Single-family detached dwelling, providing that the following standards
are met:
(1) Such use shall be permitted only with water and sewage disposal
systems that are approved by the Township as well as all applicable
regulatory agencies. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-O-07]
(2) The location of the lot shall not interfere with the farm field
operations or otherwise interfere with the operation of existing or
future agriculture uses. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-O-07]
(3) The dimensional standards shall be in accordance with § 370-405A.
I. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Conservation residential developments, provided that the following
standards are met in addition to the standards provided in § 370-3602:
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
§ 370-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-403
1:725
(1) The plan of development shall be designed to ensure that the
maximum amount of land shall be retained for conservation or for
agricultural purposes. Form 307 does not apply to conservation
residential developments. The Township may permit encroachment
into areas of woodlands, steep slopes, or prime agricultural soils
only in order to ensure the best design of the site for conservation
or agricultural purposes. The plan shall provide for a conservation
area and a development area.
(2) Prior to the submission of any application for land development, the
developer/owner shall consult with the Township Planning
Commission in order to delineate the location and boundaries of
the conservation area that will best preserve the environmental,
forest, viewshed, and rural streetscape of the site. The developer/
owner is encouraged to submit a Feasibility Sketch Plan in
accordance with the provisions of § 305-503 of Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) The minimum tract area, measured to the ultimate rights-of-way of
adjoining roads, shall not be less than 25 acres. There shall be no
deductions from this computation other than areas within the
ultimate right-of-way of existing roads and streets.
(4) The minimum size of a conservation area shall be not less than 65%
of the tract area as defined in the previous subsection and shall be
a contiguous area. The boundaries of conservation areas shall be
permanently marked upon the ground at completion by means of
permanent survey markers. The Board of Supervisors may require
other forms of marking in addition to permanent survey markers.
The remainder of the project site shall be the development area.
(5) Only agricultural uses, naturalized basins, constructed wetlands,
reforestation areas, utilities, walking trails in accordance with the
Township's Open Space and Recreation Plan or passive recreation
shall be permitted in the conservation area. No part of any lot and
no structures shall be located in the conservation area, except that
the Township may permit the conservation area to be utilized for
active recreation. In addition, the area within the ultimate right-ofway
of any access road within the conservation area needed to
access the development area shall be considered part of the
conservation area.
(6) Development shall be designed to minimize the amount of
perimeter of the development area adjacent to the conservation
area. The development area shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from existing street rights-of-way. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-O-08]
(7) The permitted gross density shall be 0.7 dwelling units per acre.
Acreage shall be measured to the ultimate right-of-way with no
other deductions except as herein provided.
§ 370-403 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-403
1:726
(a) 140 A bonus density shall be allowed if more than 50% of the
forest area on the site is preserved in the conservation area.
The bonus shall be 0.04 dwelling units per acre gross density
for each three acres of forest preserved over the minimum of
50% required by this chapter.
(b) A bonus density shall be allowed if the project includes the
extension of public sewer service to adjacent or closely
proximate single family homes presently served by on lot
sewage disposal systems. The bonus shall be 0.02 dwelling
units per acre gross density for each home served. Such
service shall be provided to the point of connection at the
property line of such dwelling. Any offsite property owner
requesting future connection to the public sewer extension will
be required to deed restrict the property from further
subdivision. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-08]
(c) A bonus density shall be allowed if the project provides
conservation area in excess of the 65% required. The bonus
shall be 0.08 dwelling units per acre gross density for each 5%
provided in excess of 65%.
(d) Density bonuses may be combined, as appropriate, provided
that the permitted gross density with bonuses shall not exceed
one dwelling unit per acre. When a density bonus results in a
total bonus being a fraction of a unit, if the fraction is 0.5 or
less, it shall be rounded down. If the fraction is greater than
0.5, it shall be rounded up. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-O-08]
(8) Single-family detached dwellings, two-family semidetached
dwellings, single-family zero-lot-line dwellings and townhouses
shall be permitted.
(9) Buffers shall be provided and conform to the requirements of
§ 370-406 of this chapter. In addition to the requirements of
§ 370-406, buffers shall create a well-defined separation between
the development area and the conservation area.
(10) All homeowner's association agreements, agreements of sale for
individual lots and deeds must include a "right-to-farm" provision.
(11) Transferable development rights may not be used in the
development area, and transferable development rights may not
accrue to any conservation area lands.
(12) Public access to the conservation area may be required as the
Board of Supervisors shall deem appropriate. The Township, in its
sole discretion, shall determine the means of permanently
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7)(a) and (b), regarding bonus density, were repealed
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-08.
§ 370-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-403
1:727
preserving the conservation area in perpetuity, which may include
one or more of the following:
(a) Deed in fee to the Township;
(b) Permanently deed restricted from further development by
conservation easement in favor of the Township, but owned by
a homeowner's association;
(c) Conveyed to a conservancy, nonprofit corporation or
association, or similar legal entity; or
(d) Any combination of the above.
(13) All such developments shall be located in a public sewer service
area, so designated by the Township's Sewage Facilities Plan in
accordance with Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act.141
(14) Any such development exceeding 50 dwelling units shall be
connected to existing public streets at two separate locations.
Developments of less than 50 homes must include provisions for
access that are approved by the Township Fire Marshal.
(15) If the approved Township Trail Map shows a trail across the site,
the trail shall be incorporated into the conservation area of the
development.
B. Public school, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Any school shall be served by public water and sewer. [Amended
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
(2) The access drives to any school shall be located in such a manner
that any increased traffic will not be directed upon roads where
farm equipment is frequently mobilized from one field to another
over public roads.
(3) Buffer standards shall create a well-defined separation between
adjoining farmlands and the school in accordance with § 370-3607,
Article XXXVI, Supplemental Regulations, herein.
C. Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,142 tower-based
wireless communications facilities and communications equipment
buildings. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
D. House of worship.
(1) General.
141. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-403 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-403
1:728
(a) It must be served by public water and sewer.
(b) It must meet determinations set forth elsewhere in the chapter
for local or community house of worship.
(c) It must demonstrate the ability to meet the standards for
maximum impervious coverage as set forth in this chapter.
(2) Local.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 15%.
(3) Community.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 15%.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage may be increased to 25%, subject
to the following requirements:
(a) For impervious coverage greater than 15%, the difference
between the volume of runoff from the two-year
predevelopment storm and the two-year post-development
storm must be infiltrated on site in accordance with Chapter
288, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington. Infiltration testing at various locations on the site
must be conducted prior to the conditional use hearing.
(b) When infiltration at the site cannot be achieved, the applicant
may propose other methods of enhancing water quality and
reducing the volume of runoff. The methods must be accepted
by the Township Engineer after review of the infiltration
testing results and test locations.
§ 370-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-403
1:729
(c) Additional allowance for impervious coverage up to a
maximum of 35% may be obtained through the use of
transferable development rights (TDRs) as stipulated in this
chapter, as amended.
E. Flag lots. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
(1) Applications for flag lots must conform to all of the requirements
contained in Article XXXVI, § 370-3602, Conditional uses, of this
chapter and all of the following conditions.
(2) Flag lots must provide direct access to a public road through the
staff of the flag lot by means of a private right-of-way with a
minimum width of 25 feet and a maximum width of 49 feet. The
private right-of-way line shall extend from the ultimate right-of-way
line of the public road to the rear property line of the flag lot. The
width of the staff shall remain constant.
(3) No more than one property may use the private right-of-way.
(4) Flag lots shall contain one single-family detached dwelling and
customary accessory buildings to a single-family detached
dwelling. No other type of dwelling or nonresidential use will be
permitted on a flag lot.
(5) Minimum lot area shall be computed using only the flag area of the
lot. The area of the flag shall be computed from the property lines
of the flag perimeter and the projected private right-of-way line of
the staff. No part of the staff may be included in the minimum lot
area.
(6) All setbacks shall be measured from the property lines and the
projected right-of-way line of the staff.
(7) A dense evergreen screening buffer with a minimum width of 20
feet shall be provided along the property lines of the flag lot
adjacent to all existing dwellings to provide effective year-round
screening.
(8) Area requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area (flag): 3.0 acres.
(b) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 20 feet; minimum total composite: 50 feet.
The minimum side yard shall not include any portion of the
staff.
(d) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15% of flag area.
§ 370-403 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-403
1:730
§ 370-404. Special exception. [Amended 4-15-1986 by Ord. No.
86-2; 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with the
provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-405. Area regulations. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8;
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A; 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06]
(f) Maximum impervious coverage: 15% of total lot area (flag plus
staff).
(g) Minimum width at the front setback line: 100 feet, not
including any portion of the staff.
(9) The private right-of-way must meet all applicable standards
necessary for emergency access and firefighting as identified in
reviews conducted by the Warrington Township Fire Marshal in
accordance with the International Fire Code, as amended from
time to time. If public water is available and no fire hydrant exists
within 500 feet of the proposed flag lot dwelling, the applicant must
install fire hydrants to a point no farther than 500 feet from the
proposed flag lot dwelling in accordance with all applicable
standards of the Warrington Water and Sewer Department. All fire
hydrants must be accessible by firefighting equipment.
(10) Transferable development rights (TDRs) may not be used to create
flag lots.
(11)No flag lot staff may be created within 100 feet of another flag lot
staff.
(12) No flag lot staff may exceed 500 feet in length.
A. Camps or private recreation areas on lots of five acres or more.
B. Home occupations.
C. Accessory uses to the permitted uses under § 370-402.143
D. Accessory apartments subject to the regulations in § 370-3616.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Minimum lot size: three acres.
(2) Minimum building setback: 1/2 of the ultimate right-of-way of each
street the lot abuts or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet either side; minimum total composite, 50 feet.
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Dog kennels, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07.
§ 370-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-405
1:731
(4) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(6) Maximum percent of lot in impervious cover: 15%.
B. Conditional uses, conservation residential developments. [Amended
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
(1) Maximum area ratio of the development area: 35% of the gross site
area.
(2) Minimum conservation area ratio: 65% of the gross site area.
(3) Minimum site area: 25 acres.
(4) The minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet, provided that the
Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Warrington
Township Planning Commission, may permit lot sizes to vary to the
extent necessary to meet the design standards provided at
§ 370-403 hereof.
(5) The following minimum yard requirements shall apply as to the
type of dwelling to which they are applicable:
(a) Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(d) The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Warrington Township Planning Commission, may permit the
setbacks noted above to vary to the extent necessary to meet
the design standards provided at § 370-403 hereof.
(6) The maximum building and impervious combined lot coverage is
80% of lot area, provided that the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Warrington Township Planning
Commission, may permit such building and impervious lot
coverage, as it deems necessary to meet the design standards
provided in § 370-403A hereof; provided, however, that adequate
stormwater management is provided.
C. All other uses. Unless otherwise stipulated in § 370-402, 370-403 or
370-404, above, for all structures, the following dimensional
requirements shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum yards.
(a) Front yards: 100 feet.
§ 370-405 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-405
1:732
§ 370-406. Screening and buffering. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-8; 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
(b) Side yards: there shall be two side yards, neither shall be less
than 75 feet.
(c) Rear yards: 100 feet.
A. General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines of the
development area, there shall be a permanent buffer at least 25 feet in
depth, unless this is modified pursuant to Subsection C or D below. A
screen buffer (as defined herein) shall be provided wherever the
development abuts existing residential uses or zoning and where
abutting other type of uses when deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors to provide sufficient buffering and transition. A softening
buffer (as defined herein) at least 75 feet in depth shall be provided
wherever the development abuts any existing street (as modified by
Subsection C below), drive, or parking area; or open (not wooded)
undeveloped land, except the conservation area as herein provided. An
open buffer shall be provided wherever the development abuts wooded
undeveloped land.
B. Components. The minimum component of each type of buffer shall be as
follows:
(1) Natural buffers. Whenever existing forested areas are located
where buffers are required by this part, they shall be retained and
used as the required buffer. All dead vegetation shall be removed
from such areas and they shall be supplemented with new
understory plantings utilizing native species to the extent deemed
necessary by the Township. Such planting shall be of the types and
density needed to achieve the visual screening purpose of the
buffer and shall be selected from the preapproved plant list
provided in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
Where sufficient depth of forest is not present or forest is not
present at all, then screen buffers or softening buffers shall be used
to supplement the depth of the natural buffer.
(2) Constructed screen buffers. The primary components of screen
buffer shall be two rows of evergreen trees, at the height of not less
than six feet when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on
center, and these trees shall be of such species to attain a height at
maturity of not less than 20 feet. The second row shall be offset five
feet from the trees in the first row and the rows shall be five feet
apart. Also required as secondary components are mounding (the
use of which is encouraged), provided the slopes shall be a
maximum of 3:1, deciduous trees, deciduous shrubs, and
coniferous shrubbery.
§ 370-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-406
1:733
§ 370-407. Parking. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-408. Signs. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-409. Application. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
None.
§ 370-410. Utility shed. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13;
7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
(3) Constructed softening buffer. The softening buffer shall conform to
the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(4) Open buffer. The open buffer shall at a minimum consist of grass,
ground cover, and/or similar vegetative material, and may include
trees, shrubs or other natural landscaping materials.
C. Street intersections. The softening buffer described in Subsection B(3),
above, may be modified wherever necessary for adequate sight
distance.
D. Existing buffers. In cases where a boundary of a development occurs
along natural features which function as buffers including, but not
limited to, mature vegetation, significant grade changes or stream
valleys, which are likely to be permanently preserved, buffering may be
waived or modified along that boundary upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
E. Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and in the
event of death or other destruction shall be replaced within one year by
the persons responsible for maintenance when death or destruction
occurred.
F. Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the
preliminary subdivision and land development plans showing all
pertinent information including the location, size and species of all
individual trees and shrubs to be preserved or planted, or alternatively,
the general characteristics of existing vegetation masses which are to
be preserved.
A. Subject to all other restrictions provided in this section, utility sheds
not in excess of 192 square feet in area on parcels greater than or equal
to 7,500 square feet in area, and not in excess of 120 square feet in area
on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area, and in no event greater
than 10 feet in height, may be erected in the rear or side yard of any
developed lot in the RA District; provided, that such shed shall be at
§ 370-406 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-410
1:734
§ 370-411. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 7-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-8; 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6; 1-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-2; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-O-09; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2102-O-15; 3-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-05; 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
To promote the preservation of large tracts of land for use as open space,
trails, scenic vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains,
riparian buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial growth
through use of the existing transferable development rights (TDR) program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will have
accrued development rights for transfer or sale to other landowners in
the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural (RA), and in other
districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors after considering
the recommendation of the Warrington Township Planning Commission; to
establish guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community
that will enjoy the open space:
least seven feet from any property. Such shed may be located as close
as one foot from the property line with written consent of adjoining
neighbors. In the RA District, not more than two such structures are
permitted per lot.
B. Building permits for utility sheds shall be obtained prior to the
construction thereof based on plan submission and approval by the
Township. Such sheds shall be exempt from the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code.144
C. No building permit will be issued for a utility shed unless, after
construction of such shed, the maximum building coverage and
impervious surface ratio for the RA District in which the lot is located
will not be exceeded.
D. No shed may be erected in any easements or drainage swales.
A. General.
(1) Pursuant to the enabling legislation contained in Section 619.1 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S.
§ 10619.1, transferable development rights ("TDRs") were
previously created and those in existence can be utilized in
accordance with the provisions of this section. TDRs are severable
from the land itself and are separately conveyable from the estate
in fee simple to which they are applicable. [Amended 7-10-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:735
(2) Transferable development rights shall be created and conveyed by
a deed and conservation easement duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which deed and
conservation easement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township.
(3) No transferable development rights created by this section shall be
transferable beyond the boundaries of Warrington Township.
(4) Transferable development rights, if and after approval, shall be
deemed to run with the land.
(5) Warrington Township shall administer this provision consistent
with the language and intent of this chapter and with the
Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan, as revised.
(6) No additional TDRs shall be created after the date of Ord. No.
2018-O-07. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
(7) TDRs may not be used in conservation residential developments
and TDRs may not accrue to any conservation area lands. [Added
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
B. Base density. In order to determine the number of TDRs required to
achieve the density permitted for residential development using
transferable development rights under this section, a developer must
first calculate the base density. The base density shall be calculated by
determining the maximum density per gross buildable site area for
single-family detached dwellings (not served by public water and
sewer) in the underlying zoning district. The difference between the
base density and the density permitted by the use of TDRs shall
determine the number of TDRs that are required to be utilized to
achieve the density proposed in the TDR subdivision. [Amended
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
C. Development rights created after September 2007. Each development
right shall carry the right to build one dwelling unit in accordance with
§ 370-411G(6)(a), Standards for single-family detached residential
development using transferable development rights, or other
equivalent development criteria as established in Subsection G(6)(b),
Standards for use of transferable development rights in nonresidential
zoning districts, if approved by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the provisions of this section. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-O-07]
D. Development rights created for the R-1-C District. Development rights
created by Ordinance 2002-O-03 on March 12, 2002, by the adoption of
the R-1-C Zoning District, shall be used only in accordance with the
terms expressed in the adopting ordinance. [Amended 7-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:736
E. Development rights created for the Klein property. Development rights
created for Parcel TMP 50-10-15, originally owned by Richard Urwiler,
and then owned by Steven and Carol W. Klein, now owned by
Warrington Township and used by the nonprofit agency known as the
"Special Equestrians," shall be used only in accordance with the terms
expressed in the Stipulation and Agreement signed February 18, 1997,
and Ordinances 1997-O-6, dated July 15, 1997, and 1998-O-15, dated
August 11, 1998.
F. (Reserved)
G. Development rights created for Warrington Investments, Inc. (Stauffer,
Kelman and Friedenberg), and the Urwiler Group (Urwiler, Poley,
Poolin, and Illg). Development rights created for Tax Parcels 50-10-6,
50-10-42, and 50-8-5 through -55 inclusive, 50-4-137, 50-4-164,
50-4-153, 50-4-167, 50-10-15, and 50-10-13, shall be used only in
accordance with the terms expressed in the Stipulation and Agreement
signed February 18, 1997, as implemented by Ordinance 1997-O-6, as
amended by Ordinance 2000-O-2, and as expressed herein.
(1) (Reserved)
(2) Transferable development rights shall be created and conveyed by
a deed and conservation easement duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which deed and
conservation easement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) The transferable development rights created in accordance with
this § 370-411 [Nolan tract - 34 transferable development rights;
Urwiler tract - 26 transferable development rights; Poley tract -
three transferable development rights; Poolin tract - 26
transferable development rights; and Illg tract - 102 transferable
development rights] may be transferred to any property located in
the R-A Residential Agricultural District, except that TDRs cannot
be used for a conservation residential subdivision, R-1 Low-Density
Residential District, R-2 Medium-Density Residential District, R-3
Single-Family Residential District, R-2I Residential Infill District,
CR/O Corridor Residential/Office District, OI Office Industrial
District, PI-1 Planned Industrial District, PI-2 Planned Industrial
District, C-1 Commercial District, C-2 Commercial District and/or
CBD Central Business District. The standards for the use of
transferable development rights in the above-referenced districts
are as set forth hereinafter: [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-O-07]
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:737
(a) Standards for single-family detached residential development
using transferable development rights.
[1] In the RA District, transferable development rights may be
utilized for the development of single-family detached
dwellings when authorized by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to a conditional use procedure. In the R-1, R-3,
R-21 and R-1-C Districts, TDRs may be utilized only for the
development of single-family detached dwellings. In the
R-2 District, TDRs may be utilized for either or both singlefamily
detached and two-family semidetached dwellings
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a
conditional use procedure. A single-family detached and
two-family semidetached residential development utilizing
transferable development rights shall be known as a
"subdivision with transferable development rights" or
"TDR subdivision."
[2] Density, area and dimensional criteria for a subdivision
with transferable development rights. The density area
and dimensional criteria for a subdivision with
transferable development rights in the R-1-C District shall
be identical to those expressed in § 370-1212.
Table of Regulations for Residential Development Using
Transferable Development Rights, or other equivalent development
R-A
District^ R-1 District
R-2 District
R-2I R-3 District
Maximum
density
1.3 dwelling
units per
acre*
1.6 dwelling
units per acre*
3 dwelling
units per
acre*
3 dwelling
units per acre*
Minimum lot
size
15,000
square feet
12,600 square
feet
8,500 square
feet
8,500 square
feet
Minimum lot
width
90 feet at
the building
setback line
90 feet at the
building
setback line
Single-family
detached
dwelling: 85
feet at the
building
setback line
Two-family
semidetached
dwelling: 65
feet at the
building
setback line
85 feet at the
building
setback line
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:738
Table of Regulations for Residential Development Using
Transferable Development Rights, or other equivalent development
R-A
District^ R-1 District
R-2 District
R-2I R-3 District
Minimum
front yard
setback
35 feet 35 feet Single-family
detached
dwelling: 35
feet
Two-family
semidetached
dwelling: 30
feet.
35 feet
Minimum side
yard setback
Five feet,
provided
that the
aggregate of
the two side
yards shall
be not less
than 25 feet
Five feet,
provided that
the aggregate
of the two side
yards shall be
not less than
25 feet
Single-family
detached
dwelling: five
feet, provided
that the
aggregate of
the two side
yards is not
less than 25
feet
Two-family
semidetached
dwelling: zero
feet between
attached units
and 25 feet
from
neighboring
units
Five feet,
provided that
the aggregate
of the two side
yards shall be
not less than
25 feet
Minimum rear
yard setback
30 feet** 30 feet** Single-family
detached
dwelling: 30
feet**
Two-family
semidetached
dwelling: 30
feet**
30 feet**
Minimum
number of offstreet
parking
spaces
2 2 2 2
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:739
Table of Regulations for Residential Development Using
Transferable Development Rights, or other equivalent development
R-A
District^ R-1 District
R-2 District
R-2I R-3 District
Maximum
building
coverage
25% 25% 25% 25%
Maximum lot
impervious
surface ratio
35% 35% 50% 50%
Maximum
building
height
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum
buffer yard
§ 370-3607
of this
chapter
shall not
apply***
§ 370-3607 of
this chapter
shall not
apply***
§ 370-3607 of
this chapter
shall not
apply***
§ 370-3607 of
this chapter
shall not
apply***
Open space One to 300
dwelling
units: six
acres per
100 dwelling
units
Over 300
dwelling
units: 18
acres plus
one acre per
100 families
over 300
One to 300
dwelling units:
six acres per
100 dwelling
units
Over 300
dwelling units:
18 acres plus
one acre per
100 families
over 300
One to 300
dwelling
units: six
acres per 100
dwelling units
Over 300
dwelling
units: 18
acres plus one
acre per 100
families over
300
One to 300
dwelling units:
six acres per
100 dwelling
units
Over 300
dwelling units:
18 acres plus
one acre per
100 families
over 300
Other
restrictions
No TDRs
may be
transferred
to any lot
which is less
than 5 acres
No TDRs may
be transferred
to any lot
which is less
than 5 acres
No TDRs may
be transferred
to any lot
which is less
than 5 acres
No TDRs may
be transferred
to any lot
which is less
than 5 acres
NOTES:
^ TDRs cannot be used for a conservation residential development.
* All maximum density is determined per acre of gross buildable site
area, as defined in § 370-304.
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:740
** Patios and decks shall be permitted to encroach into the minimum
rear yard to within 15 feet of the rear property line and shall not be
considered part of the building for purposes of calculating building
coverage.
*** Where the boundary of the tract proposed for development is within
200 feet of a single-family detached dwelling occupied as of February
18, 1997, a ten-foot-wide easement with buffer plantings in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, or a solid fence shall be provided along the portion of
the common boundary line which lies within 200 feet of the existing
dwelling. The area of the required easement shall be included in the
calculation of the minimum lot area.
(b) Standards for use of transferable development rights in
nonresidential zoning districts.
[1] General standards. In order to facilitate and encourage the
use of the transferable development rights in the PI-1,
PI-2, OI, IU, I-U-A, I-U-A1, I-U-B, CR/O, CBD, C-1 and C-2
Zoning Districts, development criteria otherwise
applicable to development in those districts shall be
modified for developments utilizing transferable
development rights according to the criteria set forth
hereinbelow. These criteria shall apply in lieu of the
criteria set forth in regulations governing development in
each of the enumerated districts.
[a] Alternative dimensional criteria. Minimum setbacks,
building separations, isolation distances and buffer
yard requirements shall be modified according to the
following table:
Maximum Dimensional Reduction Applied to
Setbacks, Separations, Gross Site Area,
Isolation, and Buffers
One transferable development right shall be
used for each type of reduction applied to a
subdivision or land development plan.
Acres Maximum
0.99 acres or less 45% maximum
1.0 acre to 2.00 acres 40% maximum
3.0 acres to 9.99 acres 35% maximum
10.0 acres or more 30% maximum
[b] There shall be no dimensional setback or buffer yard
required from adjacent residential uses if the
residential use is nonconforming.
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:741
[c] A minimum ten-foot separation between parking areas
and buildings shall be maintained for all
nonresidential sites.
[d] A minimum fifteen-foot-wide planted buffer yard along
the ultimate right-of-way of all streets on which the
proposed development has frontage (including
sidewalks, where required) shall be provided.
[e] A minimum distance of 20 feet between buildings
where more than one building is proposed in a land
development.
[f] A minimum building setback of 50 feet.
[g] The number of parking spaces required by the
provisions of this chapter with respect to any
nonresidential use may be reduced by 20% of the
minimum requirement for nonresidential
developments utilizing transferable development
rights where such reduction is supported by a traffic
study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer. The
Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, approve a
greater reduction where the Board is satisfied that the
parking proposed by the applicant will be adequate for
the proposed use.
[h] Within any required buffer yard, the buffer plantings
for proposed developments utilizing transferable
development rights shall be increased by a factor of
1 1/2 times the planting otherwise required for such
use under the provisions of Chapter 305, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Town of
Warrington.
[i] The following sections allow a transferable
development right to be used for additional
impervious surface coverage, inclusive of building
coverage. For example, in the PI-1 District:
[i] One TDR might be used for up to 10,000 square
feet of pavements, provided that the total
impervious surfaces do not exceed 85%;
[ii] One TDR might be used for up to 6,000 square
feet of pavements, provided that the total
impervious surfaces do not exceed 85%, and
4,000 square feet of building coverage, provided
that the total building coverage does not exceed
45%; or
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:742
[iii] One TDR might be used for up to 8,000 square
feet of pavements, provided that the total
impervious surfaces do not exceed 85%, and
2,000 square feet of building coverage, provided
that the total building coverage does not exceed
45%, or any combination of impervious coverage
and building coverage within the limits
established.
Use of TDRs for Additional Impervious Surface
District Use
Additional Impervious
Surface Coverage
PI-1 Planned
Industrial
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2202
PI-2 Planned
Industrial
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2402
C-1 Commercial
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2002
C-2 Commercial
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2102
Each TDR allows for an
additional 10,000 square foot
increase in impervious surface
coverage, up to a maximum
impervious coverage of 85%,
including 4,000 square feet of
building coverage, up to a
maximum building coverage of
45%
OI Professional
Office Light
Industrial
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2502
IU, I-U-A, I-UA-
1 and I-U-B
Institutional Use
Districts
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-1602
Each TDR allows for an
additional 10,000 square foot
increase in impervious surface
coverage, up to a maximum
impervious coverage of 80%,
including 4,000 square feet of
building coverage, up to a
maximum building coverage of
45%
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:743
Use of TDRs for Additional Impervious Surface
District Use
Additional Impervious
Surface Coverage
CR/O Corridor
Residential/
Office District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2602A and B
For § 370-2602A, each TDR
allows for an additional 10,000
square foot increase in
impervious surface coverage,
up to a maximum impervious
coverage of 85%, including
4,000 square feet of building
coverage above the otherwise
allowable floor area ratio
For § 370-2602B, each TDR
allows one additional dwelling
unit up to maximum of 10
dwelling units per acre, or a
10,000 square foot increase in
impervious coverage, up to a
maximum impervious coverage
of 60%
CBD Central
Business
District
TDRs are available for
use with respect to all
uses permitted under
§ 370-2902
§ 370-2902, Subsections A
through J, L and M, each TDR
allows for an additional 10,000
square foot increase in
impervious coverage, up to a
maximum impervious coverage
of 85%, including 4,000 square
feet of building coverage, up to
a maximum building coverage
of 45%
§ 370-2902 Subsection K (agerestricted
residential uses as
permitted in the IU-B District
§ 370-1602C), each TDR allows
one additional dwelling unit, up
to a maximum of 10 dwelling
units per acre, and an additional
10,000 square foot increase in
impervious coverage, up to a
maximum impervious coverage
of 85%, including 4,000 square
feet of building coverage, up to
a maximum building coverage
of 45% and additional
equivalent floor area ratio up to
80%
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:744
H. If it is determined that open space land as represented on a subdivision
or land development plan is not suitable with regard to the size, shape,
location, access or provisions for maintenance, the Township may, at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, require that open space be
provided through payment of a fee in lieu of land and/or facilities. This
fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the acreage that would
otherwise be dedicated pursuant to this section, as stated in the
adopted fee schedule. Such payment shall be made to the Warrington
Township Park and Recreation Board, to be used for the acquisition,
development, or improvement of open space land that will be available
and accessible to, and that will benefit the residents of the
development. This option is available in all zoning districts within the
Township in which open space is required.145
I. At the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, forests may be
disturbed in excess of the amount permitted in § 370-305E, where TDRs
are to be applied to a site only if the amount disturbed in excess of the
amount otherwise permitted is replaced on site, or at another site
within the Township as directed by the Township, or a fee in lieu thereof
is provided to the Township. All replacement trees shall be in
accordance with the following standards outlined in the Warrington
Township Code, Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 305-325 (henceforth called the "Landscape Ordinance"), as currently
revised by Ord. No. 2012-O-04, and as may be revised hereafter from
time to time.
(1) The following are considered priorities for location of replacement
trees:
(a) Establish or enhance forests within or adjacent to riparian
buffers.
(b) Establish or enhance forests on one-hundred-year floodplains,
when appropriate.
(c) Establish or enhance forest corridors to connect existing
forests within or adjacent to the site; and, where practical,
forest corridors should be a minimum of 300 feet in width to
facilitate wildlife movement.
(d) Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to critical habitats
where appropriate.
(e) Establish forest areas adjacent to existing forests to increase
the overall area of contiguous forest cover.
145. Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, regarding receipt of transferable development rights
to the RA District from Tax Map Parcel No. 50-10-13, which immediately preceded this
subsection, was repealed 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07.
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:745
(f) Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to areas of
differing land use or adjacent to highways or utility rights-ofway.
(2) The replacement trees used in the reforestation shall be native to
the Township or other trees approved by the Township in
accordance with the Landscape Ordinance.
(3) All tree replacement shall be conducted in conformance with state
and federal best management practices.
(4) All tree replacement shall be completed prior to the recordation of
the approved subdivision or land development plan or be
guaranteed to be completed pursuant to the development/financial
security agreements. All tree replacement areas shall be
maintained until 18 months after completion of construction upon
the site and acceptance of the public improvements by the
Township.
(5) All tree replacement shall occur upon nonbuildable areas of the
site, including open space, recreation lands, buffers (but shall be in
addition to any buffer requirements), stormwater management
BMPs, and other such areas. No tree replacement shall occur upon
residential building lots.
(6) Forest conservation fund. If an applicant subject to this section
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that
the requirements for tree replacement cannot be reasonably
accomplished on-site or off-site, the applicant shall contribute a feein-
lieu-of, at a rate to be established by the Board of Supervisors.
(7) Retention. The following trees, shrubs, plants, and specific areas
shall be granted priority for retention and protection and shall be
left in an undisturbed condition unless the applicant has
demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, that
reasonable efforts have been made to protect them and the plan
cannot be reasonably altered:
(a) Trees, shrubs, and plants located in the following sensitive
ecological areas: steep slopes, riparian buffers, one-hundredyear
floodplain, floodplain soils, streams, watercourses, waters
of the commonwealth, waters of the Unites States, lakes,
ponds, wetland margins, and critical habitats.
(b) Any part of a contiguous forest that is 10 acres or larger.
(c) Trees, shrubs or plants determined to be rare, threatened or
endangered under the Federal Endangered Species Act of
1973 in 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 through 1544, and in 50 CFR Part 17,
or placed upon the Pennsylvania Threatened Species List or
the Pennsylvania Endangered Species List (34 Pa.C.S.A. § 2101
et seq.).
§ 370-411 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-411
1:746
(d) Trees that are part of an historic site, associated with an
historic structure, or have been designated as a national, state,
or county champion tree.
(e) Any tree having a caliper of 24 inches or more.
§ 370-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:747

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)146
146. Editor's Note: Former Part 4, Subpart B, RA-A Residential Agricultural-Airfield District, as
added 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17 and amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10, was
repealed 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-411
1:749

ARTICLE VI
RA-2 Residential Agricultural District
[Added 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
§ 370-601. Purpose.
The purpose of the RA-2 District is to provide for small-lot single-family
residential development in order to provide affordable housing for all
persons who wish to reside in Warrington Township.
§ 370-602. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in §§ 370-402, 370-403A and B, and 370-404 of this
chapter shall be permitted by right, by conditional use and by special
exception, as applicable. In addition, single-family detached dwellings shall
be a permitted use by right.
§ 370-603. Area regulations.
The area regulations for all uses except single-family detached dwellings
shall be those set forth in § 370-405A, B(2) and C of this chapter, as
applicable to the specific use. The following area regulations shall apply
only to single-family detached dwellings:
A. Minimum lot size: 8,500 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 85 feet at the building setback line.
C. Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: five feet, provided that the aggregate of the two
side yards shall not be less than 25 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet; provided, however, that patios and decks
shall be permitted to encroach into the minimum rear yard to within 15
feet of the rear property line and shall not be considered part of the
building for purposes of calculating coverage.
F. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: two.
G. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
H. Maximum lot impervious surface ratio: 50%.
I. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
J. Buffer yard. Section 370-3607 of this chapter shall not apply. In lieu
thereof, where the boundary of the tract proposed for development is
within 200 feet of a single-family detached dwelling occupied as of
February 18, 1997, a ten-foot-wide easement with buffer plantings in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, or a
solid fence shall be provided along the portion of the common boundary
§ 370-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-603
1:751
§ 370-604. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-605. Application.
None.
§ 370-606. Utility shed.
See § 370-410.
§ 370-607. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 8-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-15; 1-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-2]
line which lies within 200 feet of the existing dwelling. The area of the
required easement shall be included in the calculation of the minimum
lot area.
A. Pursuant to the enabling legislation contained in § 619.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S. § 10619.1,
there are hereby created, as a separate estate in land, transferable
development rights (TDRs). TDRs are severable from the land itself and
are separately conveyable from the estate in fee simple to which they
are applicable.
B. TDRs shall be conveyed by a deed duly recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which deed shall
contain the approval of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township, dated not more than 60 days prior to the recording thereof.
C. No TDRs created by this section shall be transferable beyond the
boundaries of Warrington Township.
D. TDRs are created appurtenant to Bucks County Tax Map Parcel Nos.
50-4-153 and 50-4-164 (Urwiler) and the 39.8526-acre portion of Bucks
County Tax Map Parcel No. 50-10-15 described in Exhibit "A" hereto.147
The actual number of TDRs available for transfer from Tax Map Parcel
50-4-153 and 50-4-164 (Urwiler) shall be equal to 26 plus the difference
between 177 and the number of lots available for development for
single-family detached houses as shown on a subdivision plan given
final approval by the Board of Supervisors, up to a maximum of 79. The
actual number of TDRs available for transfer from the 39.8526 acre
tract of land, being a portion of Bucks County Tax Map Parcel No.
50-10-15 described on Exhibit "A" hereto, shall be equal to 115. There
shall be no TDRs appurtenant to the remainder of Bucks County Tax
Map Parcel No. 50-10-15.
E. The TDRs created appurtenant to Bucks County Tax Map Parcels
50-4-153 and 50-4-164 (Urwiler) may be transferred to any property
147. Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" is on file in the Township office.
§ 370-603 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-607
1:752
§ 370-608. Special provisions for development.
TDRs may only be used for the development of single-family detached
dwellings. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
following standards shall apply to the development of single-family
detached dwellings in the RA-2 District:
located in the RA Residential Agricultural District, R-1 Low-Density
Residential District, R-2 Medium-Density Residential District, R-3
Single-Family Residential District, R-2I Residential Infill District, CR/
O Corridor Residential/Office District, OI Office Industrial District, PI-1
Planned Industrial District, PI-2 Planned Industrial District, C-1
Commercial District, C-2 Commercial District and/or CBD Central
Business District. The TDRs created appurtenant to the 39.8526 acre
portion of Bucks County Tax Map Parcel No. 50-10-15 may be
transferred to any property located in the CR/O Corridor Residential/
Office District, OI Office Industrial District, PI-1 Planned Industrial
District, PI-2 Planned Industrial District, C-1 Commercial District, C-2
Commercial District and/or CBD Central Business District, or such
other nonresidential zoning districts as may be hereafter created. As
a condition of the approval of the Township for the conveyance of any
TDRs appurtenant to the 39.8526 acre portion of Bucks County Tax
Map Parcel No. 50-10-15, the transferor of the TDRs shall pay to the
Township as a transfer fee the sum of $3,000 per TDR payable at the
time of transfer of each TDR. The standards for the use of TDRs in the
above-referenced districts are those set forth in § 370-411G(6) of this
chapter.
A. Special setback requirements. The special setback provided for in
§ 370-3614 of this chapter shall apply to streams meeting the definition
of Type I stream as defined in § 370-202 of this chapter; provided,
however, that the width of a Type I stream shall be determined by the
more extensive limits of the FEMA-mapped floodplain; or, in the
absence of FEMA mapping, by the calculated flood limit, not by the
limits of alluvial soils. The special setbacks shall not be applicable to
Type II streams, or to natural water bodies or floodplains not meeting
the definition of Type I stream. In lieu thereof, the permitting and
approval requirements of the Bucks County Conservation District, Army
Corps of Engineers and the Department of Environmental Protection, in
its various branches, shall apply.
B. Slopes of 8% to 15%. The limitations provided for in this chapter
governing the ability to regrade or develop slopes of between 8% and
15% shall not apply where the total area of slopes between 8% and 15%
on a tract of land is less than 5% of the total tract and on any property
developed using TDRs established by this chapter.
C. Forested areas. There shall be no limit on disturbance of forested area.
D. Form 307.148 In regard to proposals to develop single-family detached
dwellings, an applicant for subdivision will not be required to complete
§ 370-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-608
1:753
Form 307. In lieu thereof, the density and design provisions as set
forth hereinabove, as well as the permitting requirements of the Bucks
County Conservation District, the Army Corps of Engineers and the
Department of Environmental Protection, in its various branches, shall
apply.
E. Lot area. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for the
purpose of calculating "minimum lot area," up to 20% of the minimum
lot area may consist of partially unusable land which cannot be
developed and total unusable land, provided that no portion of the
building envelope may include such lands.
148. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-608 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-608
1:754
ARTICLE VII
RA-3 Residential Agricultural District
[Added 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
§ 370-701. Purpose.
The purpose of the RA-3 District is to provide for small-lot single-family
residential development in order to provide affordable housing for all
persons who wish to reside in Warrington Township.
§ 370-702. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in §§ 370-402, 370-403A and B, and 370-404 of this
chapter shall be permitted by right, by conditional use and by special
exception, as applicable. In addition, single-family detached dwellings shall
be a permitted use by right.
§ 370-703. Area regulations.
The area regulations for all uses except single-family detached dwellings
shall be those set forth in § 370-405A, B(2) and C of this chapter, as
applicable to the specific use. The following area regulations shall apply
only to single-family dwellings:
A. Minimum lot size: 12,600 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 90 feet at the building setback line.
C. Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: five feet, provided that the aggregate of the two
side yards shall be not less than 25 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet; provided, however, that patios and decks
shall be permitted to encroach into the minimum rear yard to within 15
feet of the rear property line, and shall not be considered part of the
building for purposes of calculating coverage.
F. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: two.
G. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
H. Maximum lot impervious surface ratio: 35%.
I. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
J. Buffer yard. Section 370-3607 of this chapter shall not apply. In lieu
thereof, where the boundary of the tract proposed for development is
within 200 feet of a single-family detached dwelling occupied as of
February 18, 1997, a ten-foot-wide easement with buffer plantings in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, or a
solid fence shall be provided along the portion of the common boundary
§ 370-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-703
1:755
§ 370-704. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-705. Application.
None.
§ 370-706. Utility shed.
See § 370-410.
§ 370-707. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 1-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-2]
line which lies within 200 feet of the existing dwelling. The area of the
required easement shall be included in the calculation of the minimum
lot area.
A. Pursuant to the enabling legislation contained in § 619.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S. § 10619.1,
there are hereby created, as a separate estate in land, transferable
development rights (TDRs). TDRs are severable from the land itself and
are separately conveyable from the estate in fee simple to which they
are applicable.
B. TDRs shall be conveyed by a deed duly recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which deed shall
contain the approval of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township, dated not more than 60 days prior to the recording thereof.
C. No TDRs created by this section shall be transferable beyond the
boundaries of Warrington Township.
D. TDRs are created appurtenant to Bucks County Tax Map Parcels
50-4-167 (Poley) and 50-8-5 through 50-8-55 (Stauffer). The actual
number of TDRs available for transfer from Tax Map Parcel 5-4-167
(Poley) shall be equal to three plus the difference between 19 and the
number of lots available for development for single-family detached
houses as shown on a subdivision plan given final approval by the Board
of Supervisors, up to a maximum of eight. The actual number of TDRs
available for transfer from Tax Map Parcels 50-8-5 through 50-8-55
(Stauffer) shall be equal to the difference between 103 and the number
of lots available for development for single-family detached houses as
shown on a subdivision plan given final approval by the Board of
Supervisors, up to a maximum of 30.
E. The TDRs created and allocated among the properties in accordance
with this section may be transferred to any property located in the RA
Residential Agricultural District, R-1 Low-Density Residential District,
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District, R-3 Single-Family Residential
District, R-2I Residential Infill District, CR/O Corridor Residential Office
§ 370-703 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-707
1:756
§ 370-708. Special provisions for development. [Amended
7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-07]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the special provisions
for development in the RA-2 District as set forth in § 370-608 of this chapter
shall apply to the development of single-family detached dwellings in the
RA-3 District.
District, O-I Office Industrial District, PI-1 Planned Industrial District,
PI-2 Planned Industrial District, C-1 Commercial District, C-2
Commercial District and/or CBD Central Business District. The
standards for the use of TDRs in the above-referenced districts are
those set forth in § 370-411G(5) of this chapter.
§ 370-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-708
1:757

ARTICLE VIII
RA-4 Residential Agricultural District
[Added 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
§ 370-801. Purpose.
The purpose of the RA-4 District is to provide for small-lot single-family
residential development in order to provide affordable housing for all
persons who wish to reside in Warrington Township.
§ 370-802. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in §§ 370-402, 370-403A and B, and 370-404of this
chapter shall be permitted by right, by conditional use and by special
exception, as applicable. In addition, single-family detached dwellings shall
be a permitted use by right.
§ 370-803. Area regulations.
The area regulations for all uses except single-family detached dwellings
shall be those set forth in § 370-405A, B(2) and C of this chapter, as
applicable to the specific use. The following area regulations shall apply
only to single-family dwellings:
A. Average lot size: 15,000 square feet, provided that 75% of all lots shall
be 15,000 square feet or greater.
B. Minimum lot size: 12,600 square feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 90 feet at the building setback line.
D. Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
E. Minimum side yard: five feet, provided that the aggregate of the two
side yards shall not be less than 25 feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet; provided, however, that patios and decks
shall be permitted to encroach into the minimum rear yard to within 15
feet of the rear property line, and shall not be considered part of the
building for purposes of calculating coverage.
G. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: two.
H. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
I. Maximum lot impervious surface ratio: 35%.
J. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
K. Buffer yard. Section 370-3607 of this chapter shall not apply. In lieu
thereof, where the boundary of the tract proposed for development is
within 200 feet of a single-family detached dwelling occupied as of
February 18, 1997, a ten-foot-wide easement with buffer plantings in
§ 370-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-803
1:759
§ 370-804. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-805. Application.
None.
§ 370-806. Utility shed.
See § 370-410.
§ 370-807. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 1-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-2]
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, or a
solid fence shall be provided along the portion of the common boundary
line which lies within 200 feet of the existing dwelling. The area of the
required easement shall be included in the calculation of the minimum
lot area.
A. Pursuant to the enabling legislation contained in § 619.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S. § 10619.1,
there are hereby created, as a separate and estate in land, transferable
development rights (TDRs). TDRs are severable from the land itself and
are separately conveyable from the estate in fee simple to which they
are applicable.
B. TDRs shall be conveyed by a deed duly recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which deed shall
contain the approval of the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township, dated not more than 60 days prior to the recording thereof.
C. No TDRs created by this section shall be transferable beyond the
boundaries of Warrington Township.
D. TDRs are created appurtenant to Bucks County Tax Map Parcels
50-10-6, 50-10-7 and 50-10-42 (Nolen). The actual number of TDRs
available for transfer from Tax Map Parcels 50-10-6, 50-10-7 and
50-10-42 (Nolen) shall be equal to 34 plus the difference between 120
and the number of lots available for development for single-family
detached houses as shown on a subdivision plan given final approval by
the Board of Supervisors, up to a maximum of 70.
E. The TDRs created and allocated among the properties in accordance
with this section may be transferred to any property located in the RA
Residential Agricultural District, R-1 Low-Density Residential District,
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District, R-3 Single-Family Residential
District, R-2I Residential Infill District, CR/O Corridor Residential Office
District, OI Office Industrial District, PI-1 Planned Industrial District,
PI-2 Planned Industrial District, C-1 Commercial District, C-2
§ 370-803 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-807
1:760
§ 370-808. Special provisions for development.
TDRs may only be used for the development of single-family detached
dwellings. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the special
provisions for development in the RA-2 District as set forth in § 370-608
of this chapter shall apply to the development of single-family detached
dwellings in the RA District.
Commercial District and/or CBD Central Business District. The
standards for the use of TDRs in the above-referenced districts are
those set forth in § 370-411G(5) of this chapter.
§ 370-807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-808
1:761

ARTICLE IX
Planned Residential Development District
§ 370-901. Purpose.
The purpose of the PRD Residential/Planned Residential Development
District is to provide areas in which to accommodate projected residential
growth and development in a timed and sequenced fashion consistent with
the availability and adequacy of public facilities and services, particularly
public water and sewer; to allow for variations in permissible densities of
development in accordance with the availability of public sewer and water
necessary to serve such development; to allow for a diversification mix
of residential types and densities; to encourage innovations in residential
development and efficient use of land that is served by public water and
sewer; to ensure flexibility in design and development; to encourage
environmentally sensitive development; and to respond to development
pressures and regional housing demand in accordance with population
and housing projections. The intent of this district is to accommodate a
significant portion of Warrington Township's share of regional projected
development and housing needs. The boundaries of the PRD District were
delineated based upon two principal considerations:
§ 370-902. Permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a use by right:
A. The suitability of the area for residential development; and
B. The feasibility of providing public sewer and water from existing or
currently planned system extensions and improvements in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan for Growth Management in Warrington
Township and the Warrington Township 537 Sewer and Water Facilities
Plan Update.
A. Without public utilities.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Single-family, zero lot lines.
(3) Agricultural uses; provided, however, that any building or area
used for the keeping or raising of livestock or poultry shall be
situated not less than 100 feet from any street line, property line or
dwelling other than the owner's dwelling.
(4) Greenhouses as accessory uses to the above.
(5) Municipal use.
(6) Roadside stands for the sale of farm or nursery products produced
on the premises.
(7) Planned residential development.
§ 370-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-902
1:763
§ 370-903. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-7]
(8) No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
B. With public utilities.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Two-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family detached dwellings.
(4) Four-family semidetached dwellings.
(5) Single-family zero-lot-line dwelling.
(6) Patio house dwelling.
(7) Atrium house dwelling.
(8) Townhouse.
(9) Garden apartment.
(10) Multiplex.
(11) Mid-rise apartment.
(12) Municipal use.
(13) Private educational, religious or philanthropic uses, excluding
privately operated schools of trade, vocation, avocation or
business.
(14) Hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent homes or other medical
facilities.
(15) Camps or private recreation areas on lots of five acres or more.
(16) Clubs or lodges, provided that the chief activity is not one which is
customarily carried on as a business.
(17) Public utilities, installations and buildings.
(18) No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Without public utilities. Cluster development pursuant to § 370-903C
herein. As an alternative to minimum lot size otherwise required,
development at an overall density of one single-family detached
dwelling per three acres may be achieved through clustering such
development if the following development standards are met:
(1) Refer to § 370-906A and C.
§ 370-902 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-903
1:764
(2) An acceptable interim alternative to public sewer and public water
must be provided and the developer must agree to discontinue the
interim method and connect to the public sewer and water systems
when available to the site.
(3) The nonpublic utility alternative must satisfy all health, DEP and
other applicable local, state and federal regulations applicable to
on-site sewage disposal and/or water supply systems.
(4) Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet.
(5) Minimum building setback shall be 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
A maximum of 35% of buildings shall be at this minimum with the
remaining 65% at 45 feet or more. For nondedicated roads or
access drives, the setback shall be measured from the near edge of
cartway or extension thereof.
(a) Side yard shall be not less than 15 feet either side; minimum
total composite 45 feet.
(b) Rear yard shall not be less than 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot width at setback line shall be no less than 80 feet.
(7) Maximum percent of lot in impervious cover shall not be greater
than 15%.
B. With public utilities. The following uses may be permitted as a
conditional use in a planned residential development when authorized
pursuant to the conditions and requirements of § 370-3602 of this
chapter and as controlled by other applicable provisions of this chapter
specifying development standards for such use, in addition to all other
requirements specified herein.
(1) Cemeteries.
(2) Schools.
(3) Cluster option. The cluster option subject to the development
standards set forth in § 370-906C and the area regulations required
by § 370-905B shall be permitted as an alternative to the minimum
lot size.
(4) Lot averaging in exchange for dedication of lands for public
purposes.
(a) Where land is offered in dedication to the Township or a public
entity designated by the Board of Supervisors to receive said
lands, which said land shall be used for public facilities and
public purpose, such as lands for the future construction of
new roadways, public parks, public recreation areas, public
buildings, etc., and the Board of Supervisors, in its sole and
§ 370-903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-903
1:765
absolute discretion, chooses to accept all or a portion of lands
so offered, the design criteria for the balance of the property
remaining, after the anticipated dedication of lands for public
purposes as set forth hereinabove, shall be in accordance with
the following criteria:
[1] The balance of the lands shall be developed with singlefamily
detached dwellings, exclusively, as opposed to any
mix of dwellings otherwise provided for in this article.
[2] The project shall be served by public water and public
sewer as a condition of issuance of the initial building
permit.
[3] The minimum lot size of any building lot proposed for
development, if the option to develop pursuant to this
subsection is accepted by the Township, shall be not less
than 13,500 square feet.
[4] Dimensional requirements of lots.
[a] Minimum lot width at setback line: 75 feet.
[b] Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
[c] Minimum side yard: 10 feet minimum, 25 feet
aggregate.
[d] Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
[e] Maximum impervious coverage: 30%.
[f] Maximum building coverage: 20%.
[5] The open space to be set aside for the proposed public
purposes shall be in lieu of any and all other open space
requirements otherwise imposed by this chapter, or
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of
Warrington Township, except that $2,000 per lot shall be
contributed upon the issuance of each occupancy permit to
the Township, to be applied by the Township to its Park
and Recreation Capital Reserve Fund. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
[6] Prior to approval of any subdivision plan for lot averaging
pursuant to this chapter, applicant shall submit an
engineered sketch plan, which plan shall depict the area
proposed for dedication for public purposes, in addition to
the proposed layout of the building lots pursuant to the
design criteria set forth hereinabove. This sketch plan, if
approved as submitted or with certain revisions as
required by the Board of Supervisors, shall be
§ 370-903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-903
1:766
incorporated as part of the conditional use approval such
that the subsequent submission of plans in accordance
with Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of
the Code of the Township of Warrington, shall be designed
in accordance with the layout as depicted thereon.
[7] The provisions of this chapter may be applied to an
application for subdivision of one parcel of land, or a
combined subdivision application for multiple parcels of
land shall be permitted unless the parcels of land are
owned or otherwise controlled by the same owner and/or
developer, and in the latter instance, applicant shall be
required to submit sketch plans in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection B(4)(a)[6], above, depicting
development of all properties, in accordance with the
design criteria and other provisions hereinabove. The
maximum density per gross acre, whether the application
is for one parcel or multiple parcels, shall not exceed 1.75
units per gross acre. Provided, however, that if the
application is made for multiple parcels, the 1.75 units per
gross acre shall apply to the combined acreage of all
parcels, such that specific parcels may exceed this density,
provided that the combination of all parcels does not
exceed this average gross density.
[8] As a condition precedent to approval of the final
subdivision plan (or plans where multiple parcels are
involved) by the Board of Supervisors, applicant shall
deliver to Township, for recording, a deed of dedication for
the land which the Board of Supervisors, in its sole and
absolute discretion, has chosen to accept, for the parcel or
parcels then subject to the final subdivision plan approval,
title to same to be free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances and of a quality for recording acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors, upon advice of their Solicitor, all
costs of transfer and recording to be borne by applicant.
[9] All utilities shall be placed underground.
(b) The provisions of this Subsection B(4) shall control and shall be
deemed to supersede any inconsistent provisions of this
chapter, including the number of dwelling units calculated
pursuant to Form 307,149 and the environmental restrictions as
set forth in Article III. In lieu thereof, the density and design
provisions as set forth hereinabove, as well as the permitted
requirements and approval requirements of the Bucks County
Conservation District, the Army Corps of Engineers and the
Department of Environmental Protection, in its various
branches, shall apply.
149. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-903
1:767
(5) Flag lots. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
(a) Applications for flag lots must conform to all of the
requirements contained in Article XXXVI, § 370-3602,
Conditional uses, of this chapter and all of the following
conditions.
(b) Flag lots must provide direct access to a public road through
the staff of the flag lot by means of a private right-of-way with a
minimum width of 25 feet and a maximum width of 49 feet. The
private right-of-way line shall extend from the ultimate right-ofway
line of the public road to the rear property line of the flag
lot. The width of the staff shall remain constant.
(c) No more than one property may use the private right-of-way.
(d) Flag lots shall contain one single-family detached dwelling and
customary accessory buildings to a single-family detached
dwelling. No other type of dwelling or nonresidential use will
be permitted on a flag lot.
(e) Flag lots must be serviced by public water and public sewer.
(f) Minimum lot area shall be computed using only the flag area of
the lot. The area of the flag shall be computed from the
property lines of the flag perimeter and the projected private
right-of-way line of the staff. No part of the staff may be
included in the minimum lot area.
(g) All setbacks shall be measured from the property lines and the
projected right-of-way line of the staff.
(h) A dense evergreen screening buffer with a minimum width of
20 feet shall be provided along the property lines of the flag lot
adjacent to all existing dwellings to provide effective yearround
screening.
(i) Area requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area (flag): 15,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum side yard: 10 feet; minimum total composite: 30
feet. The minimum side yard shall not include any portion
of the staff.
[4] Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
[5] Maximum building coverage: 15% of flag area.
[6] Maximum impervious coverage: 15% of total lot area (flag
plus staff).
§ 370-903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-903
1:768
§ 370-904. Special exceptions.
[7] Minimum width at the front setback line: 75 feet, not
including any portion of the staff.
(j) The private right-of-way must meet all applicable standards
necessary for emergency access and firefighting as identified
in reviews conducted by the Warrington Township Fire
Marshal in accordance with the International Fire Code, as
amended from time to time. If no fire hydrant is available
within 500 feet of the proposed flag lot dwelling, the applicant
must install fire hydrants to a point no further than 500 feet
from the proposed flag lot dwelling in accordance with all
applicable standards of the Warrington Water and Sewer
Department. All fire hydrants must be accessible by
firefighting equipment.
(k) Transferable development rights (TDRs) may not be used to
create flag lots.
(l) No flag lot staff may be created within 75 feet of another flag
lot staff.
(m) No flag lot staff may exceed 500 feet in length.
C. With public sewer only. Single-family detached dwellings when
authorized as a conditional use, subject to the following standards:
(1) Applicant must provide a satisfactory interim private water supply
until such time as public water supply is available, at which time
applicant must tap into the public water source.
(2) A building lot shall not be less than 20,000 square feet.
(3) The building shall set back 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of each
street on which the lot abuts or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) The side yard shall not be less than a total of 40 feet, and not less
than 15 feet on any side.
(5) The rear yard shall not be less than 35 feet.
(6) The minimum of the lot at the setback line shall be 80 feet.
(7) The total impervious cover on a building lot shall not exceed 15%.
(8) The on-lot private water supply must be approved by all local, state
and federal agencies regulating the water supply and must be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Without public utilities. The following uses are permitted as a special
exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception in accordance with the provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-904
1:769
§ 370-905. Area requirements. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-13]
§ 370-906. Development standards.
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Accessory uses to those uses permitted under § 370-902.
(3) Private, educational, religious or philanthropic uses, excluding
privately operated schools of trade, vocation, avocation or
business.
(4) Hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent homes or other medical
facilities.
(5) Camps or private recreation areas on lots of five acres or more.
(6) Accessory apartments subject to special regulations in § 370-3616.
B. With public utilities. The following uses are permitted as a special
exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception in accordance with the provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Accessory uses to the permitted uses under § 370-902B.
A. Without public utilities.
(1) Minimum lot size shall be not less than three acres.
(2) Minimum building set back shall be 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
(3) Side yard shall be 15 feet either side, minimum total composite 40
feet.
(4) Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
(5) Minimum lot width at setback line shall be not less than 100 feet.
(6) Maximum percent of lot impervious cover shall be 15%.
B. With public utilities. See table Minimum Standards for Planned
Residential Developments with Public Utilities by Dwelling Type.150
A. Without public utilities.
(1) General. Unless otherwise stated, all development pursuant to this
article shall be subject to all other applicable regulations relating
to land subdivision, permissible development, densities of
development, environmental restrictions, utilities, private water
150. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-904 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-906
1:770
and sewer systems and necessary permits, including, but not
limited to, regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Protection, the Warrington Township Water and Sewer
Department, and the Bucks County Health Department and land
development and subdivision regulations.
(2) Density. The density of development in a planned residential
development not serviced with public utilities shall not exceed one
dwelling unit per three acres of gross buildable site area.
B. With public utilities.
(1) General. Unless otherwise stated, all development pursuant to this
article shall be subject to all other applicable regulations relating
to land subdivision, permissible development, densities of
development, environmental restrictions, utilities, private water
and sewer systems and necessary permits including, but not
limited to, regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Protection, the Warrington Township Water and Sewer
Department, and the Bucks County Health Department and land
development and subdivision regulations.
(2) Density. The density of development in a planned residential
development shall not exceed three dwelling units per acre of gross
buildable site area. Density is computed by dividing the number of
proposed dwelling units by the acreage of gross buildable site area.
C. Standards with or without public utilities.
(1) Development mix.
§ 370-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-906
1:771
Size of
Development
(acres) Housing Mix Criteria
Less than 10 100% of the development may be in a
single-dwelling unit type (see § 370-202,
Definitions); if a mix is desired, not less
than 75% of the dwelling units in the
development shall be single-family detached
dwellings and not more than 25% shall be
two-family semidetached; single-family "O"
lots line; patio house dwelling; atrium house
dwelling; townhouse; garden apartment;
multiplex; or mid-rise apartment
10 to 25 Not less than 60% of the dwelling units in
the development shall be single-family
detached dwellings; not more than 40%
shall be two-family semidetached; singlefamily
"O" lot line; patio house dwelling;
atrium house dwelling; townhouse; garden
apartment; multiplex; or mid-rise
apartment; not more than 25% shall be twofamily
detached or four-family
semidetached
25 and greater Not less than 50% of the dwelling units
shall be single-family detached dwellings;
not more than 50% shall be two-family
semidetached; single-family "O" lot line;
patio house dwelling; atrium house
dwelling; townhouse; garden apartment;
multiplex or mid-rise apartment; not more
than 25% shall be two-family detached or
four-family semidetached
(2) Open space.
(a) Common and active open space. In order that adequate land
for parks and open space may be adequately provided,
properly located and preserved as the Township develops; and
in order that the onus of providing such park and open space
land necessary to serve the additional residents brought into
the Township by the new development may be most equitably
apportioned on the basis of the additional need created by that
development, common open space and active open space (as
defined by § 370-202 of this chapter) shall be required to be
provided in accordance with § 370-307 of this chapter.
(b) Reservation of land for parks, open space, schools and other
public facilities. The developer, in the design of the
§ 370-906 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-906
1:772
development plan, and the Board, in its review of the plan,
shall consider the adequate provision of sites for parks, open
space, schools and other public facilities as indicated on the
adopted Comprehensive Plan. Where such facilities are shown
and located on the Comprehensive Plan or where the Board
otherwise determines that a portion of the plan is required for
such facilities, the developer may be required to reserve such
sites for a period not to exceed 60 days following receipt of the
Planning Commission recommendation on the application for
tentative approval, after which time the Township shall either
acquire the property or release the reservation. [Amended
4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-05]
(3) Environmental restrictions. Any land within the planned residential
development which is within the Environmental Restrictions
Overlay District as defined by §§ 370-305 through 370-307 of this
chapter shall be subject to the environmental restrictions,
regulations and conditions imposed thereby.
(4) Residential siting: as outlined in the table Minimum Standards for
Planned Residential Developments with Public Utilities by Dwelling
Type.151
(5) Buffer zones.
(a) Whenever a residential use is adjacent to a nonresidential use,
a buffer zone with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be
provided.
(b) Wherever another dwelling unit type is adjacent to a mid-rise
apartment, a buffer zone with a minimum width of 35 feet plus
one foot for each foot that the mid-rise is over 35 feet in height
shall be provided.
(c) The buffer zones noted above shall be landscaped as specified
in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) Perimeter requirements. If topographical or other barriers do not
provide adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the planned
residential development, the developer shall be required to
permanently screen any proposed structures located within 200
feet of the perimeter of the planned residential development, and in
no event shall any structure be located less than 50 feet from the
perimeter. Screening shall be as specified in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(7) Traffic ingress and egress.
151. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-906
1:773
(a) All planned residential developments shall have adequate road
access to and from the development as determined by the
traffic impact study required to be submitted with the
application for tentative approval.
(b) Based upon the findings and results of such impact study, the
Township may require road improvements by the developer
outside of the planned residential development to meet the
transportation needs created by the traffic projected to be
generated by the development.
(8) Design standards for townhouse, multiplex and garden apartments.
Design standards of a planned residential development containing
townhouses, multiplexes or garden apartments must conform to
the following standards:
(a) Each townhouse, multiplex or garden apartment dwelling unit
shall incorporate varied architectural modes and setbacks.
(b) An overall structure of attached dwelling units shall not be
permitted with one common roofline or with equal front and
rear yard setbacks for all dwelling units. Similarly, the
appearance of the front and rear wall of the building shall have
a distinction between dwelling units by varying the unit width
or height, providing different exterior materials on the facade,
or by changing the roof lines. Setbacks shall vary from every
other dwelling unit to the next so that every two units are offset
from the adjoining units by a minimum of two feet front and
rear.
(c) The building or setback line along any public street shall be a
minimum of 30 feet. (Reference is made only to the distance
from the ultimate right-of-way line to the street to the face of
the building.)
(9) Additional standards. In addition to the requirements above, the
following design and construction standards shall apply to planned
residential developments:
(a) Subject to approval, minimum right-of-way and cartway width
may be reduced if:
[1] Vehicular traffic has been suitably separated from
pedestrian traffic;
[2] Such reduction in cartway width allows for the passage of
two motor vehicles in opposite directions with due
allowance for on-street parking that might be permitted on
the thoroughfare; and
§ 370-906 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-906
1:774
§ 370-907. Parking.
Parking requirements are those as described in § 370-905B and Article
XXXIV.
§ 370-908. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-909. Applications.
All planned residential developments shall meet the requirements for
design and construction standards and improvement specifications of
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Township, as
amended; off-street parking, loading and unloading, and sign regulations of
this chapter, as amended; and all other sections of the Township ordinances
where applicable. Where conflict exists, the more restrictive requirement
shall be controlling. Application shall be submitted on the form provided by
the Township.
[3] The roadway in question is a minor or local road not
serving through traffic. Such reduction shall not be below
35 feet for the right-of-way and 25 feet for the cartway.
(b) Subject to approval, sidewalk requirements may be waived if a
suitable pathway system apart from the street right-of-way is
provided and serves all those dwelling units and commercial
uses for which a sidewalk would normally be required.
§ 370-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-909
1:775

ARTICLE X
PRD-M Planned Residential Development Mobile Home Park (with
Public Utilities)
[Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-13]
§ 370-1001. Purpose.
§ 370-1002. Permitted uses.
In addition to the uses permitted by § 370-902A and B, the PRD-M District
provides for mobile home parks; subject, however, to the additional
requirements as set forth in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of Warrington Township and townhouse village development
as permitted uses.
§ 370-1003. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
§ 370-1004. Special exceptions.
As in § 370-904.
§ 370-1005. Area requirements.
As in § 370-905.
§ 370-1006. Development standards.
As in § 370-906 for all applicable uses permitted by § 370-902A and B.
§ 370-1007. Parking.
Parking requirements are those as described in Article XXXIV.
A. Authority. This article is adopted pursuant to 53 P.S. §§ 10701 through
10711 (Article VII, Planned Residential Development) and pursuant to
the additional authority provided by 53 P.S. §§ 10501 through 10515
(Article 5, Subdivision and Land Development).
B. Intent. It is the intent of this article to establish a PRD-M District which
is identical to the PRD District, except that it shall allow mobile home
parks and townhouse village development as additional permitted uses.
A. As in § 370-903.
B. Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,152 tower-based
wireless communications facilities and communications equipment
buildings. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1008
1:777
§ 370-1008. Signs.
As in Article XXXV.
§ 370-1009. Application.
As in § 370-909.
§ 370-1010. Utility shed. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
§ 370-1011. Development standards for mobile home parks.
A. Subject to all other restrictions provided in this section, utility sheds
not in excess of 192 square feet in area on parcels greater than or equal
to 7,500 square feet in area, and not in excess of 120 square feet in area
on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area, and in no event greater
than 10 feet in height, may be erected in the rear or side yard of any
developed lot in the PRD-M District, provided that such sheds shall be
at least seven feet from any property. Such sheds maybe located as
close as one foot from the property line with written consent of
adjoining neighbors. In all districts, only one such structure is
permitted per lot.
B. With respect to zoning districts permitting multifamily detached or
semidetached dwellings or mobile homes, subject to all other
restrictions provided in this section, utility sheds may be erected in the
rear or side yards thereof, not in excess of 64 square feet in area, not in
excess of 10 feet in height, and at least seven feet from any property
line. Such sheds may be located as close as one foot from the property
line with written consent of adjoining neighbors.
C. Building permits for utility sheds shall be obtained prior to the
construction thereof based on plan submission and approval by the
Township. Such sheds shall be exempt from the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code.153
D. No building permit will be issued for a utility shed unless, after
construction of such shed, the maximum building coverage and
impervious surface ratio for the zoning district in which the lot is
located will not be exceeded.
E. No sheds may be erected in any easements or drainage swales.
F. Should the rear or side yard be irregular in area as often occurs in
segmental lots in culs-de-sac and corner lots of highly curved streets,
the lot owner may apply for a zoning variance at a reduced fee to be
established from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Area and density.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-1008 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1011
1:778
(1) A mobile home park shall have a minimum gross site area of 25
contiguous acres of land.
(2) The gross density of a mobile home park shall not exceed five
dwelling units per acre.
B. Site and lot location. Proposed site locations within allowed zoning
districts shall be subject to approval or disapproval on the basis of the
impact of the proposed park on existing neighboring uses, public
utilities, and transportation facilities. The site or lot location of all
mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum
requirements:
(1) The site shall be free from any adverse influence by swamps,
marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
(2) The site shall not be subject to flooding; lands subject to flooding
shall include the following:
(a) Floodplain. Areas adjoining any streams, ponds, lakes which
are subject to the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour flood as
delineated in the following reports or calculated from approved
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service or United States Army Corps of
Engineers' methods.
[1] "Floodplain Information, Report on Neshaminy Creek,
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, by the Corps of Engineers,
United States Army, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania," dated
April 1965, as amended.
[2] "Floodplain Information, Report on Little Neshaminy
Creek, Buck County, Pennsylvania, by the Corps of
Engineers, United States Army, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania," dated November 1973, as amended.
(b) Alluvial soils. Areas subject to periodic flooding as defined in
"Interim Soil Survey Report," Bucks County, Volumes I and II,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, dated 1970. The
alluvial soils will in most cases remain classified as unbuildable
land. But, in recognition of possible site situations where
alluvial soils as classified by the United States Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service may not
be characteristically alluvial soils, such soil areas may be
subtracted from the restricted land categories if the developer
or applicant submits the following reports and investigations:
[1] Provide a delineated floodplain map and calculations for
the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm or, in a
situation where, in the opinion of the Township
Supervisors, the present or future conditions warrant,
§ 370-1011 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1011
1:779
more severe design criteria shall be used. All calculations
shall be based on approved methods of either the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service or the United States Corps of
Engineers.
[2] Provide a written report assessing the actual drainage
conditions found as the result of an on-site investigation(s)
with the Township Engineer.
[3] Provide a written request as the result of an on-site
investigation by a qualified soils scientist and the
Township Engineer assessing the accuracy of the soils
location and actual field conditions.
[4] If investigations show the actual soil conditions to be other
than those described as "alluvial" and/or "subject to
flooding" by the United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service, and if they are
buildable areas, the developer may build in these areas
with alternate construction methods approved by the
Township.
(3) The site shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance such as
excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat,
odor or glare, as specified in Article XXXVI, § 370-3618,
Subsections D through I, of this chapter, as amended, or as deemed
objectionable by the Township.
C. Design standards.
(1) A mobile home lot or space shall have a minimum lot area of 5,000
square feet.
(2) The impervious surface ratio for the site shall not exceed 25%.
(3) Mobile homes and accessory structures which have a horizontal
area in excess of 25 square feet shall be separated from each other
by at least 30 feet. Any accessory structure which has a horizontal
area exceeding 25 square feet and is attached to a mobile home
and/or located within 10 feet of its window, and has an opaque or
translucent top or roof that is higher than such window, shall, for
purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be a part
of the mobile home.
(4) Setbacks.
(a) All mobile homes shall be located at least 50 feet from any park
property boundary line abutting upon a public street or
highway right-of-way, and at least 40 feet from other park
property boundary lines.
§ 370-1011 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1011
1:780
(b) There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between an
individual mobile home (including accessory structures
attached thereto) and the adjoining pavement of an interior
public street.
(c) There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between an
individual mobile home (including accessory structures
attached thereto) and the boundaries of any park common
area.
(5) Mobile home pad.
(a) No mobile home shall be erected in a mobile home lot except
upon a mobile home pad.
(b) Each mobile home pad shall have a minimum dimension of 60
feet by 12 feet.
(c) Each mobile home pad shall have access to a street in the
mobile home park. A minimum setback of 20 feet from the
street line shall be required.
(d) The pad shall be constructed from either concrete, asphalt
concrete, or other material sufficient to adequately support the
mobile home to prevent abnormal settling or heaving under the
weight of the home. The corners of the mobile home shall be
anchored to prevent wind overturn and rocking with tie-downs
such as concrete dead men, screw augers, arrowhead anchors,
or other devices suitable to withstand a tension of at least
2,800 pounds.
(6) Skirting. An enclosure of fireproof materials shall be erected
around the entire base of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall
provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of
the structure.
D. Soil and ground cover.
(1) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screening or other solid material or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and the emanation of dust during dry weather and which meets all
other requirements of this chapter.
(2) Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetative growth that is a
nuisance or poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects or
other pests in sufficient quantities as to be harmful to man, and
shall meet all other requirements of Chapter 214, Nuisances, of the
Township.
E. Nonresidential use areas. No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes except such uses that are required for direct
§ 370-1011 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1011
1:781
§ 370-1012. Development standards; townhouse village
development.
servicing and recreation for the residents of the park and for the
management and maintenance of the park.
F. Open space.
(1) All mobile home parks shall provide, and so indicate on the plan of
the mobile home park, suitable areas for recreation and open space
uses. The minimum standard for these areas shall be 25% of the
total area of the mobile home park, of which 1/2 shall be in one
place. The remainder may be used to provide pedestrian
connecting links to the recreation areas.
(2) The recreation and open space shall be located as centrally as
possible within the mobile home park in order to be easily
accessible to its residents.
(3) The open space shall be landscaped as specified in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, Article III, § 305-325.
(4) The open space shall be maintained as specified in § 370-3615, of
this chapter.
A. General. Unless otherwise stated, all development pursuant to this
article shall be subject to all other applicable regulations relating to
land subdivision, permissible development, utilities, private water and
sewer systems and necessary permits including, but not limited to,
regulations of State Department of Environmental Protection,
Warrington Township and the Bucks County Health Department and
land development and subdivision regulations.
B. Density. The density of a townhouse development shall not exceed 7 1/2
dwelling units per acre of gross buildable site area. Density is computed
by dividing the number of proposed dwelling units by the acreage of
gross buildable site area.
C. Minimum site area. Townhouse village developments shall have a
minimum gross site area of 45 acres of land.
D. Development mix.
(1) Required dwelling unit mix. All townhouse village developments
shall conform to the minimum standards for a mix of dwelling types
as set forth below.
§ 370-1011 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1012
1:782
Number of
Dwellings per
Development
Minimum
Required
Number of
Dwelling
Types
Maximum
Percentage
of Any
Dwelling
Types
Minimum
Percentage of
Any Dwelling
Types
1 to 40 1 100% 10%
41 to 85 2 70% 10%
85+ 3 45% 10%
(2) Such mix shall be a mixture of any of the following permitted
dwelling types:
(a) Townhouse with a garage.
(b) Townhouse without a garage.
(c) Courtyard townhouse.
(d) Multiplex.
E. Open space.
(1) Common and active open space. In order that adequate land for
parks and open space may be adequately provided, properly
located and preserved as the Township develops; and in order that
the onus of providing such park and open space land necessary to
serve the additional residents brought into the Township by the
new development may be most equitably apportioned on the basis
of the additional need created by that development, common open
space and active open space (as defined by § 370-202 of this
chapter) shall be required to be provided in accordance with
§ 370-307 of this chapter.
(2) Reservation of land for parks, open space, schools and other public
facilities. The developer, in the design of the development plan, and
the Board of Supervisors, in its review of the plan, shall consider
the adequate provision of sites for parks, open space, schools and
other public facilities as indicated on the adopted Comprehensive
Plan. Where such facilities are shown and located on the
Comprehensive Plan or where the Board otherwise determines that
a portion of the plan is required for such facilities, the developer
may be required to reserve such sites for a period not to exceed 60
days following receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation on the application for tentative approval, after
which time the Township shall either acquire the property or
release the reservation. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
(3) Environmental restrictions. Any land within the planned residential
development which is within the Environmental Restrictions
§ 370-1012 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1012
1:783
Overlay District as defined by §§ 370-305 through 370-307 of this
chapter shall be subject to the environmental restrictions,
regulations and conditions imposed thereby.
(4) Dedication of lands for public purposes. Where land is offered for
dedication to the Township or a public entity that is designated by
the Board of Supervisors to receive such lands, which shall be used
for public purposes, such as a park or public recreation, and the
Board of Supervisors, at its sole and absolute discretion, chooses to
accept all or a portion of the land so offered, the design criteria of
the balance of the property remaining, after the anticipated
dedication of the open space as set forth hereinabove, shall be in
accordance with the following criteria:
(a) Such dedication shall be a minimum of 15% of the gross lot
area as defined by the deed.
(b) Such dedicated lands must be contiguous with either
Township- or county-owned public lands.
(c) There shall remain a minimum of 5% of the tract which shall
remain as common open space for the development.
(d) The open space to be set aside for the above public purposes
shall be in lieu of any and all other open space and
environmental restrictions otherwise imposed by this chapter
or Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the
Code of the Township of Warrington.
(e) Prior to approval of any subdivision plan pursuant to this
subsection, the applicant shall submit an engineered sketch
plan, which shall depict the area proposed for dedication for
public purposes and the proposed development of the
remaining land.
(f) As a condition to approval of the final subdivision plans by the
Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall deliver to the
Township, for recording, a deed of dedication for the land
which the Board of Supervisors, in its sole and absolute
discretion, has chosen to accept, for the parcel then subject to
the final subdivision plan approval, title of same to be free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances and of quality for recording
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors at the advise of their
Solicitor. All costs of transfer and recording shall be borne by
the applicant.
(g) The provisions of § 370-1012E(4) shall control and shall be
deemed to supersede any inconsistent provisions of this
chapter, including the number of dwelling units calculated
pursuant to Form 307,154 and the environmental restrictions as
154. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-1012 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1012
1:784
set forth in Article III. In lieu thereof, the density and design
provisions set forth hereinabove, as well as the permitted
requirements and approval requirements of the Bucks County
Conservation District, the Army Corps of Engineers and the
Department of Environmental Protection, in its various
branches, shall apply.
(5) Residential siting. As outlined in the table Minimum Standards for
Planned Residential Developments with Public Utilities by Dwelling
Type,155 which shall be controlling.
(6) Buffer zones. Whenever a residential use is adjacent to a
nonresidential use, a buffer zone with a minimum width of 50 feet
shall be provided.
(7) Perimeter requirements. If topographical or other barriers do not
provide adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the planned
residential development, the developer shall be required to
permanently screen any proposed structure located within 200 feet
of the perimeter of the planned residential development, and in no
event shall any structure be located less than 50 feet from the
perimeter. Screening shall be as specified in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(8) Traffic ingress and egress.
(a) All planned residential developments shall have adequate road
access to and from the development as determined by the
traffic impact study required to be submitted with the
application for tentative approval.
(b) Based upon the findings and results of such impact study, the
Township may require road improvements by the developer
outside of the planned residential development to meet the
transportation needs created by the traffic projected to be
generated by the development.
(9) Design standards for townhouse units.
(a) Except for townhouse courtyard units, design standards for all
townhouse units with or without garages must conform to the
following standards:
[1] An overall structure of attached dwelling units shall not be
permitted with one common roof line or with equal front
and rear yard setbacks for all dwelling units.
[2] The appearance of the front and rear wall of the building
shall have a distinction between units by varying the unit
155. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-1012 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1012
1:785
width or height, providing different exterior materials on
the facade, or by changing the rooflines.
(b) For all residential units, the building or setback line along any
public street shall be a minimum of 30 feet. (Reference is made
only to the distance from the edge of the cartway or curbline to
the face of the building.)
(10) Sidewalk and street standards.
(a) All roads and parking areas within the townhouse village
development shall remain as private roads which shall be
maintained by a homeowners' association or other entity
approved by the Township.
(b) There shall be a vehicular hierarchy with internal collector
roads which shall provide access and egress to the common
parking facilities.
(c) All collector streets shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide serving
the development.
(d) There shall be a continuous sidewalk pathway system which
shall serve all dwellings, interconnect all areas of the
development and provide access to the open space.
(11) Sewer and water. All townhouse village developments shall be
served by public sewer and water.
§ 370-1012 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1012
1:786
ARTICLE XI
R-1 Residential District
[Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
§ 370-1101. Purpose.
The purpose of the Low-Density Residential District is to provide for the
expansion and orderly development of single-family homes in a
predominately rural residential atmosphere at a density consistent with the
desired results and the availability of public utilities.
§ 370-1102. Use regulations; permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a use by right:
§ 370-1103. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors under the provisions of § 370-3602:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Signs, in accordance with Article XXXV.
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above.
D. Municipal use.
E. Agricultural uses, including the keeping of livestock on lots of five acres
or more. Agricultural uses include the growing of nursery stock and
tilling of the soil. The keeping or raising of livestock on parcels of land
less than five acres in area shall be limited to the keeping and raising of
one head of livestock per 40,000 square feet of lot area. Any building or
area used for the keeping or raising of livestock shall be situated not
less than 100 feet from any street line, property line or dwelling other
than the owner's dwelling.
F. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Cluster development pursuant to § 370-1105B(2) herein.
B. Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,156 tower-based
wireless communications facilities and communications equipment
buildings. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
C. Flag lots. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1103
1:787
(1) Applications for flag lots must conform to all of the requirements
contained in Article XXXVI, § 370-3602, Conditional uses, of this
chapter and all of the following conditions.
(2) Flag lots must provide direct access to a public road through the
staff of the flag lot by means of a private right-of-way with a
minimum width of 25 feet and a maximum width of 49 feet. The
private right-of-way line shall extend from the ultimate right-of-way
line of the public road to the rear property line of the flag lot. The
width of the staff shall remain constant.
(3) No more than one property may use the private right-of-way.
(4) Flag lots shall contain one single-family detached dwelling and
customary accessory buildings to a single-family detached
dwelling. No other type of dwelling or nonresidential use will be
permitted on a flag lot.
(5) Flag lots must be serviced by public water and public sewer.
(6) Minimum lot area shall be computed using only the flag area of the
lot. The area of the flag shall be computed from the property lines
of the flag perimeter and the projected private right-of-way line of
the staff. No part of the staff may be included in the minimum lot
area.
(7) All setbacks shall be measured from the property lines and the
projected right-of-way line of the staff.
(8) A dense evergreen screening buffer with a minimum width of 20
feet shall be provided along the property lines of the flag lot
adjacent to all existing dwellings to provide effective year-round
screening.
(9) Area requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area (flag): 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard: 15 feet; minimum total composite: 35 feet.
The minimum side yard shall not include any portion of the
staff.
(d) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15% of flag area.
(f) Maximum impervious coverage: 15% of total lot area (flag plus
staff).
(g) Minimum width at the front setback line: 80 feet, not including
any portion of the staff.
§ 370-1103 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1103
1:788
§ 370-1104. Special exception.
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with the
provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-1105. Area requirements.
(10) The private right-of-way must meet all applicable standards
necessary for emergency access and firefighting as identified in
reviews conducted by the Warrington Township Fire Marshal in
accordance with the International Fire Code, as amended from
time to time. If no fire hydrant is available within 500 feet of the
proposed flag lot dwelling, the applicant must install fire hydrants
to a point no further than 500 feet from the proposed flag lot
dwelling in accordance with all applicable standards of the
Warrington Water and Sewer Department. All fire hydrants must be
accessible by firefighting equipment.
(11) Transferable development rights (TDRs) may not be used to create
flag lots.
(12)No flag lot staff may be created within 80 feet of another flag lot
staff.
(13) No flag lot staff may exceed 500 feet in length.
A. Home occupations.
B. Accessory uses to the permitted uses under § 370-1102.
C. Accessory apartments, subject to regulations in § 370-3616.
A. Without public utilities. Minimum lot sizes with on-site sewage disposal
shall be 60,000 square feet.
(1) Minimum building setback shall be 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
(2) Side yard shall be not less than 15 feet either side; minimum total
composite: 40 feet.
(3) Rear yard shall be not less than 50 feet.
(4) Minimum percentage of lot in impervious cover shall not be more
than 15% of lot.
(5) Minimum lot width at setback line shall be 100 feet.
(6) Minimum lot width at setback line on cul-de-sac streets with pieshaped
lots: not less than 80 feet.
B. With public utilities.
§ 370-1103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1105
1:789
§ 370-1106. Open space standards excluding cluster options.
[Amended 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-9; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13;
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-09]
For all residential uses permitted in this district, minimum open space
requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size with both public water and public sewer shall be
40,000 square feet using the following setback regulations:
(a) Minimum building setback 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is
greater.
(b) Side yard shall be not less than 15 feet either side; minimum
total composite: 35 feet.
(c) Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
(d) Minimum lot width at setback line shall be 80 feet.
(e) Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover shall be not
more than 15%.
(2) Cluster development as conditional use. As a exception to the
minimum lot size, sites serviced by approved public water and
sewer systems may reduce the lot size from 40,000 square feet to
22,500 square feet if the following conditions are met:
(a) The total number of dwelling units does not exceed the number
that would be permitted under § 370-1105B(1) of this section.
(b) Minimum building setback shall be a maximum of 35% at 30
feet. The remaining 65% must be at 40 feet or more. For
nondedicated roads or access drives, the setback shall be
measured from the near edge of cartway.
[1] Side yards shall be not less than a zero lot line or 35 feet
total composite.
[2] Rear yard shall be not less than 30 feet.
[3] Open space: 25% or six acres, whichever is greater, of the
net site area must be set aside and maintained as common
open space in a manner prescribed in Article XXXVI,
§ 370-3615.
A. One to 300 dwelling units: six acres per 100 dwelling units.
B. Over 300 dwelling units: 18 acres plus one acre per 100 families over
300.
C. If it is determined that open space land as represented on a subdivision
or land development plan is not suitable with regard to the size, shape,
§ 370-1105 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1106
1:790
§ 370-1107. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-1108. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-1109. Utility sheds. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13;
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
location, access or provisions for maintenance, the Township may, at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, require that open space
be provided through payment of a fee in lieu of land and/or facilities.
This fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the acreage
that would otherwise be dedicated pursuant to this section, as stated
in the adopted Fee Schedule.157 Such payment shall be made to the
Warrington Township Parks and Recreation Board, to be used for the
acquisition, development, or improvement of open space land that will
be available and accessible to and that will benefit the residents of the
development. This option is available in all zoning districts within the
Township in which open space is required.
D. Stormwater management facilities and preexisting aboveground
utilities with their corresponding easements shall not qualify as "open
space" under this article. However, the Township may, at its discretion,
permit the storage area of a detention basin to qualify as "open space";
provided, that the Township is satisfied that:
(1) The storage area of the detention basin is broad and flat and usable
for recreational purposes; and
(2) The storage area of the detention basin is incorporated into an
integrated open space plan that would greatly benefit the Township
and the future of the development.
A. Subject to all other restrictions provided in this section, utility sheds
not in excess of 192 square feet in area on parcels greater than or equal
to 7,500 square feet in area, and not in excess of 120 square feet in area
on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area, and in no event greater
than 10 feet in height, may be erected in the rear or side yard of any
developed lot in the R-1 District, provided that such sheds shall be at
least seven feet from any property line. Such sheds may be located as
close as one foot from the property line with written consent of
adjoining neighbors. In the R-1 District, only one such structure
permitted per lot.
B. Building permits or utility sheds shall be obtained prior to the
construction thereof based on plan submission and approval by the
157. Editor's Note: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 370-1106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1109
1:791
§ 370-1110. Transfer of development rights. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6; amended 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
The R-1 District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 and RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use
of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(a)[2][b]. In addition to the
above, any transferable development right created pursuant to § 370-411C
may be transferred to this district.
Township. Such sheds shall be exempt from the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code.158
C. No building permit will be issued for a utility shed unless after
construction of such shed the maximum building coverage and
impervious ratio for the R-1 District, in which the lot is located, will not
be exceeded.
D. No sheds may be erected in any easements or drainage swales.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-1109 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1110
1:792
ARTICLE XII
R-1-C Residential District
[Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-03]
§ 370-1201. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1-C Residential District is to provide for the orderly
development of areas of the Township with existing and proposed
residential areas where adequate public utilities and circulation facilities
are available or can be made readily available and to provide for the
termination and cessation of existing junkyard operations and/or approved
or authorized junkyard operations by providing transferable development
rights in exchange for binding restrictions and/or declarations which would
provide for the termination and cessation of existing junkyard operations
and/or approved or authorized junkyard operations.
§ 370-1202. Use regulation; permitted uses.
All uses as set forth at § 370-1102 hereinabove as well as cluster
development on minimum lot sizes as set forth at § 370-1105B(2)
hereinabove and pursuant to the area requirements and design standards
as set forth at § 370-1204 hereinbelow.
§ 370-1203. Special exceptions.
Those uses as set forth at § 370-1104A and B hereinabove.
§ 370-1204. Area requirement and design standards.
A. Without public utilities. The area requirements and design standards
set forth at § 370-1105A(1) through (6) shall apply with the following
modified requirements:
(1) Section 370-1105A(2). Side yard shall not be less than 20 feet
either side; minimum total composite: 50 feet.
(2) Section 370-1105A(5). Minimum lot width at setback line shall be
125 feet.
(3) Section 370-1105A(6): delete.
B. With public utilities. The area requirements and design standards set
forth at § 370-1105B(1)(a) through (e) shall apply with the following
modified requirements:
(1) Section 370-1105B(1)(b). Side yard shall not be less than 20 feet
either side; minimum total composite 50 feet.
(2) Section 370-1105B(1)(d). Minimum lot width at setback line shall
be 125 feet.
§ 370-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1204
1:793
§ 370-1205. Open space. [Amended 9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-21;
12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 03-25]
Open space shall be required in all cluster developments in an amount
equal to 25% of the gross site area. Open space shall be designed in a
manner to provide for either or both active and passive recreation and,
where possible, to be added to existing public open space. Open space
may also be used for appropriate buffering, protection and preservation of
streetscapes and preservation of other natural features such as woodlands
and wetlands. Inclusion of stormwater management facilities within open
space shall be governed by the provisions of § 370-1106D hereinabove. The
Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, accept in lieu of a portion of
the required open space construction of improvements on and/or off-site
designed to benefit the general public. Any such modification shall not
increase permitted density or minimum lot size as otherwise required in the
R-1-C District.
§ 370-1206. Open space ownership.
Open space shall be offered in dedication to Warrington Township in the
first instance. If the Township elects not to accept some or all of the open
C. Open space standards excluding cluster option. For all residential uses
permitted in this district, other than for cluster development with or
without TDRs, the provisions of § 370-1106 hereinabove shall apply.
D. Cluster development as permitted use. Cluster development shall be
permitted only on individual tracts of land, or combined tracts of land
which are contiguous, where the land to be developed is in excess of 15
acres of gross site area. The total number of dwelling units for any such
cluster development shall not exceed one lot/dwelling unit per acre
contained within the gross site area. The following design standards
shall apply to any such cluster development.
(1) Minimum lot area: 22,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width at building setback line: 80 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum building setback shall be at 30 feet as to a maximum of
35% of all lots. The remaining 65% of lots, at a minimum, must be
set back a minimum of 40 feet. For nondedicated roads or access
drives, the setback shall be measured from the near edge of
cartway.
(5) Side yards shall not be less than ten-foot minimum and 35 feet
composite.
(6) Rear yards shall not be less than 30 feet.
(7) Open space shall be in accordance with §§ 370-1205 and 370-1206.
§ 370-1204 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1206
1:794
space, ownership of the open space may be undertaken by homeowners'
association or appropriate deed restriction, with the inclusion of open space
within an individual lot or lots, with said deed-restricted open space
precluded from further development, placement of impervious coverage or
other forms of structure other than perimeter fencing.
§ 370-1207. Parking.
As set forth at § 370-1107 above, inclusive.
§ 370-1208. Signs.
As set forth at § 370-1108 above, inclusive.
§ 370-1209. Utility sheds.
As set forth at § 370-1109 above, inclusive.
§ 370-1210. Transfer of development rights.
No property located within an R-1-C District shall be a receiving tract
for TDRs other than TDRs created within the R-1-C District wherein the
receiving tract is located.
§ 370-1211. Establishment of TDRs in R-1-C District.
The Board of Supervisors may by ordinance establish a Zoning Map change
creating an R-1-C District to provide for the establishment of transferable
development rights which can only be utilized within the R-1-C District so
established. Such development rights may only be created upon sending
properties with preexisting junkyard operations and/or approved or
authorized junkyard operations. If TDRs so created are utilized for
development upon receiving lands within the same R-1-C District within
which the sending areas have been created, the provisions hereinbelow
shall apply to cluster development upon the receiving areas with the use of
such TDRs.
§ 370-1212. Development criteria in R-1-C District with use of
TDRs. [Amended 9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-21; 12-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-25]
All provisions set forth hereinabove as otherwise applicable to cluster
development in an R-1-C District, including those relating to open space
at §§ 370-1205 and 370-1206, shall apply to cluster development upon
receiving areas with the use of TDRs, modified as follows.
A. Lot design criteria. The following design criteria shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area: not less than 16,000 square feet average, nor
less than 13,500 square feet minimum; provided, that any lot
§ 370-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1212
1:795
abutting residentially zoned lands not part of the proposed cluster
development shall be a minimum of 15,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 30%. [Amended 9-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-O-09]
(3) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(5) Minimum aggregate side yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(7) Minimum lot width at building setback line: 75 feet.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet.
B. The density restriction of one unit per acre as set forth at § 370-1204
hereinabove shall not be applicable to cluster development. Rather, the
permitted density at § 370-1204 of one lot/dwelling unit per acre of the
gross site area may be further increased by the use of TDRs created
within the R-1-C District, provided the above design criteria of this
§ 370-1212 are met and the minimum open space requirements as set
forth at § 370-1205 hereinabove are met.159
159. Editor's Note: Former § 723, Flag Lots, added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-03, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14.
§ 370-1212 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1212
1:796
ARTICLE XIII
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
[Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
§ 370-1301. Purpose.
The purpose of the Medium-Density Residential District is to provide for the
orderly development of existing and proposed medium-density residential
areas where adequate public utilities and circulation facilities are or will be
available, and to exclude those uses not compatible with such development.
§ 370-1302. Use regulations; permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a use by right:
§ 370-1303. Conditional uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors:
A. Single-family.
B. Signs, in accordance with Article XXXV.
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above.
D. Public sewers, installations and buildings (means any person, firm or
corporation, governmental agency or board fully authorized to furnish
and furnishing to the public electricity, gas, steam, telephone,
telegraphy, transportation, water or any other similar public utilities).
E. Agricultural uses, including the keeping of livestock on lots of 10 acres
or more. Agricultural uses include the growing of nursery stock and
tilling of the soil. Shall be limited to one head of livestock or horse per
40,000 square feet of lot area. Any building or area used for the keeping
or raising of livestock shall be situated not less than 100 feet from any
street line or dwelling other than the owner's dwelling or property line.
F. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Two-family semidetached.
B. Cluster development.
C. Bed-and-breakfast.
D. Municipal use.
E. Private educational, religious or philanthropic uses.
F. Public schools.
§ 370-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1304
1:797
§ 370-1304. Special exception.
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with the
provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-1305. Area requirements. [Amended 10-3-1995 by Ord. No.
95-8; 8-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
A. Home occupations.
B. Accessory uses to the permitted uses under § 370-1302.
C. Accessory apartments subject to regulations in § 370-3616.
A. Without public utilities.
(1) Single-family detached. Minimum lot size with on-site sewage
disposal: 40,000 square feet, using the following setback
requirements:
(a) Minimum building setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is
greater, measured from the near edge of the cartway or
extension thereof.
(b) Side yard shall be not less than 15 feet either side, minimum
total composite 40 feet.
(c) Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
(d) Minimum lot width at setback line: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum lot width at setback line on cul-de-sac streets with
pie-shaped lot: not less than 80 feet.
(f) Minimum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more than
15%.
(2) Two-family semidetached.
(a) Minimum gross site area: three acres.
(b) Minimum lot size per dwelling unit, with on-site sewage
disposal: 25,000 square feet, using the following setback
requirements:
[1] Minimum building setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is
greater. A maximum of 35% of buildings shall be at this
minimum with the remaining 65% at 45 feet or more. For
nondedicated roads or access drives, the setback shall be
measured from the near edge of cartway or extension
thereof.
§ 370-1304 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1305
1:798
[2] Side yard shall be not less than 30 feet on one side, with a
zero lot line.
[3] Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
[4] Minimum lot width per two dwelling units at setback line
shall be not less than 60 feet.
[5] Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more
than 15%.
B. With public utilities.
(1) Single-family detached. Minimum lot size, with both public water
and sewer: 20,000 square feet, using the following setback
requirements:
(a) Minimum building setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts or 35 feet, whichever is
greater. A maximum of 35% of buildings shall be at this
minimum with the remaining 65% at 45 feet or more. For
nondedicated or access drives, the setback shall be measured
from the near edge of cartway or extension thereof.
(b) Side yards shall be not less than 15 feet either side; minimum
total composite: 35 feet.
(c) Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
(d) Minimum lot width at setback line: not less than 80 feet.
(e) Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more than
15%.
(2) Two-family semidetached.
(a) A minimum gross site area: three acres.
(b) Minimum lot size per dwelling unit, with both public water and
sewer: 15,000 square feet using the following setback
requirements:
[1] Minimum building setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is
greater. A maximum of 35% of buildings shall be at this
minimum with the remaining 65% at 45 feet or more. For
nondedicated roads or access drives, the setback shall be
measured from the near edge of cartway or extension
thereof.
[2] Side yard shall be not less than 25 feet on one side with a
zero lot line.
[3] Rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet.
§ 370-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1305
1:799
[4] Minimum lot width per two dwelling units at setback line
shall be not less than 55 feet.
[5] Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more
than 15%.
(3) Public schools or private educational, religious or philanthropic
uses.
(a) Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious surface: 60%.
(h) Parking: one off-street parking space for each faculty member
and employee plus one additional off-street parking space for
every two classrooms and offices.
(i) Buffers. The provisions of § 370-1306B of this chapter shall
apply. In addition, outdoor play areas shall be screened so as to
protect adjacent residential districts or residences from
inappropriate noise or other disturbances.
C. Cluster option (only with public utilities).
(1) General requirements.
(a) Cluster option is permitted only where public water and sewer
are provided to the site.
(b) After review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the
proposed development for approval, conditional approval, or
denial. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07;
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
(c) Minimum gross site area: 10 acres. The total number of
dwelling units does not exceed the number that would be
permitted under § 370-1305B of this section.
(d) Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more than
25% of lot.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Single-family detached.
§ 370-1305 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1305
1:800
§ 370-1306. Standards. [Amended 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-9;
5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-09]
[1] Cluster option. As an alternative to the minimum lot size,
sites serviced by approved public water and sewer systems
may reduce the lot size from 20,000 to 13,500 square feet
per dwelling unit if the following conditions are met:
[a] Twenty-five percent or six acres, whichever is greater,
of the net site area must be set aside and maintained
as common open space in a manner prescribed in
Article XXXVI, § 370-3615.
[b] Minimum building setback line shall be not less than a
maximum of 35% at 30 feet; the remaining 65% must
be at 40 feet or more. For nondedicated roads or
access drives, the setback shall be measured from the
near edge of cartway.
[2] Side yard shall be zero lot line or 35 feet total composite.
[3] Rear yard shall be not less than 30 feet.
[4] All other applicable regulations pertaining to this section
must be complied with.
(b) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
[1] Cluster option. As an alternative to the minimum lot size,
lots may be reduced from 15,000 square feet per dwelling
unit to 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit if the following
conditions are met:
[a] Twenty-five percent or six acres, whichever is greater
of the net site area, must be set aside and maintained
as common open space in a manner prescribed in
Article XXXVI, § 370-3615.
[b] Minimum building setback shall be: a maximum of
35% will be allowed at 30 feet; the remaining 65%
must be at 40 feet or more. For nondedicated roads or
access drives, the setback shall be measured from the
near edge of cartway.
[c] Side yard shall be zero lot line or 35 feet total
composite.
[d] Rear yard shall be not less than 30 feet.
A. Open space. For all residential uses permitted in this district, a
minimum open space requirement shall be as follows:
(1) One to 300 dwelling units: 12 acres per 100 dwelling units.
§ 370-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1306
1:801
§ 370-1307. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-1308. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-1309. Utility sheds. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13;
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
(2) Over 300 dwelling units: 36 acres plus one acre per 100 families
over 300.
(3) If it is determined that open space land as represented on a
subdivision or land development plan is not suitable with regard to
the size, shape, location, access or provisions for maintenance, the
Township may, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
require that open space be provided through payment of a fee in
lieu of land and/or facilities. This fee shall be based upon the fair
market value of the acreage that would otherwise be dedicated
pursuant to this section, as stated in the adopted Fee Schedule.160
Such payment shall be made to the Warrington Township Parks and
Recreation Board, to be used for the acquisition, development, or
improvement of open space land that will be available and
accessible to and that will benefit the residents of the development.
This option is available in all zoning districts within the Township in
which open space is required.
(4) Stormwater management facilities and preexisting aboveground
utilities with their corresponding easements shall not qualify as
"open space" under this article. However, the Township may, at its
discretion, permit the storage area of a detention basin to qualify
as "open space," provided that the Township is satisfied that:
(a) The storage area of the detention basin is broad and flat and
usable for recreational purposes; and
(b) The storage area of the detention basin is incorporated into an
integrated open space plan that would greatly benefit the
Township and the future of the development.
B. Screening and buffering. Along each side or rear property line which
adjoins an existing residence or residential district, a buffer planting
not less than 30 feet in depth shall be provided. Along each street line, a
fifteen-foot buffer planting shall be provided, including sidewalks and
accessways. For buffer requirements, see Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
A. Subject to all other restrictions provided in this section.
160. Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is included at the front of this Code.
§ 370-1306 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1309
1:802
§ 370-1310. Transfer of development rights. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
The R-2 District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use
of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(a)[2][c]. In addition to the
above, any transferable development right created pursuant to § 370-411C
may be transferred to this district.
B. Utility sheds not in excess of 192 square feet in area on parcels greater
than or equal to 7,500 square feet in area, and not in excess of 120
square feet in area on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area, and in
no event greater than 10 feet in height, may be erected in the rear or
side yard of any developed lot in the R-2 District, provided that such
shed shall be at least seven feet from any property line. Such sheds may
be located as close as one foot from the property line with written
consent of adjoining neighbors.
C. In the R-2 District, only one such structure is permitted per lot.
D. Building permits for utility sheds shall be obtained prior to the
construction thereof based on plan submission and approval by the
Township. Such sheds shall be exempt from the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code.161
E. No building permit will be issued for a utility shed unless after
construction of such shed the maximum building coverage and
impervious surface ratio for the R-2 District in which the lot is located
will not be exceeded.
F. No sheds may be erected in any easements or drainage swales.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-1309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1310
1:803

ARTICLE XIV
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
[Added 7-25-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6; amended 10-6-1992 by Ord. No.
92-9]
§ 370-1401. Purpose.
The purpose of the Single-Family Residential District is to provide for
the orderly development of existing and proposed residential areas where
adequate public utilities and circulation facilities are available; and to
exclude those uses not compatible with such development.
§ 370-1402. Use regulations; permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as uses by right:
§ 370-1403. Special exception.
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
§ 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-1404. Area requirements. [Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-09]
A. Single-family.
B. Signs in accordance with Article XXXV.
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above,
subject to the limitations of § 370-1408.
D. Public utilities (means any person, firm or corporation, governmental
agency or board fully authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public
electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraphy, transportation, water or
any other similar public utilities).
E. Agricultural uses, including the keeping of livestock on lots of 10 acres
or more. Agricultural uses include the growing of nursery stock and
tilling of the soil; shall be limited to one head of livestock or horse per
40,000 square feet of lot area. Any building or area used for the keeping
or raising of livestock shall be situated not less than 100 feet from any
street line or dwelling other than the owner's dwelling or property line.
F. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Home occupations, nonprofessional only, as defined in § 370-202.
A. General requirements.
(1) Single-family.
§ 370-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1404
1:805
§ 370-1405. Standards.
(a) Minimum lot size: 13,500 square feet per dwelling unit, using
the following setback requirements:
[1] Minimum building setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of
each street on which the lot abuts, or 35 feet, whichever is
greater. A maximum of 35% of buildings shall be at this
minimum with the remaining 65% at 45 feet or more. For
nondedicated or access drives, the setback shall be
measured from the near edge of the cartway or extension
thereof.
[2] Side yard shall be not less than 10 feet either side, and not
less than 25 feet in the aggregate for both sides.
[3] Rear yard shall be not less than 40 feet.
[4] Minimum lot width at setback line: not less than 75 feet.
[5] Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more
than 25%.
B. Additional requirements. [Amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-09]
(1) Development is permitted only where public water and sewer are
provided to the site.
(2) After review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, the
Board of Supervisors shall consider the design of the proposed
development for approval, conditional approval, or denial.
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
A. Density. Gross density of any development shall not exceed 1.9 dwelling
units per acre of gross site area, notwithstanding any other provision of
this or any other chapter.
B. Utilities. All utilities shall be underground within lot lines.
C. Open space. For all residential uses permitted in this district, a
minimum open space requirement shall be as follows: [Amended
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-09]
(1) One to 300 dwelling units: 12 acres per 100 dwelling units.
(2) Over 300 dwelling units: 36 acres plus one acre per 100 dwelling
units over 300.
(3) If it is determined that open space land as represented on a
subdivision or land development plan is not suitable with regard to
the size, shape, location, access or provisions for maintenance, the
Township may, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
§ 370-1404 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1405
1:806
§ 370-1406. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-1407. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-1408. Utility sheds. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
require that open space be provided through payment of a fee in
lieu of land and/or facilities. This fee shall be based upon the fair
market value of the acreage that would otherwise be dedicated
pursuant to this section, as stated in the adopted Fee Schedule.162
Such payment shall be made to the Warrington Township Parks
and Recreation Fund, to be used for the acquisition, development,
or improvement of open space land that will be available and
accessible to and that will benefit the residents of the development.
This option is available in all zoning districts within the Township
in which open space is required.
(4) Stormwater management facilities and preexisting aboveground
utilities with their corresponding easements shall not qualify as
"open space" under this article. However, the Township may, at its
discretion, permit the storage area of a detention basin to qualify
as "open space," provided that the Township is satisfied that:
(a) The storage area of the detention basin is broad and flat and
usable for recreational purposes; and
(b) The storage area of the detention basin is incorporated into an
integrated open space plan that would greatly benefit the
Township and the future of the development.
D. Construction type. All exterior surfaces shall present a finished
residential appearance. Exposed concrete, concrete block and cinder
block shall not be permitted on any exterior surface higher than two
feet above ground level.
E. Screening and buffering. Along each side or rear property line which
adjoins an existing residence or residential district, a buffer planting
shall be provided and maintained not less than 30 feet in depth. Along
each street line, a fifteen-foot buffer planting shall be provided,
including sidewalks and accessways. For buffer requirements, see
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
A. Subject to all other restrictions provided in this section.
162. Editor's Note: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 370-1405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1408
1:807
§ 370-1409. Transfer of development rights. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6; amended 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
The R-3 District may receive TDRs from Tax Map Parcel 50-10-13 and
from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use of TDRs
shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(a)[2][d]. In addition to the above,
any transferable development right created pursuant to § 370-411C may be
transferred to this district.
B. A utility shed not exceeding 192 square feet in area on parcels greater
than or equal to 7,500 square feet in area, and not in excess of 120
square feet in area on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area, and in
no event greater than 10 feet in height, may be erected in the rear or
side yard of any development lot in the R-3 District. Such structures
may not be erected in any easements or drainage swales. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Required side and rear yards may be occupied by a utility shed,
provided that:
(1) Such sheds shall be situated not less than five feet from any lot line,
or not less than one foot from the property line if written consent is
obtained from all adjoining neighbors; and
(2) Not less than 15 feet further back from the street line than the
rearmost portion of the principal building.
D. In an R-3 District, only one shed is permitted per dwelling.
E. Building permits for a garage or accessory structure shall be obtained
prior to the construction thereof based on plan submitted and approved
by the Township. Such structures, unless attached to the residence or
equipped with plumbing or electric utilities or natural gas, shall be
exempt from the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.163
F. No building permit will be issued for an accessory structure unless after
construction of such structure, the maximum building coverage and
impervious surface ratio for the R-3 District in which the lot is located
will not be exceeded.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-1408 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1409
1:808
ARTICLE XV
R-2I Residential Infill District
[Added 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-13]
§ 370-1501. Purpose.
The R-2I Residential Infill District is created to provide for the orderly
infill development of existing medium density residential areas where public
sewer facilities are or will be available.
§ 370-1502. Use regulations; permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as uses by right:
§ 370-1503. Conditional uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors:
§ 370-1504. Special exception.
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in accordance with the
provisions of § 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-1505. Area requirements.
A. Single-family detached.
B. Signs in accordance with Article XXXV.
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above.
D. Public utility installations and buildings.
E. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Cluster development.
B. Municipal use.
A. Home occupations.
B. Accessory uses to the permitted uses under § 370-1502.
C. Accessory apartments subject to regulations in § 370-3616.
A. Single-family detached with public sewers.
(1) Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet using the following setback
requirements.
§ 370-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1505
1:809
(2) Minimum building setback: 35 feet or equivalent to the average of
setbacks of the houses on the two adjoining properties, whichever
is less.
(3) Side yard: not less than 15 feet either side; minimum total
composite 35 feet.
(4) Rear yard: not less than 35 feet.
(5) Minimum lot width at setback line: not less than 80 feet.
(6) Maximum percent of lot in impervious cover: not more than 25%.
(7) Exceptions to minimum lot size and yard requirements. The
aforementioned requirements shall not prevent the construction of
a single-family detached dwelling on a lot which was lawful when
created and which, prior to the adoption of the first zoning
ordinance in Warrington Township, was held in single and separate
ownership, provided the following regulations are met:
(a) Minimum building setback. Front yards shall not be less than
required within the R-2I Residential Infill District for standard
single-family detached dwellings or shall not be less than the
average of the front yards of the two adjacent properties,
whichever is less.
(b) Side yard. The side yard shall be reduced by the same
percentage that the area of the lot bears to the standard singlefamily
detached dwelling in the R-2I Residential Infill District,
whatever percentage of 20,000 square feet. The minimum side
yard shall be 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard. The rear yard shall be reduced by the same
percentage that the area of the lot bears to the standard singlefamily
detached dwelling in the R-2I Residential Infill District,
whatever percentage of 20,000 square feet. The minimum rear
yard shall be 25 feet.
(d) Maximum percentage of building coverage. Maximum building
coverage of 15% of the existing lot size shall be permitted.
(e) Combination of contiguous lots. The exception to the above
minimum lot size standards shall not apply to any two or more
contiguous lots which were held in single ownership as of or
subsequent to the adoption of the first zoning ordinance in
Warrington Township in any case where a reparceling or
replatting could create one or more lots which would conform
to this chapter.
B. Cluster option (only with public water and sewer).
(1) General requirements.
§ 370-1505 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1505
1:810
§ 370-1506. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-1507. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-1508. Utility sheds. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
Utility sheds shall be subject to the following requirements as well as to all
other restrictions provided in this section:
(a) Cluster option is permitted only where public water and sewer
are provided to the site.
(b) Minimum gross site area shall be six acres.
(c) The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number
that would be permitted under § 370-1305A(1) of Article XIII.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Single-family detached cluster option. As an alternative to the
minimum lot size, sites served by approved public water and
sewer systems may reduce the lot size from 20,000 to 12,000
square feet per dwelling unit if the following conditions are
met:
[1] Minimum open space. Forty percent or six acres,
whichever is greater, of the net site area must be set aside
and maintained as common open space in a manner
prescribed in Article XXXVI, § 370-3615.
[2] Minimum building setback shall not be less than a
maximum of 35% at 30 feet; the remaining 65% must be at
40 feet or more. For nondedicated roads or access drives,
the setback shall be measured from the near edge of
cartway.
[3] Side yard. Shall be zero lot line or 35 feet total composite.
[4] Rear yard. Shall be not less than 30 feet.
[5] Maximum percentage of lot in impervious cover: not more
than 30%.
[6] All other applicable regulations pertaining to this section
must be complied with.
§ 370-1505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1508
1:811
§ 370-1509. Transfer of development rights. [Added 1-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-2; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
The R-2I District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use of
TDRs shall be set forth in § 370-411G(6)(a)[2][e]. In addition to the above,
any transferable development right created pursuant to § 370-411C may be
transferred to this district.
A. Maximum size: not in excess of 192 square feet in area on parcels
greater than or equal to 7,500 square feet in area and not in excess of
120 square feet in area on parcels less than 7,500 square feet in area.
B. Maximum height: not in excess of 10 feet in height.
C. Minimum distance from property line. Utility shed may be erected only
in the rear or side yard of any developed lot in the R-2I Residential Infill
District, provided that such shed shall be at least seven feet from any
property line. Such sheds may be located as close as one foot from the
property line with written consent of adjoining neighbors.
D. Maximum number of sheds per lot: only one shed shall be permitted per
lot.
E. Building permits. Building permits for utility sheds shall be obtained
prior to the construction thereof based on plan submission and approval
by the Township. Such sheds shall be exempt from the requirements of
the Uniform Construction Code.164 No permit will be issued for a utility
shed unless after construction of such shed, the maximum building
coverage and impervious surface ratio for the R-2I Residential Infill
District in which the lot is located will not be exceeded.
F. Sheds in easements. No sheds may be erected in any easements or
drainage swales.
G. Reduced fee variance. Should the rear or side yard be irregular in area
as often occurs in segmental lots in culs-de-sac and corner lots of highly
curved streets, the owner may apply for a zoning variances to permit
the shed at a reduced fee as may be established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 370-1508 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1509
1:812
ARTICLE XVI
I-U Institutional Uses
§ 370-1601. Purpose.
The purpose of the Institutional Use District is to provide for the orderly
establishment of institutional uses where adequate public utilities, access
and circulation facilities and public services exist for the safety and
convenience of such uses, and to exclude those uses which are not
compatible with such development.
§ 370-1602. Use regulations; permitted uses. [Amended 8-23-1988
by Ord. No. 88-15; 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2; 2-8-2000 by Ord. No.
00-5]
The following uses may be permitted as uses by right:
§ 370-1603. Conditional uses.
None.
§ 370-1604. Special exceptions.
None.
§ 370-1605. Area requirements. [Amended 8-23-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15; 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3;
2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5]
A. Senior living community.
B. Nursing homes and convalescent homes.
C. Hospitals, sanitariums, or other medical facilities.
D. Independent senior residential community.
A. Senior living community.
(1) Declaration of legislative intent. It is declared to be the intent of
this section to allow senior living community developments as
permitted use in the Institutional District and to establish
reasonable standards of performance and promote the desirable
benefits which will follow the development of a safe and adequate
senior living community and to ensure that adequate area in a
suitable environment is provided. It is the further intent of this
section to set forth standards which will ensure the development of
a senior living community in Warrington Township will provide
appropriate safety features for the residents as well as ancillary
health care, recreational and community facilities as an integral
part of the community. Finally, it is the intent of this section to
provide for standards of dwelling unit density, parking space, and
§ 370-1601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1605
1:813
open space area to increase opportunity of the development of
such housing in the Township through private, public or semipublic
means, while providing necessary standards and controls to ensure
that such senior living community will not exert an adverse impact
on surrounding neighborhoods.
(2) Use regulations. Permitted uses, in conjunction with a senior living
community, shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family attached dwellings for persons 55 years of age or
older.
(b) Apartment building and condominiums for persons 55 years of
age or older.
(c) Health care services for persons 55 years of age or older who
require nursing or convalescent care for extended periods of
time.
(d) Accessory uses exclusively to meet the needs of the occupants
of the senior living community.
[1] Retail area. Maximum area for accessory retail, personal
service and professional office, supportive of the specified
use, shall not exceed 5% of the gross floor area. Such retail
area shall not be intermixed with residential dwelling units
nor be available for use by the general public. No public
advertisement by sign or other medium shall be permitted
for such accessory retail use.
(e) Required open space. For purposes of this section, the term
"required open space" shall mean land required under the
terms of this article to be permanently preserved for
recreation, environmental and aesthetic purposes. Required
setbacks from lot lines or street rights-of-way shall not be used
in calculating the required open space.
(f) No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
(3) Development regulations. The following density, area width and
yard regulations shall apply to senior living community:
(a) Maximum density. A maximum density of six units per gross
buildable site acre.
[1] Nursing beds shall be provided for not more than 25% of
allowable density and not less than 10% of allowable
density of the number of residential living units.
(b) Minimum area. An area of not less than 25 acres shall be
provided for every senior living community.
§ 370-1605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1605
1:814
(c) Permanent open space. No less than 40% of the area of a tract
developed as a senior living community shall be retained as
permanent open space for use by the residents for recreational
and leisure activities.
(d) Distance between buildings.
[1] For any two exterior facing walls, the building of which is
oriented front-to-front, front-to-rear, or rear-to-rear, the
minimum distance apart shall be equal to 1 1/2 times the
height of the tallest building, or a minimum distance of 25
feet, whichever is greater.
[2] For any combination of exterior facing walls not qualified
under Subsection A(3)(d)[1] above, the total distance apart
shall be equal to the height of the tallest building or a
minimum distance of 40 feet, whichever is greater.
(e) Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be observed.
[1] Apartment buildings and health care facilities: 100 feet
from any property line.
[2] Single-family attached dwellings: 75 feet from any
property line.
[3] All buildings: 75 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of any
public street.
[4] There shall be access provided for emergency vehicles to
all sides of all buildings.
(f) Building height. The maximum building height (to the base of
the roof line) shall be 35 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious surface: 30% of the gross site buildable
area.
(4) General requirements.
(a) Utilities. All buildings within a senior living community shall be
served by public sewage system and public water system.
(b) Common areas and facilities. Provisions shall be made for the
perpetual maintenance and care of all common areas including
streets, driveways, parking areas, walkways, landscaped
planting areas, open space and recreation.
(c) Other facilities. Such other improvements including roads,
curbs, and stormwater collection and control facilities as
required by Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Township of Warrington, shall be provided.
(5) Buffer and screening requirements for senior living communities.
§ 370-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1605
1:815
(a) Buffer.
[1] General requirements. Along all exterior property
boundary lines there shall be a permanent buffer at least
15 feet in depth, unless this is waived pursuant to
Subsection A(5)(a)[4] or [5] below. A screen buffer (as
defined herein) shall be provided wherever the
development abuts existing residential uses, with the
exception of mid-rise or high-rise structures, and where
abutting other type of uses when deemed necessary by the
Board of Supervisors to provide sufficient buffering and
transition. A softening buffer (as defined herein) shall be
provided wherever the development abuts mid-rise or
high-rise residential uses; existing commercial, office,
industrial and institutional uses; any existing street [as
modified by Subsection A(5)(a)[3] below], drive, or parking
area; or open (not wooded) undeveloped land. An open
buffer shall be provided wherever the development abuts
wooded undeveloped land, or where extensive buffers are
deemed unnecessary by the Board of Supervisors.
[2] Components. The minimum component of each type of
buffer shall be as follows:
[a] Screen buffers.
[i] The primary components of screen buffer shall be
a row of evergreen trees, at the height of not less
than six feet when planted, spaced not more than
10 feet apart on-center, and these trees shall be of
such species to attain a height at maturity of not
less than 20 feet. Also required as a secondary
component of the buffer is one of the following:
mounding (the use of which is encouraged),
provided the slopes shall be a maximum of three
to one; visually opaque fencing not greater than
six feet in height; and coniferous shrubbery.
[ii] Any combination of evergreen trees, coniferous
shrubs, or other natural vegetation or mounding
is allowable, provided an effective visual screen at
least 15 feet in height above the adjacent ground
elevation in the development is achieved within a
reasonable time. But, whenever only vegetation is
used, there shall be at least a double row of
evergreen trees, with the trees in one row offset
five feet from the trees in the other row, and the
rows at least five feet apart.
[b] Softening buffer. The primary component of a
softening buffer shall be a row of trees spaced more
§ 370-1605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1605
1:816
than 25 feet apart on-center, at least 25% of which
shall be evergreens. The evergreen trees shall be at
least six feet in height when planted and shall attain
at least 20 feet in height at maturity. Any deciduous
trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and eight
feet in height when planted and shall attain a height
of not less than 20 feet at maturity. These trees shall
be interspersed with other allowable components,
including any other type of trees, shrubs, mounding,
fencing and/or similar natural or man-made elements
having a visible vertical dimension, or any
combination thereof.
[c] Open buffer. The open buffer shall at a minimum
consist of grass, ground cover, and/or similar
vegetative material, and may include trees, shrubs or
other natural landscaping materials.
[3] Street boundaries. Rather than the extensive buffer
described in Subsection A(5)(a)[2][b], above, the use of a
singe row of deciduous trees at least eight feet in height
when planted and at least 20 feet in height at maturity,
with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on-center, may be
provided along all property boundaries which abut a street
wherever necessary for adequate sight distance or where
the Board of Supervisors determines this to be a sufficient
buffer to protect the welfare and safety of the community.
[4] Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a
development occurs along natural features which function
as buffers including, but not limited to, mature vegetation,
significant grade changes or stream valleys, which are
likely to be permanently preserved, buffering may be
waived along that edge(s) upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
[5] Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained
permanently and in the event of death or other destruction
shall be replaced within one year by the persons
responsible for maintenance when death or destruction
occurred.
[6] Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be
submitted with the final plans showing all pertinent
information including the location, size and species of all
individual trees and shrubs to be preserved or planted, or
alternatively, the general characteristics of existing
vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
(b) Screening.
§ 370-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1605
1:817
[1] Loading zone. Truck loading zones shall be maintained and
clearly marked and shall be used only for their intended
purpose. Truck loading zones shall be screened from view
from the ultimate right-of-way and from any adjacent
residential use or district. To the fullest extent possible,
truck loading zones shall be located to minimize potential
auditory impacts on any adjacent residential use or
district.
[2] Refuse. All refuse shall be kept or stored within the
building or buildings.
B. Nursing homes.
(1) Site characteristics. The use will be permitted only where the site
is:
(a) Served by approved public water and sewer facilities.
(b) The characteristics of the site and its design are such that it
will not be detrimental to adjacent existing uses.
(c) The site shall be located within 15 minutes driving radius of a
hospital or other major medical facility.
(2) Site area. Minimum site area will be five acres.
(3) Site access. The use must take access by either a collector or
arterial street as defined in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of Warrington Township.
(4) Open space. The minimum open space shall be 30% of the net site
area. Open space shall be maintained as required in § 370-3615 of
this chapter.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20% of the gross site area.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 45% of the gross site area.
(7) Setbacks.
(a) Building from property line, 75 feet; building from public street
right-of-way, 75 feet; building from private street, 20 feet.
(b) Parking from public street ultimate right-of-way, 15 feet.
(8) Building spacing. The minimum building spacing shall be 35 feet.
(9) Building height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
C. Hospitals, sanitariums, or other medical facilities. The standards of
§ 370-1605A above shall apply, except Subsection A(3)(a)[1], site
density, which shall not apply.
D. Independent senior residential community.
§ 370-1605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1605
1:818
(1) Declaration of legislative intent. It is declared to be the intent of
this subsection to allow independent senior residential community
developments as permitted uses in the Institutional District and to
establish reasonable standards of performance and to promote the
desirable benefits which will follow the development of a variety of
housing types for senior citizens and insure that adequate area and
suitable and safe environment is provided for senior housing.
(2) Use regulations. Permitted uses in conjunction with an
independent senior residential community shall be as follows:
(a) Townhouse dwellings restricted for persons 55 years of age or
older.
(b) Multifamily dwellings restricted for persons 55 years of age or
older.
(c) Townhouse dwellings unrestricted as to age.
(d) Multifamily dwellings unrestricted as to age.
(e) No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
(3) Development regulations. The following density, area, width and
yard regulations shall apply to independent senior residential
community:
(a) Maximum density. The maximum density allowable shall be as
follows:
Percentage of Restricted
Dwellings per Development
Maximum Density Per
Gross Site Acre
(dwelling units)
50% 5.0
63% 6.0
75% 7.0
100% 8.0
(b) Minimum area. An area consisting of not less than 75 acres
unrestricted by any existing road and utility rights-of-way and
any other easements shall be provided for every independent
senior residential community.
(c) Development mix. A minimum of 50% of the dwelling units in
an independent senior residential community shall be agerestricted
for persons 55 years of age or older.
(d) Open space.
§ 370-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1605
1:819
[1] Common and active open space. In order that adequate
land for parks and open space may be adequately
provided, properly located and preserved as the Township
develops, and in order that the onus of providing such park
and open space land necessary to serve the additional
residents brought into the Township by the new
development may be most equitably apportioned on the
basis of the additional need created by that development,
common open space and active open space (as defined by
§ 370-202 of this chapter) shall be required to be provided
in accordance with § 370-307 of this chapter.
[2] Reservation of land for parks, open space, schools and
other public facilities. The developer, in the design of the
development plan, and the Board of Supervisors, in its
review of the plan, shall consider the adequate provision of
sites for parks, open space, schools and other public
facilities as indicated on the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
Where such facilities are shown and located on the
Comprehensive Plan or where the Board otherwise
determines that a portion of the plan is required for such
facilities, the developer may be required to reserve such
sites for a period not to exceed 60 days following the
receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission on the application for tentative approval, after
which time the Township shall either acquire the property
or release the reservation. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
[3] Environmental restrictions. Any land within the
development which is within the Environmental
Restrictions Overlay District as defined by §§ 370-305
through 370-307 of this chapter shall be subject to the
environmental restrictions, regulations and conditions
imposed thereby, except as otherwise provided for herein.
[4] Dedication of lands for public purposes. Where land is
offered for dedication to the Township or a public entity
designated by the Board of Supervisors to receive said
lands, which shall be used for public purposes, such as
park or public recreation, the design criteria of the
balance of the property remaining after the anticipated
dedication of the open space as set forth hereinabove shall
be in accordance with the following criteria:
[a] Such dedication shall be a minimum of 35% of the
gross lot area as defined by the deed.
[b] Such dedicated lands must be contiguous with either
Township or county owned public lands.
§ 370-1605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1605
1:820
[c] The open space to be set aside for the above public
purposes shall be in lieu of any and all other open
space and environmental restrictions otherwise
imposed by this chapter or Chapter 305, Subdivision
and Land Development, of Warrington Township.
[d] As a condition to approval of the final subdivision
plans by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall
deliver to the Township, for recording, a deed of
dedication for the land, conveying same to the
Township or other public entity free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances and acceptable for recording
by the Recorder of Deeds. All costs of transfer and
recording shall be borne by the applicant.
[e] The provisions of this Subsection D(3)(d)[4] shall
control and shall be deemed to supersede any
inconsistent provisions of this chapter, including the
number of dwelling units calculated pursuant to Form
307165 and the environmental restrictions as set forth
in Article III. In lieu thereof, the density and design
provisions set forth hereinabove, as well as the
permitted requirements and approval requirements of
the Bucks County Conservation District, the Army
Corps of Engineers and the Department of
Environmental Protection, in its various branches,
shall apply.
(e) Buffer requirements. Whenever residential use is adjacent to a
nonresidential use, a buffer zone with a minimum width of 50
feet shall be provided.
(f) Perimeter requirements. If topographical or other barriers do
not provide adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the
development, the developer shall be required to permanently
screen any proposed structure located within 200 feet of the
perimeter of the development, and in no event shall any
structure be located less than 50 feet from the perimeter.
Screening shall be as specified in Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(g) Sidewalk and street standards.
[1] All roads and parking areas within an independent senior
residential community shall remain as private roads which
shall be maintained by a homeowners' association or other
entity approved by the Township.
[2] All collector roads shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide
serving the development.
165. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1605
1:821
§ 370-1606. Screening and buffering.
All requirements of Article XXXVI, § 370-3607, shall apply except a buffer/
screen planting shall be required for all property and street lines and for
differing uses contained within the same site area.
§ 370-1607. Parking. [Amended 8-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-15;
3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2; 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5]
[3] There shall be a continuous sidewalk pathway system
which shall serve all dwellings, interconnect all areas of
development and provide access to the open space.
(h) Design standards for dwelling units. Design standards for
dwelling units shall be as set forth in the table Minimum
Standards, I-U District, Independent Senior Living Community,
by Dwelling Type.166
(i) Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between
buildings shall be 30 feet.
(j) Maximum impervious surface: 30% of the gross site area.
(k) General requirements.
[1] Utilities. All buildings within a independent senior
residential community shall be served by public sewage
system and public water system.
[2] Common areas and facilities. Provisions shall be made for
the perpetual maintenance and care of all common areas
including streets, driveways, parking areas, walkways,
landscaped planning areas, open space and recreation.
[3] Other facilities. Such other improvements including roads,
curbs and stormwater collection and control facilities as
required by Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington,
shall be provided.
A. Senior living community. The following minimum parking standards
shall be required:
(1) Not less than one parking space shall be provided for each
apartment dwelling unit.
(2) No less than 1 1/2 parking spaces shall be provided for each singlefamily
attached dwelling.
(3) At least one parking space shall be provided for each employee
working on the largest shift.
166. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-1605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1607
1:822
§ 370-1608. Signs. [Amended 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2]
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-1609. Transfers of development rights. [Amended 1-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
(4) Whenever a health care facility is proposed as permitted in
§ 370-1602A which is intended to accommodate patients other than
occupants of the residential portion of the development, one
parking space per two beds shall be required.
B. Nursing homes.
(1) Staff. One space for each staff member, including custodial.
(2) Patients. One space for every six beds.
(3) Visitors. One space for every five beds.
(4) All other sections of Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking, Loading and
Unloading, shall apply.
C. Hospitals. One and one-half off-street parking spaces for each patient or
inmate bed; plus at least one additional off-street parking for each staff
and visiting doctor; plus one additional off-street parking space for each
employee (including nurses) on the two major shifts.
D. Independent senior residential community. The following minimum
parking standards shall be required:
(1) Not less than two parking spaces shall be provided for each agerestricted
dwelling unit.
(2) Not less than two parking spaces shall be provided for each
unrestricted dwelling unit.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the Transferable Development Rights Review Board; to establish
guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community that
will enjoy the open space, development rights may be used as follows:
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
§ 370-1607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1609
1:823
(1) Use: senior living community; nursing home; convalescent home;
hospital; sanitarium; other medical facility; and independent senior
residential community.
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for an increase of one dwelling unit; or in
nonresidential developments, a ten-thousand-square-foot increase
in impervious surface coverage up to a maximum impervious
coverage of 85%, including a four-thousand-square-foot increase in
the otherwise allowable building coverage up to a maximum
coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707F(3) of this chapter is required in order
to meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The I-U District may receive transferable development rights created
pursuant to § 370-411, unless expressly prohibited. Standards for the
use of transferable development rights shall be as set forth in
§ 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-1609 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1609
1:824
ARTICLE XVII
I-U-A Institutional Age-Qualified Residential Community District
[Added 1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 98-1]
§ 370-1701. Purpose; intent.
The I-U-A Institutional Age-Qualified Residential Community District is
intended to address the housing needs of older persons who do not require
the intensive needs of a nursing home but desire the security, safety and
special design of a residential environment which can provide residential
units particularly conducive to older persons in the form of independent
living.
§ 370-1702. Use regulations; permitted uses. [Amended 2-13-2001
by Ord. No. 01-2]
The following uses are permitted by right:
§ 370-1703. Development regulations. [Amended 2-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-2]
A. Age-qualified residential community.
B. Agriculture uses as limited by the provisions of § 370-1102.
C. Municipal use.
D. Accessory uses to the age-qualified residential community shall be
specifically restricted to serve only residents of the age-qualified
residential community and their invited guests and shall be limited to
the following:
(1) Clubhouse consisting of auditorium, activity rooms, craft rooms,
library, physical therapy and fitness center, lounges and similar
facilities for members of the age-qualified residential community
and invited guests.
(2) Recreation facilities such as swimming pool, tennis court and chip
and putt course.
(3) Guard station and/or mechanical entrance gate.
E. No-impact home occupation. [Amended 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Development regulations for an age-qualified residential community.
(1) Maximum density: three units per acre of gross site area.
(2) Minimum tract area: 25 acres. Adjoining parcels may be combined
to form a twenty-five-acre tract.
§ 370-1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1703
1:825
(3) Open space. Not less than 20% of the area of the tract developed
shall be retained as open space for use by the residents for
recreation, leisure activities, resource protection, amenities, etc.
Open space may be any combination of common open space (COS)
and active open space (AOS).
(a) Open space having a dimension less than 30 feet in width or
containing an individual area less than 20,000 square feet shall
not be counted toward the minimum 20% requirement.
(4) Setbacks from property line. No principal or accessory building
shall be less than 35 feet from any tract boundary or 50 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way of existing perimeter streets.
(a) A gate house/guard house may be permitted within the
required setback from an existing perimeter street.
(5) Individual lot requirements for age-qualified residential
community. Each single-family detached dwelling shall be provided
with:
(a) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet at the building setback line.
(c) Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: five feet minimum; 15 feet aggregate.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet for principal buildings, and 10 feet
for porches, decks, patios or sheds.
(f) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
(6) Building height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
(7) Off-street parking per dwelling unit: minimum of three spaces,
which may include one garage space. In addition, where on-street
parking is not authorized by Warrington Township, 1/4 space per
dwelling unit shall be provided in common facilities for overflow
and visitors.
B. Development regulations for an age-qualified residential cluster
community.
(1) Maximum density: four units per acres of gross site area.
(2) Minimum tract area: 25 acres. Adjoining parcels may be combined
to form a twenty-five-acre tract.
(3) Open space. Not less than 20% of the total area of the tract
developed shall be retained as open space for use by the residents
for recreation, leisure activities, resource protection.
§ 370-1703 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1703
1:826
(4) Setbacks from property line. No principal or accessory building
shall be less than 35 feet from any tract boundary or 50 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way of existing perimeter streets.
(a) A gate house/guard house may be permitted within the
required setback from existing perimeter streets.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
(7) Individual dwelling requirements for an age-qualified residential
cluster community. Each single-family detached dwelling shall be
provided with:
(a) Minimum front setback: 15 feet from a building face to the
street; and 20 feet from a garage face to a street.
(b) Minimum side setback: five feet from building face to building
face.
(c) Minimum rear setback. The rear of each building shall be set
back at least 30 feet from the rear face of an adjacent building.
Porches, decks, patios or sheds shall be set back at least 10
feet from the rear face of the adjacent porch, deck or patio.
(8) Building height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
(9) Off-street parking per dwelling unit: minimum of three spaces,
which may include one garage space. In addition, where on-street
parking is not authorized by Warrington Township, 1/4 space per
dwelling unit shall be provided in common facilities for overflow
and visitors.
(10) Along all exterior property boundary lines abutting residential uses
there shall be a permanent landscape buffer at least 30 feet in
depth. All other buffers shall meet the buffer/screening and street
boundary requirements set forth in § 370-1703D of this article.
C. General requirements.
(1) Utilities. All single-family detached dwellings and other buildings
within an age-qualified residential community shall be served by
public sewage system and public water system.
(2) Common areas and facilities. Provisions shall be made for the
perpetual maintenance, care and ownership of all common areas
including streets, driveways, parking areas, walkways, landscaped
planting areas, open space, recreation and stormwater
management systems by a private association approved by the
Board of Supervisors, and none of these facilities shall be offered
for dedication to the Township.
§ 370-1703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1703
1:827
(3) Other facilities. Such other improvements including roads, curbs
and stormwater collection and control facilities as required by
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of
the Township of Warrington, shall be provided.
D. Buffer/screening and street boundary requirements.
(1) Buffer. Along all exterior property boundary lines there shall be a
permanent landscape buffer at least 30 feet in depth.
(a) Options for the landscaping of required buffers shall comply
with § 305-325 of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, or Subsection D(2) through (4) below, as may be
applicable.
(2) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a development
occurs along natural features which function as landscape buffers,
including but not limited to mature vegetation, significant grade
changes or stream valleys, which are likely to be permanently
preserved, buffering as required in § 370-1703D(1) may not be
required.
(3) Street boundaries. Rather than the landscape buffer described in
Subsection D(1) and (2) above, the use of a single row or informal
massing of deciduous trees having a minimum size of two-inch
caliper when planted and an expected 20 feet in height at maturity,
with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on-center, may be provided
along all property boundaries which abut a street where approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Extensive setbacks. Where principal and accessory buildings are
set back at least 250 feet from a property boundary line or existing
perimeter street ultimate right-of-way, the landscaping
requirements for a landscape buffer as required in § 370-1703D(1)
may not be required.
(5) Maintenance. All buffer vegetation required by this chapter shall
be maintained permanently, and in the event of death or other
destruction, shall be replaced within one year by the persons
responsible for maintenance when death or destruction occurred.
(6) Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with
the final plans showing all pertinent information including the
location, size and species of individual trees and shrubs to be
preserved or planted, or alternatively, the general characteristics
of existing vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
E. Forested areas. The clearing of forested areas shall be restricted to the
extent possible and practicable to those areas necessary for normal site
development activities (i.e., roads, lots, stormwater management
facilities, grading and the like).
§ 370-1703 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1703
1:828
§ 370-1704. Unit occupancy. [Amended 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 01-2;
5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-06]
At least one person occupying a dwelling on a permanent basis shall be
55 years of age or older. No persons under the age of 19 shall occupy a
dwelling for more than three months in a calendar year.
§ 370-1705. Declaration of age restriction.
At the time of subdivision and land development, as a prerequisite to
the recording of any final plan approved, the developer shall record a
declaration against the entire tract, in a form acceptable to the Township,
binding all properties and owners to the restriction which shall require the
permanent residents of an individual dwelling unit within the I-U-A District
to be age 55 or older, and which shall require that any resident of an
individual dwelling unit within the I-U-A District under the age of 19 years
old shall not reside in that unit for more than three months in any calendar
year.
§ 370-1706. Transfers of development rights. [Added 1-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
(1) When more than 50% of the existing trees within forested areas are
proposed to be removed by a plan of development, they shall be
replaced at the rate of at least 50% of the total amount of the
caliper inches destroyed in excess of 50%.
(2) The replacement trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper
and shall be identified on the landscape plan as more fully
described in § 370-1703D(6) herein and shall comply with the
landscape performance standards in § 305-325 of Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the Transferable Development Rights Review Board; to establish
guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community that
will enjoy the open space, development rights may be used as follows:
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
(1) Use: age-qualified residential community.
§ 370-1703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1706
1:829
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for an increase of one dwelling unit; or in
nonresidential developments, a ten-thousand-square-foot increase
in impervious surface coverage up to a maximum impervious
coverage of 85%, including a four-thousand-square-foot increase in
the otherwise allowable building coverage up to a maximum
coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707F(3) of this chapter is required in order
to meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The I-U-A District may receive transferable development rights created
pursuant to § 370-411 unless expressly prohibited. Standards for the
use of transferable development rights shall be as set forth in
§ 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-1706 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1706
1:830
ARTICLE XVIII
I-U-A-1 Institutional Age-Qualified District-1
[Added 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10-A]
§ 370-1801. Purpose/declaration of intent.
The I-U-A-1 Institutional Age-Qualified District-1 is intended to address the
housing needs of older persons who do not require the intensive needs
of a nursing home but desire the security, safety and special design of
a residential environment which can provide residential units particularly
conducive to older persons in the form of independent living and assistedliving
facilities.
§ 370-1802. Use regulations; permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted by right:
§ 370-1803. Development.
A. Age-qualified townhouse/courtyard with a garage in combination with
assisted-living facilities or personal care facilities. [Amended
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08]
B. Agriculture uses as limited by the provisions of § 370-1102.
C. Municipal use.
D. Accessory uses shall be specifically restricted to serve only residents of
the I-U-A-1 District and their invited guests and shall be limited to the
following:
(1) Required.
(a) Clubhouse.
(2) Optional.
(a) Recreation facilities such as swimming pool, tennis court and
chip and putt course, bocce ball, jogging trail, shuffleboard.
(b) Guard station and/or mechanical entrance gate.
(c) Retail area. {See § 370-1605A(2)(d)[1].}
E. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Development regulations.
(1) Maximum density: six units per acre of gross site area for agequalified
townhouse/courtyard with a garage and not to exceed 30
beds per acre for assisted-living facilities or personal care facilities.
[Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08]
§ 370-1801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1803
1:831
(2) Minimum tract area: 25 acres for age-qualified townhouse/
courtyard with a garage and three acres for assisted-living facilities
or personal care facilities. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-08]
(3) Setbacks from property line. No principal or accessory building
shall be less than 35 feet from any tract boundary or 75 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way of existing perimeter streets.
(a) A gate house/guard house may be permitted within the
required setback from an existing perimeter street.
(4) Open space. No less than 300 square feet of limited access common
area shall be provided per living unit developed as an age-qualified
townhouse/courtyard with a garage. No less than 50 square feet
per bed shall be provided, exclusive of buffers and setbacks for an
assisted -living facility or personal care home. [Amended
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08]
(5) Distance between buildings. For any two exterior facing walls, the
building of which is oriented front-to-front, front-to-rear or rear-torear,
the distance apart shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet and
the distance between any limited access common area shall be a
minimum of 15 feet.
(6) Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be observed.
(a) Age-qualified townhouse/courtyard with garage, assisted-living
facilities, and personal care facilities: 35 feet from any
property line. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-08]
(b) All buildings: 75 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of any
public street.
(c) There shall be access provided for emergency vehicles to all
buildings.
(d) Twenty feet from the curb of any private road.
(7) Building height. The maximum building height shall be 42 feet. No
building shall be more than two stories.
(8) Maximum impervious surface: 60% of the gross site area for the
entire site.
(9) Parking.
(a) Two and two-tenths parking spaces for each townhouse/
courtyard with a garage.
(b) One parking space per three beds plus one parking space for
each employee working on the largest shift for assisted-living
facilities or personal care facilities shall be provided. An area
§ 370-1803 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1803
1:832
§ 370-1804. Unit occupancy. [Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-06]
At least one person occupying a dwelling on a permanent basis shall be
55 years of age or older. No persons under the age of 19 shall occupy a
dwelling for more than three months in a calendar year.
§ 370-1805. Age restriction.
At the time of subdivision and land development, as a prerequisite to
the recording of any final plan approval, the developer shall record a
declaration against the entire tract, in a form acceptable to the Township,
binding all properties and owners to the restriction which shall require
the permanent residents of an individual dwelling unit within the I-U-A-1
District to be age 55 or older and which shall require that any resident of an
individual dwelling unit within the I-U-A-1 District under the age of 19 years
shall not reside in that unit for more than three months in any calendar year.
§ 370-1806. Transfers of development rights. [Added 1-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
large enough to accommodate the difference between one
parking space per two beds and one parking space per three
beds shall be reserved for future use when directed by the
Board of Supervisors. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-08]
B. General requirements. The general requirements set forth in
§ 370-1703C of this chapter are incorporated herein by reference as if
set forth herein at length.
C. Buffer/screening and street boundary requirements. The buffer/
screening and street boundary requirements of § 370-1703D of this
chapter are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth herein at
length.
D. Forested areas. The forested areas provisions of § 370-1703E of this
chapter are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth herein at
length.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the Transferable Development Rights Review Board; to establish
§ 370-1803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1806
1:833
guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community that
will enjoy the open space, development rights may be used as follows:
[Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-08; 4-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
(1) Use: age-qualified townhouse or courtyard dwelling; and assistedliving
facility or personal care home.
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for an increase of one dwelling unit; or in
nonresidential developments, a ten-thousand-square-foot increase
in impervious surface coverage up to a maximum coverage of 85%,
including a four-thousand-square-foot increase in the otherwise
allowable building coverage up to a maximum coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707F(3), of this chapter is required in
order to meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The I-U-A-1 District may receive transferable development rights
created pursuant to § 370-411 unless expressly prohibited. Standards
for the use of transferable development rights shall be as set forth in
§ 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-1806 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1806
1:834
ARTICLE XIX
I-U-B Institutional Senior Residential Community Multifamily
District
[Added 8-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-17]
§ 370-1901. Purpose; intent.
The IUB Institutional Senior Residential Community Multifamily District is
intended to address the housing needs of older persons who do not require
the more intensive needs of an assisted-living facility or nursing home, but
desire the security, safety and special design of a residential environment
which can provide residential units particularly conducive to older persons
in the form of affordable independent living units.
§ 370-1902. Use regulations.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 370-1903. Development.
The following development regulations shall apply:
A. Townhouse dwellings restricted for persons 55 years of age or older.
B. Multifamily dwellings restricted for person 55 years of age or older.
C. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Maximum density: eight units per acre of gross site area.
B. Minimum tract area: an area consisting of not less than 20 acres.
C. Building setbacks.
(1) From property line: 50 feet.
(2) From interior collector road: 25 feet.
D. Distance between buildings: 30 feet side to side; 50 feet back to back.
E. Building height: 35 feet (to the base of the roof line).
F. Along all exterior property boundary lines there shall be a permanent
screen buffer at least 15 feet in depth. The primary component of the
screen buffer shall be a row of evergreen trees, at the height of not less
than six feet when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on
center, and these trees shall be of such species to obtain a height at
maturity of not less than 20 feet. In cases where natural features exist
which function as buffers, including but not limited to mature
vegetation, which are likely to be permanently preserved, buffering
may be waived upon approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 370-1901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1903
1:835
G. Design standards for dwelling units shall be as set forth in the table
Minimum Standards, I-U District, Independent Senior Living
Community, by Dwelling Type.167
H. Maximum impervious surface: the maximum impervious surface
coverage shall be 40% of the gross site area.
I. Sidewalk and street standards.
(1) All roads and parking areas within an independent senior
residential community shall remain as private roads which shall be
maintained by a homeowners' association or other entity approved
by the Township.
(2) All collector roads serving the development shall be a minimum of
26 feet wide.
(3) There shall be a continuous sidewalk pathway system which shall
serve all dwellings, interconnect all areas of the development.
J. Open space.
(1) Common and active open space. In order that adequate land for
parks and open space may be adequately provided, properly
located and preserved as the Township develops, and in order that
the onus of providing such park and open space land necessary to
serve the additional residents brought into the Township by the
new development may be most equitably apportioned on the basis
of the additional need created by that development, common open
space and active open space (as defined by § 370-202 of this
chapter) shall be required to be provided in accordance with
§ 370-307 of this chapter.
(2) Preservation of additional open space. Where open space is
preserved in the amount of not less than 35% of the gross site area,
the environmental restrictions set forth in Article III of this chapter,
including the number of dwelling units calculated pursuant to Form
307,168 shall not apply. In lieu thereof, the open space, density and
design provisions set forth herein, as well as the permitting
requirements and approval requirements of the Bucks County
Conservation District, the Army Corps of Engineers and the
Department of Environmental Protection and its various branches
shall apply.
167. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
168. Editor's Note: Form 307 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-1903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1904
1:836
§ 370-1904. Unit occupancy. [Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-06]
At least one person occupying a dwelling on a permanent basis shall be
55 years of age or older. No persons under the age of 19 shall occupy a
dwelling for more than three months in a calendar year.
§ 370-1905. Age restriction.
At the time of subdivision and land development, as a prerequisite to the
recording of any final approved development, the developer shall record a
declaration against the entire tract, in a form acceptable to the Township,
binding all properties and owners to the restriction which shall require the
permanent residents of any dwelling unit within the I-U-B District to be age
55 or older and which shall require that any dwelling unit within the I-U-B
District to be age 55 or older, and which shall require that any resident of an
individual dwelling unit within the I-U-B District under the age of 19 years
shall not reside in that units for more than three months in any calendar
year.
§ 370-1906. Parking.
§ 370-1907. Transfers of development rights. [Added 1-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
A. Not less than two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in the I-U-B Institutional District.
B. The parking lot shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the
property line.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the Transferable Development Rights Review Board; to establish
guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community that
will enjoy the open space, development rights may be used as follows:
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
(1) Use: townhouse dwellings and multifamily dwellings.
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for an increase of one dwelling unit; or in
§ 370-1904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1907
1:837
nonresidential developments, a ten-thousand-square-foot increase
in impervious surface coverage up to a maximum coverage of 85%,
including a four-thousand-square-foot increase in the otherwise
allowable building coverage up to a maximum coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707F(3) of this chapter is required in order
to meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The I-U-B District may receive transferable development rights created
pursuant to this § 370-411, unless expressly prohibited. Standards for
the use of transferable development rights shall be as set forth in
§ 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-1907 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-1907
1:838
ARTICLE XX
C-1 Commercial District
[Amended 10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-5]
§ 370-2001. Description; purpose.
§ 370-2002. Permitted uses.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected or used, and the lot
area may be used or occupied, for any of the following purposes and no
other, provided that:
A. C-1 Commercial Districts are designed to provide for the appropriate
development of a modern, well designed, integrated retail shopping
center. The district is established as a district in which the principal use
of land is for commercial and service uses for surrounding residential
areas and in which traffic and parking congestion can be reduced to a
minimum in order to preserve residential values and promote the
general welfare of the surrounding area. Among other things, the
shopping center shall comprise:
(1) A group or groups of integrated, architecturally harmonious
buildings within which retail trade and related service activities
shall be wholly conducted;
(2) Convenient, safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian
accessways; and
(3) Safe and adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.
B. Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent
of this article is:
(1) To encourage the construction on and continued use of land for
neighborhood commercial and service purpose;
(2) To prohibit residential and industrial use of the land, and any other
use which would substantially interfere with the development and
continuation of commercial structures and activities in the district;
(3) To discourage any use which because of its character would
interfere with the use of the land in the district as a shopping and
service center for surrounding residential districts;
(4) To assure the safety and convenience of traffic movement, both
within the shopping center included in the plan and in relation to
access streets; and
(5) To assure a harmonious and beneficial relationship between the
shopping center and the contiguous land and adjacent
neighborhoods.
§ 370-2001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2002
1:839
A. Retail shop used only as a retail outlet or showroom for a use permitted
in this district, provided that: [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) No goods shall be displayed on the exterior of the premises;
(2) Only incidental storage, including floor samples, shall be
permitted;
(3) All products produced on premises are sold on premises; and
(4) Over-the-counter sale of alcoholic beverages in taverns and bars is
not included.
B. Restaurant or coffee shop, provided:
(1) There is no live entertainment;
(2) Drive-in or -through service is prohibited; and
(3) Sale of alcoholic beverages must be incidental with the sale and
consumption of food as per an "R" type of license as issued by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(4) All such restaurants shall provide a trash storage area that shall be
screened from the street and adjacent properties in accordance
with this article.
C. Professional, business, administrative, finance, insurance and
governmental offices.
D. Financial establishment including a bank, savings-and-loan association,
credit union or other financial establishment.
E. Service business dealing with customers: beauty parlor, barber shops,
shoe repair shop, dressmaking, travel agency, tailor, millinery,
photographer, copy service, fax mailbox, photographic studio or similar
shop.
F. Entertainment facility including indoor movie theater, bowling alley,
skating rink, recording studio or other similar uses.
G. Assembly hall or community building, indoor recreational
establishment, wellness center, health club, library, child-care center,
municipal use.
H. Bakery, pastry, candy confectionery, ice cream or custom shop, provided
that all products are primarily sold at retail on the premises.
I. General servicing or repair shop, such as watch or clock repair, radio,
video or television repair, home appliance repair (but not including
automobile, vehicle and motorcycle repair).
J. Manufacturing display room, discount outlet or retail outlet.
§ 370-2002 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2002
1:840
§ 370-2003. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-9; 11-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-17; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-O-05]
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses by the Board
of Supervisors under the provisions of § 370-3602 and the following
limitations:
K. Temporary outside display of goods, provided:
(1) A temporary use permit may be issued for the temporary outside
storage display of goods provided that the display is in connection
with a temporary sale event of a permitted retail use.
(2) The temporary use permit shall be limited to one week in duration.
A maximum of four separate permits may be issued throughout the
calendar year.
(3) The temporary storage of sale goods or merchandise shall not be
displayed within an existing parking space, within 20 feet of the
curb of the fronting highway or within the sight triangle of any
driveway to the premises.
L. Accessory use customarily incidental to any of the above uses.
M. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXXV of this chapter.
A. Passenger station, electric substation, telephone and telegraph office.
B. Motor vehicle service station or car washing facility, provided:
(1) That the facility is connected both to public water and public sewer
systems and that all services are conducted within the confines of
the lot.
(2) No entrance or exit shall be located within 100 feet of a property
used for a school, house of worship or hospital.
(3) No motor fuel or filling hose shall be installed within 50 feet of the
abutting street line.
(4) All activities other than the sale of gasoline, oil, antifreeze and tires
must be conducted in the building on the premises.
(5) No vehicle may be parked except subject to restrictions set forth in
the off-street parking regulations, Article XXXIV.
(6) There shall be a minimum lot width of 200 feet at the ultimate
right-of-way.
(7) Paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be permitted.
§ 370-2002 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2003
1:841
§ 370-2004. Uses by special exception. [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-O-05]
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for
the following uses when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board:
(8) Vehicles shall not be stored outdoors while awaiting repairs for
more than 30 days; all such cars shall be totally screened in
accordance with this chapter.
(9) The sale or rental of automobiles shall be prohibited.
(10) The motor vehicle service station or car wash facility is located on a
lot containing a minimum of two acres.
(11) The lot on which the motor vehicle service station or car wash
facility is located has direct access to four-lane roadway (two lanes
in each direction).
A. Entertainment facilities operated as a gainful business within a building
or structure providing automatic amusement devices or games,
including pool or billiard rooms in a game room or similar location used
for this purpose.
(1) An automatic amusement device or game is defined to be each coinoperated
machine, mechanical machine or electronic machine
which operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or
amusement of any kind or description. Such devices shall be
governed by this section in any location where four or more devices
are located.
(2) In addition to other provisions now applicable or hereinafter
enacted governing special exceptions, the Board shall grant a
special exception only if it finds adequate evidence that the
proposed use meets the following specific requirements:
(a) Such use shall only be operated between the hours of 12:00
noon and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 9:00
a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday.
(b) The activity shall not be operated in any manner which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) No audio speakers or equipment shall be installed inside or
outside the location of such use which are intended to cause
music, voices or other sounds to emanate to the exterior of the
premises.
(d) Adult supervision shall be provided during the hours of
operation.
§ 370-2003 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2004
1:842
§ 370-2005. Area requirements.
The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan, shall be designed as a single architectural scheme with
appropriate landscaping, and shall provide initially for the construction of
either a minimum of 8,000 square feet of ground floor area or a minimum of
six of the above permitted uses:
§ 370-2006. Standards. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-9]
(e) Such use complies in all respects to the requirements of any
other applicable provision of this chapter, other Township
ordinances or state statutes relating to exits, fire safety, rest
rooms or other applicable requirements.
B. Restaurant with live entertainment, provided that:
(1) No such facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of a residentially
zoned district.
(2) No such use shall be within 500 feet of a house of worship, a statelicensed
child-care facility, an elementary school, or a public
education facility that serves persons under the age of 17.
(3) Coin-operated laundry or clothes-cleaning and pressing agency.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Maximum height: 35 feet.
C. Minimum building setback.
(1) From ultimate right-of-way: 50 feet, provided that no such building
shall be within the sight triangle of a street or driveway.
(2) From property lines: 30 feet from all property lines except
residential and institutional property lines; in which cases, the
minimum shall be 50 feet.
D. Minimum parking setback: 20 feet from all ultimate rights-of-way and
like use property lines and 30 feet from all residential and institutional
uses.
E. Maximum building coverage: 35% of the gross lot area.
F. Maximum impervious coverage: 75% of lot area including building and
parking spaces as defined in Article II.
A. Water and sewer facilities. The proposed commercial district shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer facilities.
B. Screening and buffering as provided in § 370-3607.
§ 370-2004 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2006
1:843
C. Outside storage and/or display. Outside storage is prohibited unless
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Additional standards. The Board of Township Supervisors may
prescribe more restrictive conditions, or any further reasonable
conditions deemed appropriate with respect to suitability of the
commercial area in the neighborhood. Section 305-329 of Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington, must be met in locations in the Corridor Overlay District.
Adequate guarantee shall be given, prior to approval of the plan, to
assure that the minimum conditions enumerated in this section are or
will be fully complied with.
E. Forested areas. The clearing of forested areas shall be restricted to the
extent possible and practicable to those areas necessary for normal site
development activities (e.g., roads, structures, parking lots, stormwater
management facilities, grading and the like).
(1) When more than 50% of the existing trees within forested areas are
proposed to be removed by the plan of development, they shall be
replaced at the rate of at least 50% of the total amount of caliper
inches destroyed in excess of 50%.
(2) Replacement may be in the form of deciduous trees and evergreen
trees. The standard measurement of tree size shall be caliper
inches, which is the diameter of the trunk of all deciduous and
flowering trees measured at a point not less than six inches nor
more than 12 inches above the root ball; provided, however, that
for evergreen trees, the height shall be converted to caliper inches
as shown below:
Evergreen Caliper Calculations
Evergreen Height
(feet) Caliper Inches Equivalent
5 to 6 1
6 to 8 2
8 to 10 3
10 to 12 4.5
(3) Replacement plantings, to the extent possible, shall be replaced onsite
and all replacement calculations shall be shown on the
landscape plan.
(4) Replacement plantings not used on-site, to the extent possible,
shall be used on properties abutting the site and on properties
abutting the site and on properties visually impacted by the plan. A
plan for each property shall be submitted for review and approval
by the Township Engineer.
§ 370-2006 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2006
1:844
§ 370-2007. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2008. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-2009. Application.
(5) Any remaining replacement planting not used as described in
Subsection E(3) and (4) above shall be used at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors.
(6) If replacement trees are provided in a size larger than a minimum
size required by this article, they shall receive a credit in caliper
inches equal to the minimum tree size plus a credit in caliper
inches equal to the difference between the installed cost of the
larger tree size and the installed cost of the minimum tree size,
expressed in caliper inches; dividing the cost difference by a
minimum size installed tree cost, and then multiplying by the
minimum tree size required.
Example: Assume a four-inch replacement tree is being provided.
Assume a two-inch installed tree costs $200 and a four-inch
installed tree costs $600. ($600 - $200) divided by $200 x two
inches equals four inches, plus the two-inch minimum size equals a
total credit of six inches.
(7) Each nonreplacement tree required by Township ordinances and
provided at a caliper larger than required by the ordinance shall
receive a credit in caliper inches equal to the difference between
the installed cost of the larger size and the installed cost of the
minimum tree size, expressed in caliper inches; dividing the cost
difference by the minimum size installed tree cost, and then
multiplying by the minimum tree size required.
Example: Assume a two-inch deciduous tree is being increased to a
four-inch deciduous tree. Assume the two-inch installed tree costs
$200 and the four-inch installed tree costs $600 ($600 - $200)
divided by $200 x 2 inches = 4-inch credit.
(8) All trees shall be properly staked, mulched and irrigated.
A. Application shall be made to the Township Manager for referral to the
Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the Township
Board of Supervisors as set forth in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington. [Amended
4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-05]
§ 370-2006 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2009
1:845
§ 370-2010. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 7-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-6]
The C-1 District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use
of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b)(1) and (7).
B. Application requirements. The request for amendment, or in the case of
an area designated C-1 prior to specific request, the application for
permit shall be accompanied by the following information in addition to
the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Township of Warrington:
(1) A plan for the integrated development of the total area to be
included in the shopping center, which shall be drawn to scale and
shall include, among other things:
(a) The location, boundaries, dimensions and ownership of the
land to be included in the shopping center district.
(b) The location, use and ground area of each proposed building
and other structure.
(c) The locations, dimensions, arrangement and proposed use of
all open space, yards, accessways, entrances, exits, off-street
parking facilities, loading and unloading facilities,
pedestrianways and buffer strips.
(d) The design of buffer areas and screening devices to be
maintained, including the dimensions and arrangements of all
areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees or similar purpose.
(2) A description of the provisions made for sewage and waste
disposal, water supply and stormwater management, including a
suitable topographic map of the area.
(3) A traffic report sufficient to demonstrate that satisfactory
arrangements will be made to facilitate traffic movement on the
roadways adjoining the shopping center and to assure proper
circulation within the center. These arrangements must include
provisions for necessary signalization, channelization, turning
lanes, right turn, runoff lanes and adequate storage area and
distribution facilities within the center to prevent backup of
vehicles on public streets.
C. Although portions of the project may be planned for completion in
successive stages, a complete land development plan for the entire
project shall be submitted to and approved by the Board of Township
Supervisors prior to the issuance of building permits and the
construction of any portion of the premises.
§ 370-2009 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2010
1:846
ARTICLE XXI
C-2 Commercial District
[Amended 10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-5]
§ 370-2101. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-2 Commercial District is to provide for the shopping
and servicing needs of the Township population and to require reasonable
standards for individual commercial development, in order to provide for
the public convenience, avoid undue congestion on the streets, and fulfill
the other broad purposes of this chapter.
§ 370-2102. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-9]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following purposes and no others. The following uses are permitted
by right:
A. Retail business or service establishment, such as, but not limited to, the
following: food store, drug and pharmaceutical store, stationery and
newspaper store, personal service shop, restaurant, coffee shop, cafe or
other similar place serving food or beverage, but specifically not
including restaurants with drive-through service, provided the sale of
alcoholic beverages must be incidental to the sale of food.
B. Professional or business office, bank or similar financial institutes and
funeral home.
C. Private club or lodge for members only and not operated as a private
gainful business.
D. Motel, hotel, bed-and-breakfast or tourist home, provided that the use
must have direct access to a collector or arterial road.
E. Greenhouse as either an accessory or main use.
F. Amusement or recreation place, including golf driving range, swimming
pool, bowling alley, skating rink or similar recreation use.
G. Roadside stand for the sale of farm or nursery products.
H. Manufacturing display room, discount outlet or retail outlet.
I. Beverage or ice distributing station, frozen food locker.
J. Municipal use.
K. Dwelling for watchman or caretaker.
L. Public utility, CATV or telephone facility.
M. Temporary outside display of goods, provided:
§ 370-2101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2102
1:847
§ 370-2103. Special exception. [Amended 8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
94-7]
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
§ 370-3707F(2):
§ 370-2104. Conditional uses. [Added 7-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-9;
11-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-17; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-05]
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses by the Board of
Supervisors under the provisions of § 370-3602:
(1) A temporary use permit may be issued for the temporary outside
storage and display of goods, provided that the display is in
connection with a temporary sale event of a permitted retail use.
(2) The temporary use permit shall be limited to one week in duration.
A maximum of four separate permits may be issued throughout the
calendar year.
(3) The temporary storage of sale goods or merchandise shall not be
displayed within an existing parking space, within 20 feet of the
curb of the fronting highway, or within the sight triangle of any
driveway to the premises.
N. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing permitted uses.
O. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXXV.
A. Apartment in combination with a business use.
B. School as defined in § 370-202.
C. Privately operated school of trade, vocation, or avocation; religious or
philanthropic use; hospital, sanitarium or convalescent home.
D. Sales agency for motor vehicles, house trailers, boats, recreational
equipment or farm machinery.
E. Automobile repair shop, body and fender shop, and similar use,
provided that:
(1) No automobile or part thereof is stored or displayed outside the
building, other than the parking of undamaged automobiles
belonging to customers or employees.
(2) The creation of noise by the activities on the lot conforms with
regulations contained in Article XXII, § 370-2206C(3), of this
chapter.
(3) All services are conducted within the confines of the building.
§ 370-2102 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2104
1:848
A. Motor vehicle service station or car-washing facility, provided:
(1) That the facility is connected both to public water and public sewer
systems and that all services are conducted within the confines of
the lot.
(2) No entrance or exit shall be located within 100 feet of a property
used for a school, house of worship or hospital.
(3) No motor fuel or filling hose shall be installed within 50 feet of the
abutting street line.
(4) All activities other than the sale of gasoline, oil, antifreeze and tires
must be conducted in the building on the premises.
(5) No vehicle may be parked except subject to restrictions set forth in
the off-street parking regulations, Article XXXIV.
(6) There shall be a minimum lot width of 200 feet at the ultimate
right-of-way.
(7) Paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be permitted.
(8) Vehicles shall not be stored outdoors while awaiting repairs for
more than 30 days; all such cars shall be totally screened in
accordance with this chapter.
(9) The sale or rental of automobiles shall be prohibited.
(10) The motor vehicle service station or car-wash facility is located on
a lot containing a minimum of two acres.
(11) The lot on which the motor vehicle service station or car wash
facility is located has direct access to four-lane roadway (two lanes
in each direction).
B. Multifamily dwelling, subject to the following conditions: [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-04]
(1) Completion of one of the following: a road or dedicated bypass lane
connecting two roadways is installed as part of the development
plan; off-site traffic improvements are installed as part of the
development plan; or a fee in lieu of such improvements is
contributed to the Township in an amount approved by the Board of
Supervisors; all to improve the traffic situation at an intersection of
arterial roads in Warrington Township and all in a manner
determined to be an improvement to such intersection by the Board
of Supervisors as part of the conditional use hearing.
(2) The property shall have frontage on an arterial road.
(3) A rendering or photo of the proposed building shall be provided to
the Township and approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of
the conditional use hearing.
§ 370-2104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2104
1:849
§ 370-2105. Area requirements.
(4) For a multifamily dwelling conditional use in the C-2 Commercial
Zoning District, the following bulk standards shall apply and shall
supersede those contains in §§ 370-2105, 370-2106, 370-2107 and
370-3402 of this chapter whenever there is a conflict. All other bulk
standards in §§ 3370-2105, 370-2106, 370-2107 and 370-3402shall
remain in effect.
(a) The maximum allowable building height shall be no greater
than 55 feet.
(b) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
(c) The minimum width of buffers shall be no less than 30 feet,
except for a small area of no more than 25 feet in length which
can be 20 feet wide and shown on a plan approved as part of
the conditional use hearing.
(d) The required parking setback shall be zero feet at the ultimate
right-of-way line.
(e) The minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet.
A. All uses.
(1) Minimum building setback.
(a) Setback line. The minimum setback shall be 1/2 the width of
the ultimate right-of-way or 60 feet (which will accommodate
the required buffer, one parking bay and a two-way access
drive), whichever is greater, one each street and subject to the
requirements of § 370-3610A and B.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Two side yards, not less than 20 feet in width each, shall be
provided for every building constructed or altered in this
district; provided, that when a written agreement is made
between adjoining property owners, two or more abutting
commercial buildings may be constructed at the side
property lines provided that all current fire codes are met
by both adjoining uses.
[2] In the case of a series of abutting buildings, an open and
unobstructed passage for vehicles and pedestrians of not
less than 30 feet in width shall be provided at finished
grade level at intervals of not more than 200 feet of
frontage.
§ 370-2104 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2105
1:850
§ 370-2106. Standards.
[3] For buildings used solely for dwelling purposes, there shall
be two side yards, neither of which shall be less than 10
feet in width.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be
not less than 35 feet in depth.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 75% of lot area.
B. Commercial uses.
(1) For lots used exclusively for commercial or nonresidential uses, a
minimum lot area and width of not less than the following shall be
provided:
(a) Twenty thousand square feet, with a lot width of 100 feet at the
building line, for all lots served by neither a public water nor a
public sanitary sewer system.
(b) Ten thousand square feet, with a lot width of 75 feet at the
building line, for all lots served by both public water and a
public sanitary sewer system.
(2) For lots used for both commercial and residential uses, in
combination, attached or in separate buildings, the following areas
and widths shall be required for each dwelling unit in addition to
the requirements in § 370-2105B(1)(a) and (b) above:
(a) Twenty thousand square feet per dwelling unit and 25 feet in
width, on lots served by neither public water nor a public
sanitary sewer system.
(b) Five thousand square feet per dwelling unit, and 25 feet in
width, on lot served by both a public water and a public
sanitary sewer system.
(3) For every lot used in whole or in part for commercial purposes, not
more than 35% of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings.
(4) Maximum height: 35 feet. [Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-09]
C. Residential uses. For every lot used exclusively for residence purposes,
not more than 30% of the lot area may be occupied by buildings.
A. Screening and buffering. Along each side or rear property line which
adjoins an existing residential use or residential district, a buffer
planting not less than 30 feet in depth shall be provided. Along each
street, a fifteen-foot-wide buffer planting shall be provided including
sidewalks and accessways. For buffer requirements, see Chapter 305,
§ 370-2105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2106
1:851
§ 370-2107. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2108. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-2109. Transfer of development rights. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6]
The C-2 District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use
of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b)[1] and [2].
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington.
B. Outside storage or display. Such storage or display, if authorized by
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, must meet all yard
requirements imposed on the main building.
§ 370-2106 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2109
1:852
ARTICLE XXII
PI-1 Planned Industrial District
§ 370-2201. General description and purpose.
§ 370-2202. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-4]
The specific uses permitted in this district shall be the erection,
construction, alteration, or use of buildings on premises for the following
uses and no other:
A. The PI-1 Planned Industrial District is hereby established as a district in
which the regulations are intended to permit and encourage industrial
development to ensure that it will be so located and designed as to
constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical
development of the Township, to contribute to the soundness of the
economic base of the Township, and otherwise further the purposes of
this chapter.
B. Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent
of this article is:
(1) To encourage the construction on and continued use of the land in
the district for industrial purposes.
(2) To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial uses in the
district.
(3) To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other
structures, the areas and dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and the provision of facilities and operation of industries to
minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, fire, safety
hazards, etc.
A. Any manufacturing, wholesale, or distributing use which meets the
provisions of § 370-2206C, Performance requirements, as follows:
(1) Any manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of the following previously prepared materials: bone,
cork, feathers, cellophane, ceramics, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn,
paper, pharmaceutical, plastics, shells, iron and steel, aluminum,
leather, plaster, metals, precious and/or semiprecious stones,
wood, yarns, containers or novelties from paper or cardboard,
natural or synthetic rubber, tobacco, textile or textile products, and
perfumes.
(2) The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, electrical
or electronic devices; home, commercial and industrial appliances
and instruments, including the manufacture of accessory parts or
assemblies; dental and medical equipment; watches and clocks;
optical goods, drafting equipment, and canvas products.
§ 370-2201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2202
1:853
§ 370-2203. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
94-7; 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7; 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10]
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses by the Board
of Supervisors under the provisions of § 370-3602 and the following
limitations:
(3) Storage buildings and warehouses; parking garages and lots.
(4) Laboratories; experimental, research or testing.
(5) Carpet or rug cleaning; laundry, cleaning and dyeing plant.
(6) Wholesaling and distributing activities.
(7) Light metal processing as follows: cleaning, finishing, grinding,
heat treating, plating, polishing, rustproofing, and sharpening;
metal stamping and extrusion of small products; similar metal
working processes.
(8) Job printing, newspaper or book publishing, electronics and small
parts assembly or manufacture.
(9) Baking and food processing.
(10) Electronics and small parts assembly or manufacture.
(11) Manufacture and/or storage of construction materials and
equipment.
B. Dwelling quarters for watchmen or caretakers employed on the
premises shall be permitted in connection with any industrial
establishment.
C. Mini warehouses.
D. Commercial uses clearly intended to service the employees of
establishments on the site. Customary accessory uses and structures
which are clearly incidental to permitted main uses and structures.
E. Commercial recreational facilities.
F. Professional and business office facilities.
G. Food preparation and serving areas an accessory use to uses specified
in this section.
H. Signs, in accordance with Article XXXV.
I. Accessory retail sales use to a commercial business may be allowed,
provided the retail sales portion of the business is less than 15% of the
annual gross receipts. A letter of certification shall be filed with the
Township certifying the percentage of retail sales for the previous year.
§ 370-2202 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2203
1:854
§ 370-2204. Special exceptions.
None.
§ 370-2205. Area requirements. [Amended 11-14-1995 by Ord. No.
95-9]
A. An outdoor retail product display may be allowed, provided the display
area is less than 5% of the gross square footage of the building(s) on
site.
B. Truck terminal or transfer station for freight or goods; provided:
(1) Trucks with compressors shall be located within a quadrangle of
buildings or walls of sufficient height to deflect noise away from
adjoining properties.
(2) Such shall be screened from all adjacent properties in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Such use shall take access from Route 611 on Titus Drive.
C. Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,169 tower-based
wireless communications facilities and communications equipment
buildings. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
A. General requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum lot width at setback line: 175 feet.
(3) Maximum percentage of lot to be covered by buildings (principal
and accessory combined): 35%.
(4) Maximum percentage of lot to be covered by impervious surfaces:
70%.
(5) Minimum building setback. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-07]
(a) The front yard setback line shall be 75 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way, subject to the provisions of §§ 370-3610A and B.
For nondedicated roads or access drives, the front yard
setback shall be measured from the near edge of the cartway
or extension thereof.
(b) The side yard setback shall be 20 feet minimum per side
(except that no industrial building or structure shall be located
closer than 100 feet from any agricultural or residential
district boundary line or from an existing residential use).
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-2203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2205
1:855
(c) The rear yard setback shall be 50 feet (except that no industrial
building or structure shall be located closer than 100 feet from
any agricultural or residential district boundary line or from an
existing residential use).
(6) The maximum building height (occupied space) shall be 35 feet
with required building setbacks. [Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-07]
(a) For parcels greater than 25 acres in size, the occupied space of
a building may be increased to a maximum height of 45 feet,
provided that at least one of the following requirements is
satisfied:
[1] An increase in the maximum front yard setback at a
minimum rate of five feet of additional front yard setback
for each additional one foot of building height greater than
35 feet.
[2] Any portion of a building above 35 feet shall be erected so
as to not protrude above a recession plane starting from
the minimum seventy-five-foot front yard setback line at a
height of 35 feet, and then receding at the rate of five feet
horizontal (H) recession for each one foot of vertical (V)
height. As used herein, the "recession plane" is a plane
inclined at an angle to the horizontal measured from a
point that begins along the roofline at 35 feet vertically
and continues at a slope of 1V:5H to the maximum
allowable building height of 45 feet. (See Figure 1205.)
§ 370-2205 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2205
1:856
Figure 1205
Maximum Building Height in PI-1/PI-2 Zoning
Districts
B. Special requirements for mini warehouses. In addition to the other
several requirements, the following special requirements shall apply:
(1) Recreational vehicles, boats and trailers may be stored outside, but
the total area for such storage shall not exceed 3% of the lot area.
The storage area shall be limited to one area on the site and shall
be located behind the front line of any structures. The limits of this
area shall be identified by permanent markers.
(2) Each site shall provide a security system, satisfactory to the
Township, which shall include either:
(a) The entire perimeter of the compound enclosed with a security
fence or wall with a height of eight feet; or
(b) A full-time watchman or caretaker employed on the premises.
(3) No unit may be leased for the purpose of storing products that
constitute an environmental or safety hazard to the area.
§ 370-2205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2205
1:857
§ 370-2206. Standards.
(4) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
groups of attached buildings shall be not less than 30 feet, except
in Office Laboratory, Limited Industrial, and Institutional Districts,
where the distance shall not be less than 60 feet. In the Limited
Industrial District, mini warehouses shall require 30 feet minimum
separation. In no case shall the minimum distance between
buildings be less than the average height of the two buildings.
(5) The use, in its entirety, shall be owned and operated as a single or
common management and maintenance unit.
(6) No truck or other burden vehicle shall be stored outdoors.
C. Parking for mini warehouse. One space for each 10,000 square feet of
warehouse space, and one space for each 20 rental units.
A. Screening and buffering. Along each side or rear property line which
adjoins an existing residence or residential district, a buffer of 100 feet
including therein a planting of not less than 30 feet in depth shall be
provided. Along each street line, a 15 feet in depth buffer planting shall
be provided including sidewalks and accessways. For buffer
requirements, see Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of
the Code of the Township of Warrington.
B. Prohibited activity and/or materials.
(1) No highly flammable or explosive or toxic liquids, solids or gases
shall be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel
directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices, or
appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or
drums of fuel.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products,
and all fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be
enclosed by an approved safety fence and visual screen and shall
conform to all yard requirements imposed upon the main buildings
in this district.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will
destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
A description of the methods to be used for the treatment of
disposal sewage and industrial wastes shall be provided by the
applicant.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire or environmental hazard or which may be edible or
§ 370-2205 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2206
1:858
otherwise attractive to rodents shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
(5) All applicable state and county regulations pertaining to sanitary
landfills must be complied with.
C. Performance requirements.
(1) Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other
source of visible gray greater than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except
that smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any thirtyminute
period. These provisions applicable to visible gray smoke
shall also apply to visible smoke of any other color with an
equivalent apparent opacity.
(2) Dust and dirt, fumes, vapors and gases.
(a) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases
which can cause any damage to human health, to animals or
vegetation or to other forms of property, or which can cause
any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point
beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission is herewith
prohibited.
(b) No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or
otherwise shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the covering
gas at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the
emission. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases
resulting from combustion, standard correction shall be
applied to a stack temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in
stack at full load.
(3) Noise. The sound pressure level of any operation shall not exceed,
at any point on the boundary of a nonindustrial district, the decibel
levels in the designated octave band shown below, except for
emergency alarm signals, and subject to the following corrections;
subtract five decibels for pulsating or periodic noise, and five
decibels for noise sources operating less than 20% of any one hour:
§ 370-2206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2206
1:859
§ 370-2207. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2208. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
Sound Levels
Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Decibels = 10 log. P1 where P2 = 0.0002
Octave Band
(cycles per
second)
Decibels Along
Agricultural or
Residential
District
Boundaries
Decibels Along Any
Other District
Boundaries
0 to 600 50 55
600 to 2,400 38 40
2,400 to 4,800 35 38
Above 4,800 32 38
(4) Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at any point on
or beyond the lot boundary line within which the industrial
operation is situated. Any process which may involve the creation
or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary
safeguard system in order that control will be maintained if the
primary safeguard system should fail, hereby established as a
guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors is Table 111
(Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual,"
copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists Association; the
numerical average value for all authorities listed may be used.
(5) Glare and heat. No industrial use shall carry on an operation that
would produce heat or glare beyond the property line of a lot on
which the industrial operation is situated.
(6) Vibration. Machines or operations which cause vibrations shall be
permitted, but in no case shall any such vibrations be perceptible
along the boundary line of any nonindustrial district.
(7) Radioactivity, electrical or radio disturbance, EMF and RFI
emission. There shall be no activities which emit dangerous
radioactivity disturbance (except from domestic household
appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
§ 370-2206 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2209
1:860
§ 370-2209. Application.
§ 370-2210. Transfers of development rights. [Amended 7-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-6; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
A. Application shall be made to the Township Manager for referral to the
Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors as set forth in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington. [Amended
4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-05]
B. The location, use and ground area of each proposed building and other
structure.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Township Manager for
referral to the Planning Commission and the Transferable Development
Rights Review Board; to establish guidelines to facilitate the transfers;
and to benefit the community that will enjoy the open space,
development rights may be used as follows: [Amended 4-8-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
(1) Use: manufacturing; wholesaling; distributing; and professional
and business offices.
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for ten-thousand-square-foot increase in impervious
surface coverage up to a maximum coverage of 85%, including a
four-thousand-square-foot increase in the otherwise allowable
building coverage up to a maximum coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707F(3), of this chapter is required in
order to meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The PI-1 District may receive transferable development rights
transferred from Tax Map Parcel 50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or
§ 370-2209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2210
1:861
RA-4 District. Standards for the use of transferable development rights
shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-2210 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2210
1:862
ARTICLE XXIII
PI-1A Planned Industrial District
[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
§ 370-2301. General description and purpose.
§ 370-2302. Permitted uses.
The specific uses permitted in this district shall be the erection,
construction, alteration or use of buildings on premises for the following
uses and no other:
A. The PI-1A Planned Industrial District is hereby established as a district
in which the regulations are intended to permit and encourage
industrial development to ensure that it will be so located and designed
as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical
development of the Township, to contribute to the soundness of the
economic base of the Township, and otherwise further the purposes of
this chapter.
B. Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent
of this article is:
(1) To encourage the construction on and continued use of land for
industrial purposes.
(2) To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial uses in the
district.
(3) To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other
structures, the areas and dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and the provision of facilities and operation of industries to
minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, fire, safety
hazards, etc.
A. Any manufacturing, wholesale, or distributing use which meets the
provisions of § 370-2006, Standards, as follows:
(1) Storage buildings and warehouses; parking garages and lots.
(2) Laboratories; experimental, research or testing.
(3) Carpet or rug cleaning; laundry, cleaning and dyeing plant.
(4) Wholesaling and distributing activities.
(5) Light metal processing as follows: cleaning, finishing, grinding,
heat treating, plating, polishing, rustproofing, and sharpening;
metal stamping and extrusion of small products; similar metal
working processes.
§ 370-2301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2302
1:863
§ 370-2303. Conditional uses.
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses by the Board
of Supervisors under the provisions of § 370-3602 and the following
limitations:
(6) Job printing, newspaper or book publishing, electronics and small
parts assembly or manufacture.
(7) Baking and food processing.
(8) Electronics and small parts assembly or manufacture.
(9) Manufacture and/or storage of construction materials and
equipment.
B. Dwelling quarters for watchmen or caretakers employed on the
premises shall be permitted in connection with any industrial
establishment.
C. Mini warehouses.
D. Food preparation and serving areas as an accessory use to uses
specified in this section.
E. Signs, in accordance with Article XXXV.
A. Any manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment
of the following previously prepared materials: bone, cork, feathers,
cellophane, ceramics, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn, paper, pharmaceutical,
plastics, shells, iron and steel, aluminum, leather, plaster, metals,
precious and/or semiprecious stones, woods, yarns, containers or
novelties from paper or cardboard, natural or synthetic rubber, tobacco,
textile or textile products, and perfumes in accordance with the area
requirements of § 370-2205 and the Standards of § 370-2206.
B. The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, electrical or
electronic devices; home, commercial and industrial appliances and
instruments, including the manufacture of accessory parts or
assemblies; dental and medical equipment; watches and clocks; optical
goods, drafting equipment, and canvas products in accordance with the
area requirements of § 370-2205 and the standards of § 370-2206.
C. Medical marijuana grower/processor in accordance with the standards
in § 370-3627.
D. Commercial uses in accordance with the area requirements of
§ 370-2205 and the standards of § 370-2206.
E. Commercial recreational facilities in accordance with the area
requirements of § 370-2205 and the standards of § 370-2206.
F. Professional and business office facilities in accordance with the area
requirements of § 370-2205 and the standards of § 370-2206.
§ 370-2302 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2303
1:864
§ 370-2304. Special exceptions.
None.
§ 370-2305. Area requirements.
§ 370-2306. Standards.
For uses permitted by § 370-2302, the standards set forth in § 370-2206
shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-2303, the standards set forth in
§ 370-2206 shall apply, unless otherwise stated.
§ 370-2307. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2308. Signs.
See Article XXXV, § 370-3510.
G. Retail store in accordance with the area requirements of § 370-2305
and the standards of § 370-2206.
H. Medical marijuana dispensary in accordance with the standards in
§ 370-3626.
A. For uses permitted by § 370-2302, the standards set forth in § 370-2205
shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-2303, the area requirements
set forth in § 370-2205 shall apply, unless otherwise stated.
B. Retail stores shall comply with the following minimum area
requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area and lot width.
(a) Twenty thousand square feet, with a lot width of 100 feet at the
building line, for all lots served by neither a public water nor a
public sanitary sewer system.
(b) Ten thousand square feet, with a lot width of 75 feet at the
building line, for all lots served by both public water and a
public sanitary sewer system.
(2) Side yards. Two side yards, not less than 20 feet in width, each.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than 35 feet in depth.
(4) Impervious coverage. Not more than 35% of the lot areas shall be
occupied by buildings.
(5) Maximum height: 35 feet.
§ 370-2303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2308
1:865

ARTICLE XXIV
PI-2 Planned Industrial District
§ 370-2401. General description and purpose.
§ 370-2402. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-O-1]
§ 370-2403. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
A. The PI-2 Planned Industrial District is hereby established as a district in
which the regulations are intended to permit and encourage industrial
development and to ensure that it will be so located and designed as to
constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical
development of the Township, to contribute to the soundness of the
economic base of the Township, and otherwise further the purposes of
this chapter.
B. Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent
of this article is:
(1) To encourage the construction on and continued use of the land for
industrial purposes.
(2) To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial uses in the
district.
(3) To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other
structures, the areas and dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and the provisions of facilities and operation of industries
to minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, fire, safety
hazards, etc.
A. The permitted uses in the PI-1 District, Article XII, § 370-2202.
B. Community center.
C. Municipal building.
D. Emergency services.
E. School, provided that the maximum enrollment shall be limited to a
maximum of 50 students.
A. Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks may be permitted as a use by
the Board of Supervisors, subject to the provisions of this section and
Article X of this chapter and Article VIII, Mobile Home Park
Regulations, of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development. In
addition the following requirements apply:
§ 370-2401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2403
1:867
§ 370-2404. Special exceptions. [Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-04]
(1) Utilities. All proposed mobile home parks shall be serviced by
approved public water and sewer facilities.
(2) Access. Mobile home parks shall be required to front on collector
streets in the Township road classification system; or streets of a
greater classification, as defined herein.
B. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, communications towers
and communications equipment buildings.
A. Adult commercial uses. Any adult or sexually oriented businesses,
including any business establishment that regularly features live
performances, which are designated by or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or
the breasts of any female person, or specified sexual activities that
include the exposure of the genitals or buttocks of any person or the
breasts of any female person, or any business whose primary purpose is
the sale or display of matter which, because of its sexually explicit
nature, may, pursuant to the state law or other regulatory authority, be
offered only to persons over the age of 18 years of age. Adult
entertainment may include an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, or adult visual materials or video
store as defined in this section. Adult entertainment includes any other
use or business, regardless of how named or advertised, that is of a
character like or similar to the uses and businesses described herein.
An adult commercial store, adult entertainment cabaret, adult movie
house and other adult uses are defined below.
(1) Adult commercial bookstore. Adult bookstore is an establishment
with more than 15 square feet of floor area devoted to the display,
selling and/or rental of pornographic materials, which are pictures,
drawings, photographs, videotapes or other depictions or printed
matter and paraphernalia, which if sold knowingly to a minor under
18 years of age would violate the criminal laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in effect at the same time.
(2) Adult entertainment cabaret. A public or private establishment
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which
features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators,
or similar entertainers, or similar establishments to which access is
limited to persons 18 years of age or older.
(3) Adult video/movie houses. An enclosed building used regularly and
routinely for presenting, displaying or exhibiting obscene matter
for observation by patrons therein or similar establishment to
which access is limited to persons 18 years of age or older.
§ 370-2403 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2404
1:868
§ 370-2405. Area and setback requirements. [Amended 7-13-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-O-04; 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-O-1]
(4) Adult arcade. Any place in which the public, or a private member, is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slab-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture, or video machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by depicting or
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(5) Adult visual materials or video store. A building or portion thereof
used by an establishment having not less than 10% of its actual
display area devoted to stock-in-trade for sale or rental to the
public or any segment thereof consisting of books, magazines,
other publications, files, videocassettes, or any combination thereof
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas hereinafter defined.
(6) Other adult uses. Any business, activity or use, similar to or of the
same general nature as the uses listed above.
B. Prohibited activities.
(1) Specified anatomical areas. Any of the following:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2) Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(a) The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
(b) Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in Subsection B(1) or (2) of this subsection.
(e) Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of
transparent or diaphanous clothing.
§ 370-2404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2405
1:869
A. The area and bulk requirements in § 370-2205 of this chapter shall
apply to all uses in this chapter, except for adult commercial,
community center, municipal building and emergency services.
B. Adult commercial. Adult commercial uses must meet the standards set
forth below in addition to the standards set forth in § 370-2205. The
most restrictive standard shall apply.
(1) The building or structure of such use shall be located no less that
1,000 feet from any residential use or district or from any public or
private school, church, recreation facility, camp, riding academy,
miniature golf, non-adult arcade or any other religious, institutional
or educational use as measured from building or structure listed
above to the building containing the adult commercial use.
(2) No such use shall be located within 2,000 feet of a similar use.
(3) No materials sold within shall be visible from any window, door, or
exterior of the building.
(4) No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted
within an adult commercial store or sold pornographic material.
C. Community center, municipal building and emergency services.
Community center, municipal building and emergency services must
meet the standards set forth below.
(1) Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet.
(2) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 90%.
D. A school permitted by § 370-2402 must meet the standards set forth
below:
(1) Minimum lot size: 1 acre.
(2) Front yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 10 feet.
(4) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Maximum percentage of impervious cover: 90%.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) Parking: one off-street parking space for each faculty member and
employee plus one additional off-street parking space for every
three students.
(8) Any outdoor play areas shall be screened so as to protect adjacent
residential districts or residences from inappropriate noises or
other disturbances.
§ 370-2405 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2406
1:870
§ 370-2406. Standards.
A. Screening and buffering. Along each side or real property line a buffer
planting not less than 30 feet in depth shall be provided. Along each
street line, a fifteen-foot in depth buffer planting shall be provided
including sidewalks and accessways. For buffer requirements, see
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
B. Storage and disposal. As specified in § 370-2206.
C. Performance requirements. As specified in § 370-2206.
D. No adult commercial use shall be operated in any manner that permits
observation of any materials of activities depicting, describing or
relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from
any public rights-of-way or from any location outside the building or
area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window, or other opening, No exterior door or
window shall be propped open or kept open at any time that the
business is open and any exterior windows shall be covered with
opaque covering at all times. [Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-04]
E. All off-street parking areas and premises entries of any adult
commercial use shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average
illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. [Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-04]
F. Adult commercial uses may only be operated between 11:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. Extended hours of operation may be approved by the Board
of Supervisors upon submission of a written request by the applicant/
owner of the facility. The Board of Supervisors shall take into
consideration the type of facility, amount of usage and impact on
adjoining properties when reviewing such requests. [Added
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-04]
G. Adult commercial uses shall not include any activity conducted or
sponsored by a school district or other public agency so long as such
activity is conducted as part of and within the scope of an authorized
and regular part of the curriculum or is part of a training or
instructional program being conducted by a public agency. [Added
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-04]
H. Adult commercial uses shall not include any activity conducted by a
person pursuant to any license issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any agency thereof charged with the responsibility of
licensing, prescribing standards for and supervising such activity or
profession in and to the extent that such activity is conducted within the
course and scope of the exercise of the privileges authorized by such
§ 370-2406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2406
1:871
§ 370-2407. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2408. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
§ 370-2409. Application.
§ 370-2410. Transfers of development rights. [Amended 7-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-3; 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-01]
license or the duties to such agency. [Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-04]
A. For all adult commercial uses, one off-street parking space shall be
provided for each four seats devoted to patron use, or one off-street
parking space shall be provided for each 50 square feet of gross floor
area devoted to the adult commercial use, whichever is greater, plus
one additional off-street parking space for each employee of such
facility. [Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-04]
B. All parking shall be located in the front of the building. [Added
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-04]
A. Procedural requirements. Application shall be made to the Township
Manager for referral to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors as set forth in Chapter
305, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
B. Application requirements. The applications for a permit shall be
accompanied by the information specified in § 370-2206 of this chapter
in addition to the requirements of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development.
A. To promote the preservation of land for use as open space, trails, scenic
vistas, agriculture, nurseries, forests, wetlands, floodplains, riparian
buffers, natural wildlife areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and
historically significant sites; to manage residential and commercial
growth through the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Program
using the criteria established herein; to benefit landowners who will be
able to accrue development rights for transfer or sale to other
landowners in the Township in districts zoned Residential Agricultural
(RA), and in other districts when approved by the Board of Supervisors
after considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
the Transferable Development Rights Review Board; to establish
guidelines to facilitate the transfers; and to benefit the community that
will enjoy the open space, development rights may be used as follows:
§ 370-2406 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2410
1:872
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
(1) Use: manufacturing; wholesaling; distributing; and professional
and business offices.
(2) Development rights equivalency. Each transferable development
right allows for an additional ten-thousand-square-foot increase in
impervious surface coverage up to a maximum imperious coverage
of 85%, including a four-thousand-square-foot increase in building
coverage up to a maximum building coverage of 45%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to run with the land.
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707 of this chapter is required in order to
meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan.
E. The PI-2 District may receive transferable development rights
transferred from Tax Map Parcel 50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or
RA-4 District. Standards for the use of transferable development rights
shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b).
§ 370-2410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2410
1:873

ARTICLE XXV
O-I Professional Office and Light Industrial District
§ 370-2501. General description; purpose.
The Professional Office and Light Industrial District is intended to provide
areas where commercial and industrial uses of a limited and highly
restricted nature may develop in a getting which may be appropriate for
relatively intensive uses but which, because of the proximity of residential
areas or the general character of the area, should not be opened to a
broad range of commercial and industrial uses. In addition, it is intended to
provide for greater variety in the development scheme of the Township by
recognizing what is regarded as a particular need.
§ 370-2502. Permitted uses.
The following uses, and no others, shall be considered for development
under the provisions of this article:
§ 370-2503. Conditional uses. [Amended 12-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-24]
The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors:
A. The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, electronic
devices; home and commercial appliances and instruments, including
the manufacture of accessory parts or assemblies, dental and medical
equipment, watches and clocks, optical goods, drafting equipment and
canvas products.
B. Laboratories; experimental research excluding all uses involving
outside chemical storage tanks, fractionating or distillation towers and
similar structures.
C. Professional and business offices.
D. Accessory uses commonly incidental to the above.
A. Limited-access self-storage facility. Notwithstanding anything
contained in §§ 370-2405 and 370-3401O, of this chapter to the
contrary, the Board of Supervisors shall be permitted, as part of the
conditional use hearing for a limited-access self-storage facility, to:
(1) Reduce the requirements for the minimum site area down to 1.5
acres, the minimum building setbacks down to 20 feet on the rear
and side yards and 30 feet on the front yard, and the parking
setback down to five feet on the side yards abutting a
nonresidential use; and
(2) Increase the requirements for the maximum building coverage up
to 50% and the maximum impervious surface coverage up to 75%.
§ 370-2501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2504
1:875
§ 370-2504. Special exceptions.
None.
§ 370-2505. Area requirements.
§ 370-2506. Standards.
§ 370-2507. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2508. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
A. Minimum site area: five acres.
B. Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
C. Maximum height: 55 feet. [Amended 12-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-24]
D. Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
E. Minimum building setback: 50 feet measured from the ultimate right-ofway
line or property line. For nondedicated roads or access drives, the
minimum setback shall be 40 feet from the edge of cartway or 20 feet
from a parking area edge of paving.
F. Maximum building coverage: 10% of the lot area.
G. Maximum impervious surface: 60% of the lot area.
A. Screening and buffer requirements. Along each side or rear property
line which adjoins an existing residence or residential district, a buffer
planting not less than 30 feet in depth shall be provided. Along each
street line, a fifteen-foot in depth buffer planting shall be provided,
including sidewalks and accessways. In addition, the requirements of
Article XXXVI, § 370-3607, apply.
B. Storage and waste. All uses shall comply with § 370-2206 of this
chapter.
C. Performance requirements. All uses shall comply with § 370-2206 of
this chapter.
D. Design standards. The proposed development shall be constructed in
accordance with an overall plan, and shall be designed as a single
architectural scheme with appropriate landscaping.
§ 370-2504 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2509
1:876
§ 370-2509. Application. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
Applications shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington, and § 370-2209. Approval or disapproval will be made by the
Board of Supervisors after review and recommendations by the Township
Planning Commission and its professional consultants. For the purpose of
administration, applications shall be treated as conditional uses.
§ 370-2510. Transfer of development rights. [Amended 7-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-6]
A. Toward achieving the purpose of promoting office and light industrial
development in Warrington and toward furthering the preservation of
agricultural lands (see § 370-411 of this chapter), landowners in this
district may be recipients of development rights transferable from the
RA Residential Agricultural District, which development rights may be
usable as follows:
Use Development Right Equivalency
Light industry; laboratories;
professional and business
offices
Each development right allows for a
one-percent increase in the otherwise
allowable building coverage up to a
maximum coverage of 20%; and a twopercent
increase in impervious surface
coverage up to a maximum coverage of
8%.
B. Development rights shall be deemed to "run with the land."
C. Development rights shall not be available on any site for which a bulk
variance pursuant to § 370-3707 of this chapter is required in order to
meet otherwise applicable site and area requirements.
D. Warrington Township shall formulate and adopt appropriate regulations
to effectuate this provision consistent with the language and intent of
this chapter and with the Comprehensive Plan for Growth Management
in Warrington Township.
E. The O-I District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the
use of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b)[1] and [4].
§ 370-2509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2510
1:877

ARTICLE XXVI
CR/O Corridor Residential/Office District
§ 370-2601. Purpose. [Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 88-16;
3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
The purpose of the CR/O District is to provide areas where professional
office and/or multifamily residential development may be permitted. This
district permits and encourages the combination of offices and multifamily
residential development. This district is intend to create development which
is both architecturally integrated and visually cohesive by offering the
opportunity to create a unique architectural environment. The mix of
professional office and/or multifamily residential development is not only
permitted but encouraged to provide a diversity of facilities that promote
the establishment of a comprehensive and unifying vehicular and walkway
system throughout this district; and reinforces the preservation of existing
natural amenities including trees, drainageways, historic or significant
buildings, etc.
§ 370-2602. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No.
88-16; 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
A. Office buildings.
(1) For business, professional and governmental use, including
administrative, scientific, training, medical, financial and similar
purposes in connection with such uses.
(2) Accessory uses commonly incidental to office buildings, contained
within the same buildings, and limited to 20% of building's total
floor space. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, retail
service establishments such as food store, drugstore, stationery
and newspaper store, personal service shop, restaurant, cafe, or
other similar place serving food or beverage; banks or other
financial institutions.
B. Multifamily dwelling units.
(1) A building having two or more dwelling units which may have
either a common or independent outside access. Said units may be
arranged one above the other or side by side.
(2) Accessory uses commonly incidental to multifamily dwellings,
contained within the same building on the ground floor and limited
to 10% of the building's total floor space. Typical uses include, but
are not limited to, retail service establishments such are food store,
drug and stationery and newspaper store, personal service shop,
restaurant, cafe, or other similar place serving food or beverage;
banks or other financial institutions.
C. Combined office multifamily complex.
§ 370-2601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2602
1:879
§ 370-2603. Conditional uses for commercial conversions. [Added
8-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10; 7-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-8; 4-30-2002
by Ord. No. 02-05]
The conversion of an existing building(s) shall be permitted provided that
the proposed use complies with § 370-3602 of this chapter and all of the
following conditions:
(1) Combined office multifamily complex is a building complex for
multiple dwelling and office units contained either within the same
structure or separate structures. Dwelling units and professional
and business offices shall not occupy the same floor.
(2) Accessory uses commonly incidental to offices and/or multifamily
structures contained within the same building and limited to 15%
of the buildings total floor space.
D. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
A. Permitted uses. That the existing building is converted to one or more
of the following uses:
(1) Office.
(2) Antique shop, beauty salon, music store.
(3) Residential (one, two or multifamily).
B. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot size shall be 35,000 square feet.
C. Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
D. Private alleys. All lots developed under this section shall provide a rear
yard private limited access alley with a twenty-foot paved cartway
within a twenty-five-foot easement. This alley shall be designed in such
a manner as to encourage its connection in and between adjoining lots
but not between parallel local public streets. Alleys shall not open onto
local streets. All proposed private alleys shall contain cross-easement
provisions in a form acceptable to the Township.
E. Access drives. Access drives to Route 611 shall be restricted to existing
points. New access drives to Route 611 shall be combined with
adjoining properties to the greatest extent practicable and no new
access drive to Route 611 shall be closer than 75 feet to an existing
access drive.
F. Interior circulation. All new access drives from Route 611 shall be
designed and maintained as a one-way street system with ingress only
from Route 611 with ingress and egress to and from the rear yard alley.
G. Parking. Parking for commercial conversions shall be provided in the
side and rear yard areas only and as follows:
§ 370-2602 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2603
1:880
§ 370-2604. Density. [Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 88-16;
3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
(1) Residential use: two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Office use: one space per 250 square feet of net leasable area.
(3) Other use: one space per 200 square feet of net leasable area.
H. Landscaping and fencing. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided
between all access drives and parking areas, and adjacent lots, unless
the adjacent lots are the subject of a common accessway easement.
Solid fencing shall be a minimum of five feet and a maximum of six feet
in height, and shrubbery shall be a minimum of four feet in height upon
planting and shall be closely planted as to create the equivalent to an
eighty-five-percent visual screen.
I. Second floor access. All proposed and required stairways to the second
floor or higher shall be enclosed within the building or stair tower.
J. Signage. No signs shall be permitted except as provided for in Article
XXXV herein.
K. Street trees. All commercial conversions shall provide one street tree
for every 50 feet of street frontage along Route 611.
L. Lighting. All parking lot lighting shall be on a timer so that it is not on
all evening.
M. Renovation/restoration of building facade. All conversions shall
renovate and/or restore the subject building facade to its original
residential character and, in particular, there shall be no enclosed front
porches. The residential character of the building shall be preserved.
N. Outside storage limitation. There shall be no exterior storage of
materials.
A. Multifamily dwelling units. The maximum density for multiplex
dwellings and townhouses shall be eight dwelling units per acre. Other
multifamily buildings such as garden and mid-rise apartments shall be
12 dwelling units per acre. Density shall be calculated on the net
buildable site area.
B. Combined office multifamily complex. Maximum density for the
residential portion of this complex is eight dwelling units per acre, with
regard to office use the maximum FAR (floor to area ratio) is 0.3;
provided, that the maximum impervious surface coverage does not
exceed 60% of the lot area.
C. Public utility. The site must be served by public or community water and
public sanitary sewage facilities acceptable to the Warrington Township
Municipal Authority. Available fire hydrants shall be provided in
locations suitable to the Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 370-2603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2605
1:881
§ 370-2605. Parking. [Amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2606. Special exceptions. [Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No.
88-16; 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
None.
§ 370-2607. Area requirements. [Amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No.
92-3; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-12; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
A. Office buildings.
(1) Minimum site area: two acres.
(2) Minimum lot width at building setback line: 200 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious surface: 60% of lot line.
(4) Building setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet or building height, whichever is greater.
(b) Side and rear yard: 50 feet.
(c) Boundary parking buffer: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet.
(6) Maximum height: 55 feet.
(7) Maximum FAR (floor to area ratio): 0.3.
B. Multifamily dwelling units.
(1) Multiplex dwelling.
(a) Minimum site area: four acres.
(b) Minimum lot area (per building): 8,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width (per building) at setback line: 80 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface: 40%.
(e) Minimum building setback line street (ultimate right-of-way):
30 feet.
(f) Minimum building setback line, property lines: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum building setback line, parking areas: 20 feet.
(h) Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet.
(i) Maximum floor area to lot area: 0.75.
§ 370-2605 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2607
1:882
(j) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(2) Townhouse dwellings.
(a) Minimum site area: four acres.
(b) Maximum impervious surface area: 30%.
(c) Minimum building setback line, street (ultimate right-of-way):
30 feet.
(d) Minimum building setback line, parking areas: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback line, pedestrian walk: 15 feet.
(f) Minimum building setback line, property lines: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum distance between buildings (side): 30 feet.
(h) Minimum distance between buildings (rear): 60 feet.
(i) Maximum floor area to lot ratio: 0.75.
(j) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(3) Garden apartment dwellings.
(a) Minimum site area: four acres.
(b) Maximum floor area (on lot) to lot area ratio: 0.55.
(c) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 40%.
(d) Minimum building setback line, street (ultimate right-of-way):
50 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback line, parking: 30 feet.
(f) Minimum building setback line, property lines: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet.
(h) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(4) Mid-rise apartment dwelling.
(a) Minimum site area: four acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(c) Maximum impervious surface area (on lot): 50%.
(d) Minimum building setback line, property line of development:
150 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback line, street (ultimate right-of-way):
80 feet.
§ 370-2607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2607
1:883
§ 370-2608. Open space. [Amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3;
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-09]
(f) Minimum building setback line, parking: 40 feet.
(g) Minimum distance between buildings: 100 feet.
(h) Maximum horizontal dimension (one side): 180 feet.
(i) Maximum height: 55 feet.
A. The active open space required on a parcel at the time of development
of that parcel shall be calculated by dividing the number of proposed
dwelling units by 100 and multiplying the result by three acres. All
remaining open space on the parcel shall be passive open space.
B. Open space/recreation design guidelines.
(1) An effective space system should tie together a number of diverse
recreational activity areas with adequate pedestrian pathways and
auto-bicycle access for residents it is intended to serve. As many
homes as possible should have direct access to the open space of a
development. Developed open space generally should not be
isolated in one corner of a project.
(2) Active recreation should be visibly close but shall not interfere with
the privacy of adjacent residents. It should be designed to
accommodate the recreation needs of the project's intended age
group.
(3) Suggested recreational facilities could include the following:
(a) Pathways and bikeways. Uses to connect open space,
recreational facilities, residential buildings and other uses.
Vehicular conflicts with open space pathways are discouraged.
(b) Play lots. Minimum 2,000 square feet for toddlers and up to
5,000 square feet for older children primarily used by
preschool children. Facilities could include swings, play
sculptures, benches for parents, horseshoes, shuffleboard and
chess tables for adults. Provide approximately one play lot for
each 400 persons or one per 100 children.
(c) Playgrounds.
[1] Designed for a variety of uses and age groups; the
equipment should reflect the patronage. Sandboxes and
play sculpture for young children, basketball courts or
backboards for older youths, paved areas for various
activities and shuffleboard and sunny quiet areas for the
elderly.
§ 370-2607 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2608
1:884
[2] The size of playgrounds should generally be based on
population as follows:
Population
Size
(acres)
500 0.75
1,000 1.0
(d) Tennis. One court for each 100 dwelling units.
(e) Swimming pools. The size of pools should generally be based
on the number of dwelling units as follows:
Number of Dwelling Units
Pool Size
(square feet)
Under 50 800 to 1,000
50 to 100 1,000 to 1,3000
101 to 150 1,200 to 1,500
151 to 200 1,400 to 1,800
Over 200 1,800 and up
(f) Community buildings. In planned residential development of
over 150 dwelling units, consideration shall be given toward a
recreation center/community multipurpose building. This
facility may include day care, manager's office, exercise areas,
storage lockers, vending machines, etc. This facility is solely
for the use of residents and their guests. Such facility should
be within walking or easy biking distance of the majority of
residents it is intended to serve.
(g) Other amenities. Jogging trails and exercise areas in an adultoriented
project. Provide benches and sitting areas along the
pathways where appropriate and particularly where they can
incorporate or provide views of significant landscape feature,
recreational facility or interesting site design of the project.
C. If it is determined that open space land as represented on a subdivision
or land development plan is not suitable with regard to the size, shape,
location, access or provisions for maintenance, the Township may, at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, require that open space be
provided through payment of a fee in lieu of land and/or facilities. This
fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the acreage that would
otherwise be dedicated pursuant to this section, as stated in the
adopted Fee Schedule.170 Such payment shall be made to the
Warrington Township Parks and Recreation Board, to be used for the
170. Editor's Note: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 370-2608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2608
1:885
§ 370-2609. Standards. [Amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3;
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
§ 370-2610. Parking. [Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 88-16;
3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-2611. Signs. [Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
See Article XXXV
§ 370-2612. Transfers of development rights. [Added 3-17-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-3; amended 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
The CR/O District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 Districts. Standards for the use
of TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b)[1] and [5].
acquisition, development, or improvement of open space land that will
be available and accessible to and that will benefit the residents of the
development. This option is available in all zoning districts within the
Township in which open space is required.
A. Screening and buffering. All uses shall comply with § 370-2506A, above,
except that buffer yards shall be no less than 25 feet wide in the CR/O
District.
B. Outside storage. All uses shall comply with § 370-2206A, above.
C. Design. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance
with an overall plan and shall be designed as a single architectural
scheme with appropriate landscaping. The standards of § 305-329,
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington, shall apply.
§ 370-2608 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2612
1:886
ARTICLE XXVII
CR/O-IU Corridor Residential/Office-Institutional Use District
[Added 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
§ 370-2701. Purpose.
The purpose of the CR/O-IU District is to provide areas where professional
office, multifamily residential and/or institutional development may be
permitted. This district permits and encourages the combination of offices,
multifamily residential and institutional development. This district is
intended to create development which is both architecturally integrated
and visually cohesive by offering the opportunity to create a unique
architectural environment. The mix of professional office, multifamily
residential and institutional development is not only permitted but
encouraged to provide a diversity of facilities that promote the
establishment of a comprehensive and unifying vehicular and walkway
system throughout this district; and reinforces the preservation of existing
natural amenities including trees, drainage ways, historic or significant
buildings, etc.
§ 370-2702. Permitted uses.
Those uses permitted in §§ 370-1602 and 370-2602 of this chapter shall be
permitted in the CR/O-IU District.
§ 370-2703. Conditional uses.
Those uses permitted in § 370-2603 as conditional uses shall be permitted
as conditional uses in the CR/O-IU District, and shall be governed by the
conditions and other regulations set forth in § 370-2603.
§ 370-2704. Special exceptions.
None.
§ 370-2705. Density.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the requirements of
§ 370-2604 shall apply.
§ 370-2706. Area requirements.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the area requirements set
forth in § 370-2607 shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-1602, the area
requirements set forth in § 370-1605 shall apply.
§ 370-2707. Open space.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the open space
requirements of § 370-2608 shall apply.
§ 370-2701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2708
1:887
§ 370-2708. Standards.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the standards set forth in
§ 370-2609 shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-1602, the standards set
forth in § 370-1606 shall apply.
§ 370-2709. Parking.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the requirements of
§ 370-2610 shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-1602, the requirements
of § 370-1607 shall apply.
§ 370-2710. Signs.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603, the provisions of
§ 370-2611 shall apply. For uses permitted by § 370-1602, the provisions of
§ 370-1608 shall apply.
§ 370-2711. Transfers of development rights.
For uses permitted by §§ 370-2602 and 370-2603the provisions of
§ 370-2612 shall apply.
§ 370-2712. Design. [Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
The standards of § 305-329, Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington, shall apply.
§ 370-2708 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2712
1:888
ARTICLE XXVIII
Loop Road Overlay District
[Added 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-14]
§ 370-2801. Purpose and application.
§ 370-2802. Permitted uses.
A. Purpose. The purpose of establishing the Loop Road Overlay District
shall be to allow the development of a well-planned, designed, built and
maintained development, consisting of a mix of nonresidential with
residential uses on a large parcel of ground designed around a new loop
road in order to alleviate traffic backups at a major intersection in the
Township (each a "loop road"). Mixed-use developments in the Loop
Road Overlay District may provide for a variety of uses. Such
developments shall have all necessary services and facilities
comprehensively provided in accordance with an approved
development plan. Provisions of this district are formulated to achieve
harmoniously designed structures upon a well-designed site with a loop
road.
B. Application.
(1) The Loop Road Overlay District shall be deemed an overlay on the
specific parcels identified on the Zoning Map, as designated by the
Township from time to time. It shall not change the underlying
zoning district of said parcels; but, rather, provide additional
permitted uses and regulations applicable to such uses.
(2) The Loop Road Overlay District may be applied to those parcels of
land that include in their development plan the completion of a loop
road. A "loop road" shall be defined as a road that connects an
arterial road with either a collector road or another arterial road
(as those roads are defined in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
(3) The regulations, requirements and restrictions set forth in this
Article XXVIII shall apply to development in the Loop Road Overlay
District and shall supersede the regulations, requirements and
restrictions applicable to the underlying zoning district to the
extent of a conflict between them.
A. Two-family semidetached dwellings.
B. Four-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Townhouse dwellings.
D. The following uses shall be permitted when fronting on an arterial road
or loop road:
§ 370-2801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2802
1:889
§ 370-2803. Area requirements.
(1) Retail business or service establishment, including but not limited
to the following: food store, drug and pharmaceutical store,
convenience store, stationery and newspaper store, personal
service shop, restaurant, coffee shop, bakery, cafe or other similar
place serving food or beverage. Such uses may include outdoor
seating. Such uses may include drive-through service, subject to
providing a stacking lane to serve a minimum of 10 cars and
providing trash receptacles outside for patron use.
(2) Bank, savings and loan association, credit union and other financial
establishment. Such uses with drive-up service windows shall have
a vehicle waiting line area for at least six vehicles. The waiting line
area shall be separated from other circulation areas.
(3) Motor vehicle service station, subject to the conditions set forth in
§ 370-2003B. Such use shall be permitted to include retail food
sales.
E. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses listed above.
A. Minimum gross tract area: 10 acres.
B. Residential uses (with residential structures either on individual lots or
on a common lot as part of a planned community association).
(1) Minimum gross lot area dedicated to residential use: five acres.
(a) Where residential lots are separated by the loop road, the
gross lot area shall include the sum of all residential lots within
the residential tract and on both sides of the loop road.
(2) Minimum lot size per residential structure (if each residential
structure is on an individual lot and not on a common lot as part of
a planned community association): 3,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum building setback, loop road: 15 feet.
(4) Minimum building setback, arterial road: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum building setback, other roads: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum building setback, property line: 10 feet.
(7) Minimum building setback to access drive or common parking
area: 10 feet.
(8) Minimum separation between buildings: 15 feet.
(9) Minimum access drive width: 22 feet.
(10) Maximum impervious coverage: 60%.
(11) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
§ 370-2802 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2803
1:890
§ 370-2804. Standards.
(12) Minimum building height: 40 feet.
(13) Maximum density: 12 dwelling units per acre within the residential
tract.
C. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Minimum gross lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum building setback, loop road: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum building setback, arterial road: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum building setback, other roads: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum building setback, property line: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum separation between buildings: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum separation between access drive or parking area and
property line or loop road right-of-way: 10 feet.
(8) Minimum separation between parking areas and buildings: five
feet.
(9) Maximum impervious coverage: 80%.
(10) Maximum building coverage: 45%.
(11) Maximum building height: 50 feet.
A. Screening and buffering. The screening and buffering needs associated
with any property in the Loop Road Overlay District may vary
substantially depending upon the site design, topography and other
factors; thus requiring design on a case-by-case basis. Section
370-3607A(1), regarding buffers between residential and
nonresidential uses, and § 370-3607C(1), regarding planting strips
between residential and nonresidential uses, shall not be applicable to
this Loop Road Overlay District. The applicant shall submit a detailed
screening and buffering plan during the land development approval
process.
B. Special development regulations.
(1) Unified plan. Any development plan hereunder shall consist of a
unified, harmonious grouping of buildings, service and parking
areas and landscaped spaces, planned and designed as an
integrated unit.
(2) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract, and in which it shall be agreed that
§ 370-2803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2804
1:891
§ 370-2805. Parking.
Parking within this district shall comply with the requirements of Article
XXXIV; provided, however, that the following sections shall not apply:
§ 370-3401P, regarding buffering of access drives, and § 370-3405A,
regarding planting strips within nonresidential parking and loading areas.
§ 370-2806. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
the tract will be developed under single direction in accordance
with an approved master development plan.
C. Traffic. A traffic impact study shall be required and submitted as part of
the land development approval process. The applicant shall provide
credible evidence that the development in the Loop Road Overlay
District will include sufficient road improvements to mitigate the traffic
impacts of the development on public streets and will avoid significant
increased traffic safety hazards, consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.171
D. Supplemental regulations. Development within this district shall
comply with the requirements of Article XXXVI; provided, however, that
the following sections shall not apply: § 370-3607A(1), regarding
buffers between residential and nonresidential uses, and
§ 370-3607C(1), regarding planting strips between residential and
nonresidential uses.
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 370-2804 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2806
1:892
ARTICLE XXIX
Central Business District
[Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
§ 370-2901. Purpose. [Amended 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07;
9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19]
The intent of the Central Business District is to provide an area that can
develop the center of commerce in the Township that will present a positive
image for the Route 611 and Street Road corridor. By creating development
which is both architecturally integrated and visually cohesive, the Central
Business District mixes nonresidential with permitted residential uses that
encourage the preservation of existing natural amenities, including trees,
drainageways, historic or significant buildings, etc. The permitted mix of
uses is intended to provide a diversity of facilities that consists of
harmonious grouping and design of buildings. The buildings are to be
connected by pedestrian plazas and walkways promoting the establishment
of a comprehensive and unifying walkway system. The interconnection
of development is encouraged with vehicular interconnections to
nonresidential uses when adjacent tracts are developed separately. Primary
objectives of the district are the promotion of the efficiency and safety of
the corridors through the placement, design and limitation on the number
of access points, and also to encourage shared parking and maximum open
space.
§ 370-2902. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5;
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-18; 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07;
9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19]
A. Professional and business offices.
(1) Office space for business, professional, medical and governmental
use, including administration, research and development, training,
data processing, financial and other similar operations.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
B. Research and development laboratories.
(1) An establishment for conducting investigations in the natural,
physical or social sciences or engineering and development as an
extension of investigation with the objective for creating end
products.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
C. Municipal/government facility.
(1) An administrative-type service provided by an agency of the
municipal, county, state or federal government.
§ 370-2901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2902
1:893
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
D. Theater.
(1) A building in which films are shown or stage shows are performed.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
E. Fitness center.
(1) An indoor fitness center shall include a building or buildings used
for any one or a combination of the following activities: indoor
court games played with a ball such as racquetball, handball,
squash, tennis, basketball and volleyball; swimming pool; indoor
running track; facilities related thereto.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
F. Retail business or service. [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-O-05]
(1) An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption or use and
rendering service incidental to the sale of such goods.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
G. Financial institution.
(1) Bank, savings and loan association, credit union and other financial
establishment. Such uses with drive-up service windows shall have
a vehicle waiting line area for at least six vehicles. The waiting line
area shall be separated from other circulation areas.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
H. Hotel/motel.
(1) A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general
public and providing such services as restaurants, banquet
facilities, meeting rooms and recreation facilities.
(2) In addition to the requirements of § 370-3602, this use shall be
subject to the following additional requirements:
(a) This use shall apply only to lots having the minimum allowed
lot width 150 feet on Easton Road (U.S. Route 611) or Street
Road.
§ 370-2902 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2902
1:894
(b) The minimum building setback shall be 200 feet from all
property lines that are adjacent to a residential district or a
residential use. Appropriate buffering and planting shall be
provided between the property line and the building setback
line to provide reasonable residential privacy and screening.
(3) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
I. Light manufacturing.
(1) Light manufacturing is permitted only in the Business Campus
Development. The manufacture or assembling of industrial or
commercial product that does not conflict with any of the other
Township ordinances or any other sections of this chapter. The
following uses as well as any other compatible or similar uses are
permitted:
(a) Electronic devices;
(b) Home and commercial appliances and instruments;
(c) Dental and medical equipment;
(d) Optical goods;
(e) Drafting equipment;
(f) Canvas products;
(g) Watches and clocks;
(h) Hardware;
(i) Electrical appliances, equipment and supplies;
(j) Small or hand tools;
(k) Professional musical and scientific instruments;
(l) Toys;
(m) Jewelry; as well as any other compatible or similar use.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
J. Flex space.
(1) Flex space is permitted only in the Business Campus Development.
It also is limited to 30% of the Business Campus site and is not
permitted on lots fronting Route 611 or Street Road. Flex space
consists of any use or combination of uses permitted in this zoning
district.
§ 370-2902 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2902
1:895
§ 370-2903. Conditional use. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5;
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 00-9; 8-20-2002
by Ord. No. 02-07; 9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19]
The following use may be permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with § 370-3602:
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
K. Age-restricted residential uses. As permitted in the I-U-B District,
§ 370-1902 (permitted in mixed use development areas only).
L. Commercial day-care center. Under 10,000 gsf.
(1) An establishment for the care of five or more persons at any one
time, including child nurseries, preschools and adult day-care
facilities.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
M. No-impact home occupation. [Added 7-24-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-O-09]
N. Video game arcade. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-05]
O. Service business dealing with customers: beauty parlor, barbershop,
shoe repair shop, dressmaking, travel agency, tailor, millinery,
photographer, copy service, fax mailbox, photographic studio or similar
shop. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-O-05]
A. Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,172 tower-based
wireless communications facilities and communications equipment
buildings. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
B. Restaurant with drive-through service.
(1) A restaurant with drive-through service may only be developed in
conjunction with the development of a parcel pursuant to a
permitted use or other conditional use in the CBD Central Business
District.
(2) In addition to the requirements of § 370-3602, this use shall be
subject to the following additional requirements:
(a) There shall be no direct access to any other arterial/public
roads in the Township.
(b) Access to a restaurant with drive-through service shall be
limited to internal circulation from the development of a
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-2902 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2903
1:896
permitted use or other conditional use in the CBD Central
Business District.
(c) Where a drive-through window is proposed, there shall be a
stacking lane provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside for patron use.
C. Motor vehicle service station.
(1) A motor vehicle service station may be permitted in the district
subject to the conditions as specified in § 370-2003B.
(2) Parking. See this chapter, Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Unloading.
D. Townhouse village development, subject to the following specific
standards: [Added 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-03]
(1) Allowed only as a land use type in the mixed-use development
option, provided that:
(a) The mixed-use development tract area is not less than 60
acres; and
(b) The mixed-use development tract area contains not less than
1,500 linear feet of arterial highway frontage.
(2) A townhouse village development shall comply with the
development standards set forth at § 370-1012A through C, except
that:
(a) The tract or lot area allocated for the townhouse village
development shall contain a minimum of 20 acres;
(b) The density shall not exceed 4.5 dwelling units per acre;
(c) At least one off-street parking space per dwelling unit shall be
provided for in parking courts or on-street parking for overflow
parking; and
(d) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each townhouse dwelling unit.
(3) In addition, the townhouse village development shall comply with
the following additional development standards:
(a) Not less than 20% of the tract area allocated for townhouse
village development shall be devoted to resource protection,
passive open space, active recreation and/or leisure activities.
(b) All open space areas, recreation areas, walkways, access
drives, common parking courts, and other portions of the tract
area allocated for townhouse village development shall be
§ 370-2903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2903
1:897
§ 370-2904. Area requirements. [Amended 12-9-1995 by Ord. No.
95-13; 8-2-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07; 9-30-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19]
owned or managed by a homeowners' or condominium
association.
(c) The maximum building height for a townhouse within a
townhouse village development shall not exceed 35 feet.
A. When an existing tract is proposed to be developed for one use without
subdivision, the following standards shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area: five acres. Sites of 25 acres or larger shall
comply with Subsection B, Business campus, or Subsection C,
Mixed-use development.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 65%. [Amended 2-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-O-05]
(5) Minimum building setbacks.
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(d) The minimum side and rear yard shall be 100 feet when the lot
is adjacent to a residential district.
(6) Minimum space between buildings: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum building height (occupied space):
(a) Professional office: 40 feet.
(b) Research and development laboratories: 40 feet.
(c) Municipal facility: 55 feet.
(d) Theater: 55 feet.
(e) Restaurant: 35 feet.
(f) Fitness center: 40 feet.
(g) Retail store: 35 feet.
(h) Service business: 35 feet.
(i) Financial institution: 40 feet.
§ 370-2903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2904
1:898
(j) Motel/hotel: 55 feet; permits five stories.
(k) Light manufacturing: 35 feet.
(8) Building heights may be increased by a maximum of 10 additional
feet for the purposes of architectural rooflines or roof structures to
cover mechanical equipment. No building shall exceed 65 feet in
overall height.
B. Business campus. The tract is required to be developed with at least
two land use types, such as office uses including professional business/
financial/municipal, retail uses including theater/fitness center/service/
restaurant/day care/automotive service, light manufacturing uses
including research and development/flex space, hotel/motel use. No one
use shall occupy more than 80% of the gross site area as approved by
the Township. Retail uses shall occupy no more than 20% of the gross
site area.
(1) When an existing tract is proposed to be developed for two or more
uses with or without subdividing the tract, the following standards
shall apply:
(a) Minimum gross site area: 25 acres.
(b) Business campus buildings may be mixed use or single use.
[1] Maximum building coverage: 25% of the gross site area.
[2] Maximum impervious surface: 60% of the gross site area.
(c) Dimensional standards for each business campus tract:
[1] Minimum building setback from arterial or collector street
ultimate right-of-way: 50 feet. This includes building
eaves, canopies, awnings, pent roofs, signs and the like.
[2] Minimum building setback from the curbline of an internal
roadway or parking area: 20 feet. This excludes building
eaves, canopies, awnings, pent roofs, signs and the like. In
no case shall the setback from these features be less than
10 feet.
[3] Minimum building and parking setback when lot is
adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet and 50 feet from
all other districts.
[4] Minimum setback for a loading dock or loading areas
whose hours of delivery will operate after 8:00 p.m. or
before 8:00 a.m., when adjacent to a residential district:
300 feet. Minimum setback for all other loading docks or
loading areas adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard: 25 feet.
§ 370-2904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2904
1:899
[6] Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
[7] Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet on all sides.
[8] Maximum building height (occupied space):
[a] Professional office: 40 feet.
[b] Research and development laboratories: 40 feet.
[c] Municipal facility: 55 feet.
[d] Theater: 55 feet.
[e] Restaurant: 35 feet.
[f] Fitness center: 40 feet.
[g] Retail store: 35 feet.
[h] Service business: 35 feet.
[i] Financial institution: 40 feet.
[j] Motel/hotel: 55 feet; permits five stories.
[k] Light manufacturing: 35 feet.
[l] Mixed-use building. The higher building height per
proposed use from the above-listed uses shall prevail.
[9] Building heights may be increased by a maximum of 10
additional feet for the purposes of architectural rooflines
or roofing structures to cover mechanical equipment. No
building shall exceed 65 feet in overall height.
(d) Business campus tracts may be subdivided into lots that
comply with Subsection A(1) through (6), provided the overall
site plan conforms with the Business Campus section of this
chapter (§ 370-2904B).
C. Mixed-use development. A mixed-use development is intended to
provide for a large tract of land to be developed in a planned, orderly
manner. It is to encourage and support a mix of land use types. Tracts
are required to be developed with at least three different land use
types, such as office uses, including professional/business/financial/
municipal; retail uses, including theater/fitness center/service/
restaurant/day care/automotive service; age-restricted residential uses;
light manufacturing uses, including research and development/flex
space; and/or hotel/motel use. In addition to age-restricted residential
uses, the use townhouse village development may be included as a
permitted land use type if authorized as a conditional use. No one use
group shall occupy more than 60% of the gross site area. Age-restricted
housing and townhouse village development may not exceed 30%
maximum nor be less than 15% of the gross site area. Age-restricted
§ 370-2904 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2904
1:900
housing is limited to a maximum density of eight units per acre of
the age-restricted portion of the site. Townhouse village development
housing is limited to a maximum density of 4 1/2 units per acre of
that portion of the tract allocated for such housing type. Neither agerestricted
residential housing nor townhouse village development
housing is an essential requirement of the mixed-use development.
Whenever a mixed-use development includes a townhouse village
development as a land use type, the requirements of Article III,
§ 370-307, shall apply. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-03]
(1) When an existing tract is proposed to be developed for three or
more uses with or without subdividing the tract, the following
standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum gross site area: 50 acres.
(b) Mixed-use buildings may be single use or mixed use.
[1] Maximum building coverage: 35% of the gross site area.
[2] Maximum impervious surface: 60% of the gross site area.
(c) Dimensional standards for each mixed-use tract:
[1] Minimum building setback from arterial or collector street
ultimate right-of-way: 50 feet. This includes building
eaves, canopies, awnings, pent roofs, signs and the like.
[2] Minimum building setback from the curbline of an internal
roadway or parking area: 15 feet along the building face of
a primary entrance and 10 feet along the building face of a
secondary entrance. This excludes building eaves,
canopies, awnings, pent roofs, signs and the like. In no
case shall the setback from these features be less than
eight feet.
[3] Minimum building and parking setback when lot is
adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet and 50 feet from
all other districts.
[4] Minimum setback for a loading dock or loading areas
whose hours of delivery will operate after 8:00 p.m. or
before 8:00 a.m., when adjacent to a residential district:
300 feet. Minimum setback for all other loading docks or
loading areas adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 370-2904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2904
1:901
§ 370-2905. General requirements. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-5; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13; 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2;
8-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5; 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07; 9-30-2003
by Ord. No. 03-19]
[7] Minimum distance between buildings: for residential uses,
50 feet back to back and 30 feet side to side; for all other
uses: 30 feet on all sides.
[8] Maximum building height (occupied space):
[a] Professional office: 50 feet.
[b] Research and development laboratories: 50 feet.
[c] Municipal facility: 50 feet.
[d] Theater: 55 feet.
[e] Restaurant: 35 feet.
[f] Fitness center: 40 feet.
[g] Retail store: 50 feet.
[h] Service business: 50 feet.
[i] Financial institution: 50 feet.
[j] Motel/hotel: 55 feet; permits five stories.
[k] Light manufacturing: 35 feet.
[l] Age-restricted residential use: 50 feet.
[m] Mixed-use building: the higher building height per
proposed use from the above-listed uses shall prevail.
[i] Building heights may be increased by a maximum
of 10 additional feet for the purposes of
architectural roof lines or roofing structures to
cover mechanical equipment. No building shall
exceed 65 feet in overall height.
(d) Business campus tracts may be subdivided into lots that
comply with Subsection A(1) through (6), provided the overall
site plan conforms with the business campus section of this
chapter (§ 370-2904B).
A. Access.
(1) All uses within a business campus or mixed-use development shall
take access from an interior roadway or common access driveway.
§ 370-2904 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2905
1:902
(2) In order to keep the number of access points on arterial roads to a
minimum, the internal street system shall be designed to connect
with the street system on an adjacent nonresidential tract. In the
event the adjacent tract is vacant, the streets may, at the discretion
of the Board of Supervisors, be required to be designed so that they
can be connected when the adjacent tract is developed.
(3) New access points to an existing arterial road shall be 300 feet
from the center line of existing or proposed access points and
intersections of streets. An access point shall be aligned with an
access point that is directly across the highway, unless safety
considerations dictate otherwise.
(4) A lot or lots developed under this article shall not access residential
streets unless specifically allowed by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use giving consideration to traffic flows, congestion,
safety and public welfare in addition to those requirements set
forth in § 370-3602.
B. (Reserved)
C. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) Walkways shall be provided throughout a business campus or
mixed-use development at the following locations:
(a) Between the buildings in the development, between buildings
and parking, plazas or open areas and off-site destination
points.
(b) Along both sides of internal streets, unless the Board of
Supervisors determines they are needed on only one side.
(c) Along existing roads that adjoin the site unless the Board of
Supervisors determines they are not needed. These walkways
shall connect with walkways on abutting tracts or extend to the
property line so that they can be continued on the adjacent
tract.
(2) The walkways shall form a continuous coordinated system
throughout the development.
(3) Walkways shall be barrier-free and shall facilitate easy pedestrian
movement for all people, regardless of physical condition.
(4) A clearly marked crosswalk, at least 10 feet wide, is required
wherever a walkway crosses an internal street. The crosswalk may
be marked by either painted lines or with a paving material of a
different color.
(5) Seating and trash containers shall be located at appropriate
locations, along the pedestrian walkway system. As much as
§ 370-2905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2905
1:903
possible, the design of the benches, trash receptacles, streetlights
and street signs shall be coordinated.
(6) Open space/amenity plan. Developers should submit proposed
locations and type of pedestrian amenities such as walkways, street
furniture, lighting, signage, bicycle racks, seating elements, flags,
fountains, etc., so as to ultimately create a unifying pedestrian/
amenity system.
D. Parking.
(1) All parking shall be contained within the mixed-use development
without regard to lot lines. Proof of cross and reciprocal parking
easements shall be submitted.
(2) The ingress and egress for off-street parking shall be designed so
that vehicles are not required to back out onto a street or into
another parking lot.
(3) Parking standards for on-street parking.
(a) Parking requirements.
[1] All permitted on-street parking spaces shall count towards
fulfilling the required off-street parking standards as
defined in § 370-3402.
[2] On-street parking areas shall be provided in designated
areas where the curbline is expanded to make a specific
on-street parking lane.
[3] On-street parking shall be permitted along one or both
sides of all residential streets, secondary streets or
primary streets as defined by Chapter 305, Subdivision
and Land Development, § 305-304.
[4] All streets permitting on-street parking shall allow elevenfoot
travel lanes, eight-foot on-street parking lanes.
[5] On-street parking shall be prohibited on any through
primary road in the development which connects to an
arterial roadway.
(4) Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or a change or
extension of a use which increases the parking requirements
according to the standards of this chapter, the total additional
parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of that section.
(5) In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of
parking spaces than is actually required to serve the needs of
nonresidential uses, the Board of Supervisors, after consulting with
the Planning Commission and Township Engineer, may permit a
§ 370-2905 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2905
1:904
conditional reduction of parking space if the following conditions
are satisfied: [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07;
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
(a) The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land
development plan, must designate sufficient space to meet the
parking requirements of this chapter. The plan shall also
illustrate the layout for the total number of parking spaces.
(b) The conditional reduction shall provide for the establishment
of not less than 80% of the required number of parking spaces,
as specified in this chapter. This initial phase of the parking
provision shall be clearly indicated on the plan.
(c) The balance of the parking area conditionally reserved shall
not include areas for required buffer yards, setbacks or areas
which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to
the physical characteristics of the land or other requirements
of this chapter. This parking area which is reserved shall be
located and have characteristics so as to provide amenable
open space should it be determined the additional parking
spaces are not required. The developer shall provide a
landscaping plan for the reserved area with the land
development plan.
(d) The developer shall enter into a written agreement with the
Board of Supervisors that, after one year following the issuing
of the last occupancy permit, the additional parking spaces
shall be provided at the developer's or owner's expense should
it be determined that the required number of parking spaces
are necessary to satisfy the need of the particular land
development.
(e) At the time of the above-stated agreement, the developer or
owner shall post a performance bond or other securities to
cover the expense of a traffic study to be undertaken by a
registered traffic engineer of the Board of Supervisors'
choosing, who shall determine the advisability of providing the
full parking requirements. Said study shall be taken one year
after the issuance of the last occupancy permit pursuant to
Subsection D(5)(d) above. With recommendations of the
Township Engineer and the Planning Commission, the Board of
Supervisors shall determine if the additional spaces shall be
provided by the developer or if the area shall remain as open
space.
(f) Land which has been determined and designated by the Board
of Supervisors to remain as open space rather than as required
parking shall not be used to provide parking spaces for any
addition or expansion but shall remain as open space.
§ 370-2905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2905
1:905
E. Landscaping.
(1) A fifty-foot buffer yard is required along existing highways. This
buffer yard shall be landscaped with street trees, at interval of 35
feet. A tree with a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches shall be planted.
The trees shall be located so that they do not interfere with a clear
sight triangle at street intersections.
(a) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, a sidewalk shall
be located in the buffer yard that is at least six feet wide. The
sidewalk shall be located between the street trees and the
property that is being developed.
(b) Parking, loading/service areas and streets are not permitted in
the buffer yard. The only improvement for vehicles that is
permitted in the buffer is streets or driveways that provide
access to the site may cross the buffer yard.
(2) All interior streets shall be landscaped with street trees that are
planted at an interval of 35 feet.
(3) A one-hundred-foot buffer is required along all property lines that
are adjacent to a residential zoning district. This buffer yard can be
reduced to 50 feet based on the final setbacks agreed during final
site development plan where floodplains, wetlands or natural
vegetation provide a sufficiently natural buffer and approval by the
Board of Supervisors. Parking loading/service areas and streets are
not permitted in the buffer yard. This buffer yard shall be
landscaped in accordance with the standards in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington, including §§ 305-324 and 305-325.
(a) Required buffer landscaping at a minimum shall include one
tree and one shrub for every 10 linear feet of buffer. A
minimum of 80% shall be evergreen trees.
(b) Particular attention shall be paid to landscaping and screening
of all service, storage and loading areas. Adequate screening
shall include landscaping, earth berms, fencing and walls.
F. Business campus and mixed-use development plan approval process.
The preliminary and final land development plan shall document the
aggregate project in all respects, including all uses, buildings, parking,
buffering, etc. The preliminary and final land development plan
submissions shall set clear standards for the aggregate project to
ensure that the development of the site achieves the healthy mix of
building uses and building types in a unified architectural manner. As
such, the development standards for buildable area, building coverage,
parking criteria and impervious coverage shall be related to the
aggregate project. Any future land development submission shall
comply with the approved preliminary and final land development plan.
§ 370-2905 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-2905
1:906
§ 370-2906. Transfer of development rights. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6; amended 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07]
The CBD District may receive TDRs transferred from Tax Map Parcel
50-10-13 and from the RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 District. Standards for the use of
TDRs shall be as set forth in § 370-411G(6)(b)[1] and [6] of this chapter.
G. Specific studies and reports. To insure the health, safety and welfare of
the residents and to provide for the appropriate environmental
protection measures, it is specifically noted that the developer must
adhere to and provide for the following standards and reporting
requirements:
(1) The resource protection requirements as defined in Chapter 370,
Zoning, Article III, § 370-304.
(2) The Transportation Impact Study requirement as defined in
Chapter 370, Zoning, Article XXXVIII.
(3) The Corridor Overlay District requirements as defined in Chapter
305, Subdivision and Land Development, § 305-329.
(4) The Environmental Impact Assessment Report requirements in
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, Appendix G.
§ 370-2905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2906
1:907

ARTICLE XXX
Open Space/Parkland District
[Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
§ 370-3001. Purpose.
The purpose of the Open Space/Parkland District is to protect
environmentally sensitive areas and areas of scenic beauty such as the
Bradford Dam, and encourage the preservation of open space, and/or
encourage passive recreation activities.
§ 370-3002. Permitted uses.
§ 370-3003. Conditional use. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-20]
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with § 370-3602:
§ 370-3004. Area and dimensional requirements.
No use in the Open Space/Parkland District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
A. Riding academy/stable.
B. Wildlife sanctuary.
C. Public recreation facility.
D. Library or museum.
E. Municipal building.
F. Storage shed.
G. Tennis court.
A. Golf course.
B. Community center.
§ 370-3001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3004
1:909

ARTICLE XXXI
Quarry District
§ 370-3101. General description and purpose.
The general description and purpose of this article shall follow that of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Act No. 418, entitled "Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act":173 . . . for the general welfare of the
people of the commonwealth, by providing for conservation and
improvement of areas of land affected in the surface mining of bituminous
and anthracite coal and metallic and nonmetallic minerals, to aid thereby in
the protection of birds and wildlife, to enhance the value of such land for
taxation, to decrease soil erosion, to aid in the prevention of the pollution of
rivers and streams, to prevent and eliminate hazards to health and safety, to
prevent combustion of unmined coal, and generally to improve the use and
enjoyment of said lands."
§ 370-3102. Permitted uses.
§ 370-3103. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
Non-tower wireless communications facilities not subject to the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act,174 tower-based wireless
communications facilities and communications equipment buildings.
§ 370-3104. Special exception.
None.
§ 370-3105. Area requirements.
See § 370-3106below.
§ 370-3106. Performance standards.
A. The quarrying and/or digging of stone and related elements except
within the limits of the buffer zone as described in Act 418 where such
use is prohibited.
B. Agricultural use.
A. All performance standards and area regulations used in the design and
operation of a quarry shall be those set forth in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania's Act No. 418, entitled: "Surface Mining Conservation and
Reclamation Act," as amended November 30, 1971, Act No. 147, and as
subsequently amended.175
173. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
174. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
175. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
§ 370-3101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3106
1:911
§ 370-3107. Parking.
See Article XXXIV.
§ 370-3108. Signs.
See Article XXXV.
B. In addition to state requirements, an eight-foot chain-link fence must
completely enclose all operational quarry properties. The fence must be
placed in a manner which provides maximum safety.
C. Screening and buffer requirements. Screening and buffers shall be in
compliance with the requirements as set forth in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington. In no event shall there be a buffer of less than 100 feet.
§ 370-3106 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3108
1:912
ARTICLE XXXII
Junkyard District
§ 370-3201. Purpose.
The J Junkyard District is hereby established as a district in which the
regulations are intended to permit the establishment of, or continuation of,
junkyards, and to ensure that junkyards will be so located and designed
so as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical
development of the Township, and otherwise further the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 370-3202. Permitted uses.
None.
§ 370-3203. Conditional uses.
None.
§ 370-3204. Special exceptions.
The following uses shall be permitted where authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board:
§ 370-3205. Area requirements.
The area requirements set forth in Article XXII, § 370-2205, shall apply.
§ 370-3206. Standards.
The standards set forth in Article XXII, §§ 370-2206 and 370-2207, shall
apply, with the additional provision that there shall be no business
conducted on Sundays except for emergency towing.
A. Junkyard as defined in Article II, § 370-202.
B. Motor vehicle repair as an accessory use to the junkyard.
§ 370-3201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3206
1:913

ARTICLE XXXIII
CE Cemetery District
§ 370-3301. Purpose.
The purpose of the Cemetery District is to provide a cemetery to serve the
needs of the community.
§ 370-3302. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted as a use by right:
§ 370-3303. Conditional uses.
Mausoleum, crematory, or columbarium.
§ 370-3304. Special exception.
None.
§ 370-3305. Area regulations.
§ 370-3306. Design standards.
A. Cemetery with accessory buildings.
A. Minimum lot size: five acres.
B. Lot coverage for accessory buildings: no more than 10% of the entire
area, to a maximum of five acres, may be devoted to aboveground
buildings.
C. Minimum setback standards.
(1) For all buildings, burial plots, burial plot markers or monuments
mounted flush with ground:
(a) Front setback: 1/2 the ultimate right-of-way of each street on
which the lot abuts or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
(b) Side yard: 35 feet each side.
(c) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(2) For all aboveground burial structures: 100 feet from all property
lines and street rights-of-way.
D. An area may be provided for above ground burial and for graves with
monuments and headstones. Such area shall be contiguous and shall
not exceed 10% of the total area devoted to burial.
E. If the cemetery area exceeds 50 acres, one dwelling to be used for
custodial personnel may be permitted. If the cemetery area is less than
50 acres, there shall be no dwelling thereon.
§ 370-3301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3306
1:915
§ 370-3307. Parking.
§ 370-3308. Signs.
The provisions of Article XXXV shall apply.
§ 370-3309. Standards.
A. All grave markers shall be flush with the surface of the ground except in
a designated area where monuments and headstones are permitted.
The Board of Supervisors shall approve the designated areas at the time
the plan is approved.
B. Maximum height of monuments, headstones, grave markers: 10 feet.
C. Maximum height of mausoleums, columbariums and other burial
structures: 15 feet.
D. Maximum height of accessory buildings, including dwelling unit where
permitted: three stories or 35 feet.
E. Entrance features. Including gates, fountains, statuary, identification
signs and the like:
(1) There shall be not more than two identification signs at each
entrance, and the same shall conform to applicable sections of
Article XXXV, Signs, of this chapter.
(2) The main portion of entrance features shall be located at least 10
feet from the nearest right-of-way line of any public street.
(3) No such entrance features shall exceed 12 feet in height.
F. Access and circulation. Where interior roads are provided, they shall be
paved according to Township standards, shall have minimum width of
12 feet if one-way, and 20 feet if two-way. There shall be no dead-end
roads, unless provided with a turnaround of at least 50 feet center-line
radius.
A. Owner shall establish appropriate number of required parking stalls.
B. See Article XXXIV, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading, for
design standards.
A. Street trees shall be planted along each public street on which active
cemetery use is developed according to Article III of Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington.
B. Along each property line which adjoins an existing residential use, all
aboveground burial structures shall be screened according to Article III
of Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
§ 370-3306 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3309
1:916
ARTICLE XXXIV
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading
[Amended 10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 92-10]
§ 370-3401. General regulations. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
04-7]
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be provided to
lessen congestion in the streets. The facilities required herein shall be
available throughout the hours of operation of the particular business
or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term
"parking space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered
parking lot space located off the public right-of-way.
B. For each parking space required, an area of 450 square feet of usable
area for each motor vehicle, including interior driveways, driveways
connected the garage, or parking space, with a street or alley, shall be
used as a guide in calculating maximum impervious coverage.
Notwithstanding the above, all parking spaces shall be ample in size for
the vehicles for which use is intended. The actual parking space shall be
not less than 9 1/2 feet wide and 18 1/2 feet long. Outdoor parking
space, and the approaches thereto, shall be paved or covered with
gravel. Such outdoor parking spaces shall not be used to satisfy any
open space requirements of the lot on which it is located.
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If separated from
the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or
court. The unoccupied space above an underground garage shall be
deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located.
D. Surfacing. Any off-street parking area shall be graded for proper
drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless
surface and shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe
parking and storage of vehicles.
E. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking shall be
so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and
public right-of-way.
F. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all parking
and loading spaces designed for use by employees, customers, delivery
services, sales people and/or the general public. Where parking or
loading area does not abut on a public right-of-way or private alley or
easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive per lane of
traffic not less than 12 feet in width suitably graded and surfaced not
less than 18 feet in width in all cases where the access is to storage
areas or loading and unloading spaces required hereunder.
§ 370-3401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3401
1:917
G. Two-way cartways, accessing parking bays, shall be no less than 22 feet
in width.
H. For other uses which do not fit into one of the categories listed in
§ 370-3402, determination of the appropriate parking space
requirement shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
I. Parking area screening. All nonresidential off-street parking areas
which provide more than five parking spaces shall be screened from
any abutting property zoned residential or used for residential
purposes. See Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the
Code of the Township of Warrington.
J. Parking area reservation.
(1) All off-street parking areas, in all districts (except for service
stations and automobile sales), shall be reserved and used for
automobile parking only, with no sales, dead storage, repair work,
dismantling or servicing of any kind.
(2) In service stations and automobile repair facilities, the parking of
an automobile for sale, storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of
any kind, for any automobile not bearing a valid and current state
inspection or current and valid vehicle registration, shall not
exceed 30 days.
(3) The parking of one commercial vehicle up to one-ton load capacity
is permitted in residential districts if needed by an individual for his
livelihood for a business not conducted on the premises; or one
vehicular dwelling is permitted for storage purposes only and is not
to be used for sleeping, recreational or living purposes at any time
or in any way, shape or form.
K. Off-street parking and loading space as required in this section shall be
provided for all new buildings and structures and for additions to
existing buildings or structures. The word "addition" as used above
shall include any alteration intended to enlarge or increase capacity by
adding or creating dwelling units or gross leasable area.
L. Existing off-street parking or loading facilities provided at the effective
date of this chapter and actually being used at that time in connection
with the operation of an existing use shall not be reduced below the
minimum required in this chapter.
M. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or land shall
hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall
be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building
or structure was erected or the use of land established prior to the
effective date of this chapter, additional parking or loading facilities are
mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new
use would exceed those for the existing use.
§ 370-3401 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3401
1:918
§ 370-3402. Required off-street parking space. [Amended 3-10-1998
by Ord. No. 98-6; 7-24-2001, by Ord. No. 01-8; 4-30-2002, by Ord.
No. 02-05; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-O-05]
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
N. Shared parking; collective or mixed uses; off-street parking and loading
requirements. Collective provision of off-street parking and loading
facilities for two or more buildings or uses located on the same or
adjacent lots is permitted to allow for the sharing of such facilities for
commercial and multiple-use centers.
O. Parking, access and circulation roads, driveways and loading and
unloading area setbacks:
Uses
Buildings
(feet)
Ultimate
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Property
Lines: Like
Uses
(feet)
Property
Lines:
Unlike
Uses
(feet)
Single-family
detached
0 NA 5 5
Other
residential
5*** 10 10** *
Commercial 10 15 10 *
Office
industrial
10 15 10 *
Other uses 10 15 10 *
NOTES:
* These setbacks will be equal to the buffer requirements of this
chapter and the subdivision and land development.
** No setback for attached dwelling units.
*** No setback for attached garages.
Exception: Access drives may cross the ultimate right-of-way.
P. Access drives.
(1) Access drive surfacing must be buffered with a minimum planting
strip of 10 feet when directly adjacent to building walls except in
loading and unloading areas.
(2) Contents of this planting strip are subject to Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington.
A. Minimum residential parking requirements.
§ 370-3401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3402
1:919
(1) Schedule:
Uses
Required Parking for Each
Dwelling Unit
Single-family detached dwelling 2
Single-family semidetached
dwelling
2.5
Two-family detached dwelling 2.5
Two-family semidetached dwelling 2.5
Townhouse dwelling 2.5
Elderly or senior citizen housing 2.5
Garden apartment dwellings
1 bedroom 2
2 bedrooms and up 2.50
Low-rise apartment dwelling 2.5
Mid-rise apartment dwelling 2.5
Residential conversion unit 2
Board, rooming or tourist house,
per guest room
1
Dormitories, fraternity, sorority
house
1 space for each 2 beds
Funeral home 1 space for each 4 seats in
chapel
Government building 1 space for each 200 square
gross floor area used by
public; 1 space for each 600
square gross floor area not
used by public
(2) An attached or unattached garage or carport on the premises, or
that portion of the driveway not included in the public right-of-way,
may be considered as parking space.
(3) Apartment structures in combination with permitted commercial
uses shall provide parking spaces as required if both uses were
established separately.
(4) Required parking shall be permitted in front yards.
(5) Any fractional space shall be deemed general parking and not
assigned to any designated unit.
B. Minimum commercial parking.
(1) Schedule: [Amended 12-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-24]
§ 370-3402 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3402
1:920
Uses Parking Spaces
Private club 1 space per 5 members or 1 space per
50 square feet of service area plus 1
space per employee
Indoor recreational
center
1 space per 250 square feet of floor
area
Veterinarian 1 space per 175 square feet of gross
area
Bank 1 space per 200 square feet of gross
area
Flex space 1 space per employee or 1 per 250
square feet of total floor area,
whichever is greater
Automotive sales 1 space per 100 square feet of gross
area plus 1 per employee
Automotive repair 1 space per 120 square feet of gross
area plus 1 per employee
Service station 1 space per 300 square feet of gross
area, plus 1 per employee
Service station with car 1 space per 200 square feet of wash
total area
Restaurant, tavern or
similar establishment
1 space for each seating
accommodation or 1 space for each 50
square feet of floor area devoted to
patron drinking and dining use,
whichever yields the greatest number
of spaces
Retail business 1 space for each 200 square feet of
sales floor area
Supermarkets, food
stores
1 space for each 175 square feet of
sales floor area
Personal service 1 space for each 100 square feet of
building floor area up to 400 square
feet, plus 1 space for each 200 square
feet of building floor area above 400
square feet
Motel/hotel 1.25 spaces per room plus the required
parking for associated uses such as
restaurant, banquet, assembly and
meeting rooms, etc.
Convenience store 1 space for every 85 square feet of
sales floor area
§ 370-3402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3402
1:921
Uses Parking Spaces
Limited-access selfstorage
facility
1 space for every 200 square feet of the
office/retail space located in the
building
For all other
nonresidential uses
5.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable area of each floor
(2) Parking reserve area. Ten percent of minimum parking space
requirements shall be held in reserve for future parking expansion
and shall be clearly delineated on required submission plans. At the
discretion of the Township, a traffic study may be required at the
developer's or owner's expense to determine if this reserve area is
required for additional parking.
(3) Landscape parking reserve area. An additional 5% of minimum
parking space requirements shall be put into landscaped areas
within approved parking and access road design excluding end of
parking bay islands and odd pieces of ground remaining after
layout and design of minimum requirements, see Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington.
C. Minimum industrial parking requirements.
(1) Three spaces for every four personnel for the largest shift, plus one
space for each company vehicle.
(a) Two per 1,000 square feet if the facility is mostly industrial or
for no more than 20% office space, whichever yields the
greatest number of spaces.
(b) Research and development laboratories. Three per 1,000
square feet floor area (applicant to demonstrate that the
intended use of a facility is not similar to standard office
space), whichever yields the greatest number of spaces.
(c) Flex space. The applicant shall submit a plan and area
breakdown indicating proposed parking based on the amount
of floor area identified by use, i.e., office, storage, laboratory,
etc., width radios determined according to use categories,
whichever yields the greatest number of spaces.
(2) In addition to normal business requirements, space shall be
provided for salesmen and other visitor parking according to
specific needs.
(3) Parking reserve area. Ten percent of minimum parking space
requirements shall be held in reserve for future parking expansion
and shall be clearly delineated on required submission plans. At the
discretion of the Township, a traffic study may be required, at the
§ 370-3402 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3402
1:922
§ 370-3403. Loading dock and dropoff areas.
developer's or owner's expense, to determine if the reserve area is
required for additional parking.
(4) Landscape parking reserve area. An additional 5% of minimum
parking space requirements shall be put into landscaped areas
within parking and access road design, excluding end-of-parkingbay
islands and odd pieces of ground remaining after layout and
design of minimum requirements. See Chapter 305, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington.
D. Public and semipublic parking requirements.
(1) Office use: five cars per 1,000 square feet of leasable area.
(2) Academic and administrative building for educational facilities of
higher learning: one space for each 1.25 persons employed therein;
plus one space as applicable for each three students.
(3) Assembly hall, auditorium, stadium, theater, house of worship or
similar places of public assembly: one space for four fixed seats or,
where capacity is not determined by the number of fixed seats, one
space for each 40 square feet of floor area available for patron use.
(4) Private kindergarten, child nursery, day care or institutional home:
one space for each 600 square feet of building floor area.
(5) Public or private schools: one space for each employee, plus one
space for each five seats in the auditorium or other places of
assembly available to the public, except in secondary school, one
space for each employee plus one space for every three seats in the
auditorium or other places of assembly not available to the public.
(6) Nursing homes: one space per two beds.
(7) Outdoor recreation center: 500 square feet of lot area devoted to
amusement devices.
E. Office off-street parking.
(1) Medical or dental clinic office: one space for each 100 square feet
of building floor area, plus three spaces for every four personnel.
(2) General office, corporate office, research laboratories: one space
for each 300 square feet of building floor area.
F. Parking prohibitions. Parking shall not be permitted on public rights-ofway
except in designated areas.
A. Where required by this chapter, each off-street loading, unloading and
drop area shall be 12 feet wide and a minimum of 30 feet long for small
vehicles such as passenger cars, and panel or pickup (city delivery type)
§ 370-3402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3403
1:923
§ 370-3404. Access to off-street parking and loading areas.
Access to and from all off-street parking, loading and vehicle service areas
along public rights-of-way shall consist of well-defined separate or common
entrances and exits and shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 370-3405. Parking and loading area setbacks.
All structures and paved areas shall be subject to lot area and bulk
regulations, except:
trucks, or an area of 14 feet wide and a minimum of 55 feet long for
larger vehicles such as buses and tractor-trailer-type trucks.
B. All loading, unloading and dropoff areas shall have unobstructed access
from a street, service driveway or alley and are to be located as
separate as possible from parking areas and access aisles or drives, and
shall be designed and marked to preclude the use thereof for general
parking, and so as not impede emergency access or pedestrian or
vehicular movements.
C. Where not required by this chapter to be completely enclosed, all
loading/unloading areas shall be adequately screened by the use of
dense evergreen planting, earth berms or solid walls or fences, so as to
not be visible from any street or residential property.
A. Access drives shall not open upon any public ultimate right-of-way
within 80 feet of the nearest ultimate right-of-way line of any
intersecting public street or highway.
B. Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way where the
sight distance in either direction along the public thoroughfare would
be less than 500 feet when the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per
hour; however, when the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less,
the sight distance requirement may be reduced to 250 feet.
A. All nonresidential parking and loading areas and parallel circulation
and service lanes shall be separated from the paving edge of a public
thoroughfare or adjoining property lines by a planting strip no less than
20 feet in depth in nonresidential districts. If additional lanes or
roadway are dedicated to the Township, the width of the required plant
strip may be reduced to not less than 10 feet. For buffer requirements,
see Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
B. In any district, driveways and sidewalks for residential uses may be
placed in required side yards and front yards provided they are no
closer than 25 feet to the corner at the intersection of streets.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 370-3403 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3405
1:924
C. In any district, a driveway otherwise permitted may extend into a front
yard for the purpose of reaching the street.
D. Paved areas may be exempted from required area and bulk regulations
as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 370-3405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3405
1:925

ARTICLE XXXV
Signs
§ 370-3501. Definitions. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05;
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMATED SIGN — A type of freestanding wall, projecting, or roof sign
with motion, flashing light, or color changes requiring electrical energy or
electronic or manufactured sources of supply.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection, except signs, which is
not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an
exterior wall of a building.
BACKGROUND AREA OF SIGN — The entire area of a sign on which
copy can be placed, including framing, border and trim, but not including
structural supports.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign."
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign on which message copy can be
changed through the use of attachable letters, numerals or graphics or
through the use of electronic switching of lamps or other illuminated
devices. This includes public service information, such as time and
temperature, displays or any sign which features automatic or manual
switching or changing of its message content.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is
intended to advertise a nonprofit community or civic event.
CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which
is intended to advertise the name of a project or development and/or the
contractor, architect, engineer, financier, etc.
COPY AREA OF SIGN — The actual area of the sign copy applied to any
background. Compute copy area by straight lines drawn tangent to copy
extremities encompassing individual letters, words, or graphic elements.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which is designed and erected solely for
the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and which is placed on the
property to which or on which the public is directed.
EAVES — The lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, suspend, affix, alter, structurally
repair, remove, relocate, demolish, renew, or paint on a wall or other
background surface.
FASCIA SIGN — See "wall sign."
§ 370-3501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3501
1:927
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign permanently supported by an upright(s),
which is permanently anchored into the ground. Such signs must be
anchored below the frost line with a footing.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign in which internal or external source of
artificial light is used.
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign, except a window sign, placed within a
building, regardless of whether its message is visible to the exterior of the
building. Except for such window signs, interior signs are not regulated by
the provisions of this chapter.
MARQUEE — A permanent, roofed structure attached to a building and
projecting over public property or a pedestrian walkway.
MONUMENT SIGN — A low-profile freestanding sign mounted permanently
to and directly on the ground, with no separation between the base of the
sign and the ground, having or appearing to have a solid and opaque base,
and designed to be viewed at a height of six feet.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign directing attention to a business, person,
commodity or service not necessarily sold or located upon the premises
where the sign is located; includes signs erected or maintained for purpose
of providing copy area of advertising messages for business, rent or lease.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which carries only messages strictly
incidental to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located. Such
signs may include, but not be limited to, messages indicating the business
transacted, services rendered, goods sold or produced on the premises,
name of the business, and name of the person, firm or corporation
occupying the premises.
PARAPET — A non-load-supporting wall around the perimeter of the roof.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — Any temporary sign pertaining to political views, an
individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or a
forthcoming public election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign which consists of letters, words, graphics,
artwork or other visual display of any kind or nature and which is not
permanently attached to any building, pole or the ground. Portable signs
may or may not convey a specific message.[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-O-07]
PREMISES — A separate lot or tax parcel with individual frontage abutting
the street line. A premises may include more than one occupant as in an
office complex or shopping center.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to
and projects more than 18 inches from a wall of a building.
PROMOTIONAL SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is intended to
advertise a business or commercial event, excluding agricultural and
horticultural sales.
§ 370-3501 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3501
1:928
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the
property upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN — A type of freestanding sign which revolves 360° or
agitates back and forth.
ROOF LINE — The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the case
of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost height of said facade or
parapet.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building, the
entire face of which is situated above the eaves or highest architectural
point of the building to which it is attached and which is wholly or partially
supported by said building.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or any
device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, flag
or representation used as or which is in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, visual communication or direction or which is designed to
attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the public. The word
should include signs which are affixed to the inside of the windows and glass
doors or displayed within 24 inches of the interior surface of the window or
door and are intended to be seen from a street or public thoroughfare.
SNIPE SIGN — A small off-premises sign attached in any way to an object
or tree and which is not a freestanding sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign constructed and intended for short-term use
such as a promotional sign.
TIME-AND-TEMPERATURE SIGN — A display containing illuminated or
reflective numerals switching alternatively to show the time and
temperature.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A type of sign which is affixed and/or painted on a
vehicle in such a manner that the display of the sign is the primary use of
the vehicle, and business use of the vehicle is secondary. Such vehicular
signs shall be permitted only as allowed in § 370-3512, as amended from
time to time.[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-O-07]
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign which is parallel to any exterior wall
of a building or structure. Also includes signs affixed to architectural
projections, canopies, or marquees which project from a building facade,
provided the copy area of such sign remains parallel to the building facade.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or within 12 inches of the interior
surface of a window with its message visible to the outside of said window
surface.
§ 370-3502. General regulations. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
07-05; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
A. Location of signs. In no case, except for official traffic and street signs,
shall any sign be erected so that it:
§ 370-3501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3502
1:929
(1) Lies within or projects out over the ultimate right-of-way of any
street or within 10 feet of the shoulder or curb, whichever is
greater.
(2) Lies within the clear-sight triangle as set forth in § 370-3611 of this
chapter.
(3) Obscures a motorist's view of traffic signals, stop signs, or other
warning devices as viewed from a distance of 500 feet along
established thoroughfares.
(4) Obscures a motorist's view of roadway or intersections ahead as
viewed from a distance of 500 feet along established
thoroughfares.
(5) Limits a pedestrian's view of vehicular traffic to less than 500 feet
while he stands inside the curbline at an intersection or other
established crossing point.
(6) Lies within a distance of 15 feet from either side yard property line.
(7) Lies within a parking space or fire lane.
(8) Blocks the movement of pedestrians traveling on public
thoroughfares.
B. Area of signs.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not to include any supporting framework, bracing or
decorative trim which is not incidental to the copy content of the
display itself.
(2) In the computation of square foot area of a double-faced sign or
multiple-faced sign, only one side shall be considered, provided all
faces are identical in size. If the interior angle formed by the faces
of a double-faced or multiple-faced sign is greater than 90°, then all
sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
All faces of a revolving sign, or a revolving sign component, shall be
considered in calculating the sign area of such sign or component.
(3) If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets or if
the property fronts on more than one street, the sign area for each
building wall or property frontage shall be computed separately.
(4) A sign supported by more than one means (and therefore may be
defined as a freestanding, wall, roof, or projecting sign) shall have
its area and height calculation determined by the type of sign
which has the most restrictive standards.
C. Height of signs.
§ 370-3502 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3502
1:930
§ 370-3503. Nonconforming signs. [Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-06]
(1) The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from
the elevation of the shoulder of the road to the highest point of the
sign structure. In the case where there is a sidewalk, the height of
the sign shall be measured from the elevation of the sidewalk.
(2) For the projecting, wall or roof sign, the maximum height shall be
determined by the height of the facade of the building.
D. Code requirements. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, the Township Building Code,176 and any other
ordinance or regulations of the Township.
E. Maintenance.
(1) Every permanent sign permitted by this chapter must be
constructed of durable materials and kept in good condition and
repair.
(2) When any sign becomes insecure, is in danger of falling, or is
otherwise deemed unsafe by the Township, or if any sign shall be
unlawfully erected in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm maintaining same
shall, upon written notice by the Township, forthwith in the case of
immediate danger and in any case within not more than 30 days,
make such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter or shall
remove it. If within 30 days the order is not complied with, the
Township may remove or cause to be removed such sign at the
expense of the owner or lessee.
F. Lots containing multiple tenants may have additional monument signs
not exceeding 16 square feet per tenant or six feet in height upon
granting of a special exception.
A. Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this chapter that
does not conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations of
the district in which such sign is located shall be considered a
nonconforming sign and shall be bound by the regulations of this
chapter regarding nonconforming signs.
B. A sign on a building or structure which does not conform to this chapter
shall be removed when the building or structure is demolished or when
its renovation or expansion amounts to over 50% of the market value of
the structure assessed by the Bucks County Board of Tax Assessment.
C. A sign not conforming to this chapter shall be removed when the sign
requires any structural renovation or the background area of the sign is
to be altered.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes.
§ 370-3502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3503
1:931
§ 370-3504. Permits. [Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
D. A nonconforming sign must be removed within 14 days or be made to
conform to this chapter in every respect whenever:
(1) It is not firmly attached to the ground or some other object and can
be easily moved.
(2) It becomes so deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose
of communication and is a nuisance as determined by the
Township.
(3) If the copy of a sign is changed for a change of business or
ownership, the sign must comply with this chapter with the
exception of shopping centers where sizes are determined and
uniform.
E. A sign in violation of § 370-3506, Exempt and prohibited signs, of this
chapter, shall be removed within 14 days of notice from the Township
that such sign shall be removed.
A. A permit must be obtained from the Township for the erection of all
signs erected in the Township, unless specifically exempted herein.
B. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not
be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from
responsibility for its erection in a safe manner and in a manner in
accord with all the other provisions of this chapter.
C. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure,
plans and specifications shall be filed with the Township showing the
dimensions, materials, and details of construction, including loads,
stresses, anchorage, and any other pertinent engineering data. Plans
for signs with a proposed area greater than 100 square feet shall be
prepared and sealed by a structural engineer. The application for
permit shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or
lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected for the
Township to enter said premises to inspect such sign.
D. No new sign shall hereafter be erected except as herein provided and
until a permit has been issued by the Township.
E. The changing of movable parts of an approved changeable copy sign
that is designed for such changes or the repainting or reposting of
display matter shall not be deemed an alteration, provided the
conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this article
are not violated.
F. Permit fees to erect a sign shall be in accordance with the sign fee
schedule adopted by the Township.177
177. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
§ 370-3503 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3505
1:932
§ 370-3505. Annual registration certificate requirements. [Amended
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
§ 370-3506. Exempt and prohibited signs. [Amended 7-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
A. The owner of the premises or the tenant of the tenant property on
which all signs requiring a sign permit are erected, regardless of when
the sign(s) are erected, shall pay an annual renewal fee for an annual
registration certificate for each sign he owns, leases, and maintains on
said premises. This fee for the annual registration certificate shall be
paid annually before January 15 of the year following the year in which
a sign permit for a sign has been secured. The amount of the annual
renewal fee shall be in accordance with the sign fee schedule adopted
by the Township.
B. The Township shall inspect each sign for which it receives an
application for an annual registration certificate. The Township shall
issue the certificate for each sign that is in conformance with the
provisions of this article and other applicable Township ordinances. If
the Township determines, following its inspection, that a sign has
defects requiring repairs or that a sign violates any provision of this
article, the Township shall mail a certified letter to the owner or tenant
indicating the defects and/or violations. The applicant receiving this
certified letter to repair and/or correct shall have 30 days within which
to complete said repair and/or corrections after receipt of the letter
from the Township. The Township shall not issue an annual registration
certificate until all repairs and/or corrections have been completed to
the satisfaction of the Township subject to the right of appeal.
C. Failure to apply for or obtain the certificate of registration by any
person, firm or corporation leasing or owning premises upon which a
sign of the category defined in this section has been erected shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. In all cases wherein the property is
leased, the tenants shall be held primarily responsible, but the owner
shall, nevertheless, be responsible in the event the Township is
unsuccessful in obtaining the tenant's compliance with this subsection.
A. Exempt signs. The following signs are permitted in all districts:
(1) Official highway route number signs, street name signs, directional
or other traffic signs may be erected on the public roads and
highways in the interest of public safety.
(2) Signs displaying the name and address of the occupant of the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
two square feet and not more than one such sign shall be erected
for each occupant of a premises, unless such property fronts on
more than one street, in which case one such sign may be erected
on each street frontage.
§ 370-3505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3506
1:933
(3) No-trespassing signs, signs indicating the prohibition or control of
fishing, hunting, etc., or signs indicating the private nature of a
road, provided the area of any such sign does not exceed 216
square inches.
(4) Real estate signs shall be permitted, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed six square feet in all residential districts
and 12 square feet in all other districts and that not more than one
such sign shall be placed on property held in single and separate
ownership unless the property fronts on more than one street, in
which case, one such sign shall be permitted along each street. All
such signs shall be removed within 10 days after a settlement of
sale, lease or rental has been entered into.
(5) Governmental flags or insignias.
(6) Legal notices.
(7) Public service and information signs advertising the availability of
rest rooms, telephone, or similar public convenience; also signs
advertising meeting times and places of nonprofit service or
charitable organizations. These may be erected, provided they do
not advertise any commercial establishment, activity, organization,
product, goods or service, except those of public utilities. Any such
sign shall not exceed four square feet.
(8) Window signs giving store hours or the name or names of credit or
charge institutions, provided the total area of any such sign or all
signs together does not exceed two square feet.
(9) Temporary window signs, including community special event signs
less than four square feet placed in store windows.
(10) Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, such as a cornerstone, or identifying letters carved into
or enclosed on a building, provided the letters are not made of a
reflective material nor contrast in color with the building.
(11) Mechanic or artisan signs may be erected during the period such
persons are performing work on the premises on which such signs
are erected, provided that such signs shall be removed upon
completion of work by the mechanic or artisan, and the total areas
for all such signs shall not exceed six square feet. Not more than
one such sign shall be placed on any given property on which such
person is performing work unless such property fronts on more
than one street, in which case, one such sign shall be permitted
along each street. All such signs shall be removed immediately
upon completion of the work.
(12) Bunting, pennants, and similar materials are permitted to
announce the opening of a new business or industry and must be
removed after seven days.
§ 370-3506 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3506
1:934
(13) Revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not exceed
24 inches in height and that it is erected only in a C-1 or C-2
Commercial District.
(14) A sign advertising a yard sale is permitted, provided the sign is onpremises,
does not exceed four square feet in area, remains up only
during the sale, and does not appear more than once every six
months on the same premises.
(15) Temporary signs for the election of government officials.
B. Prohibited signs. The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
(1) Any banner-type sign suspended between poles and lighted by a
series of lights is prohibited.
(2) A sign that uses any method of illumination that can cause glare is
prohibited, except in accordance with the following:
(a) It must be so effectively shielded that alarming beams or rays
of light are not directed to any portion of any street or highway.
(b) It must be less than 1/4 footcandle, as measured from the
curbline or shoulder, so as not to cause glare or impair the
vision of any motor vehicle driver or otherwise interfere with a
driver's operation of his motor vehicle.
(3) No sign may use the words "stop," "look," "danger," or any other
word or character which attempts or appears to attempt to direct
the movement of traffic or which interferes with or resembles any
official traffic sign, signal or device within 75 feet of a public rightof-
way or within 200 feet of a traffic control device, whichever is
greater.
(4) Except for traffic control signals, red or green lights are prohibited
within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or 200 feet of a traffic control
device signal, whichever is greater.
(5) Any sign erected on a tree, utility pole, or other natural feature is
prohibited.
(6) Any banner sign or any other type is prohibited across a public
street or on any private property, except for such signs which are
approved by the Board of Supervisors to be of general benefit to the
Township or for public convenience, necessity, or welfare.
(7) Any sign suspended between poles, which is either a pennant which
blows in the wind or a spinner which spins in the wind, is
prohibited.
(8) Any sign is prohibited which does not conform to the requirements
of the sign ordinance which was in effect when the sign was
erected.
§ 370-3506 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3506
1:935
§ 370-3507. Signs permitted in Residential, Cemetery, Institutional
Use, Quarry and Junkyard Districts. [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-O-05; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
In the RA, PRD, PRD-M, R-1, R-2, CE, I-U, Q, J Junkyard, RA-2, RA-3, R2-I,
RIC R3, I-U-A, I-U-A-I and I-U-B Districts, the following standards shall
govern:
(9) Any flashing light or other flashing part of a sign that is visible from
the public right-of-way throughout the Township. This provision
supersedes any contradictory provision elsewhere in this chapter.
A. General regulations.
(1) Freestanding signs are permitted, provided that no such sign shall
exceed a height of seven feet.
(2) Animated, changeable copy, portable, projecting, promotional,
revolving, roof, vehicular, and backlit electrical signs are
prohibited, except as provided in Subsection A(3).
(3) Changeable-copy signs are permitted by right in association with
municipal services, including emergency services, school and
church land use, and by special exception with other similar land
uses. Changeable-copy signs shall be combined with or be
substituted for a permitted sign in the zoning district. Note: See
Subsection B(2) below regarding bulletin board signs.
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Construction/development signs are permitted, provided that the
aggregate area of the sign shall not exceed 15 square feet per each
5,000 square feet of lot area in the subject premises, or a maximum
of 32 square feet. Not more than one such sign shall be placed on
property held in single and separate ownership unless the property
fronts on more than one street, in which case, one such sign shall
be permitted along each street. Such signs shall be removed within
10 days after the last structure has been satisfactorily inspected for
Building Code compliance by the Township.
(2) Signs or bulletin boards of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals,
sanitariums, cemeteries, nonprofit clubs, and other nonprofit
institutions of a similar nature or signs indicating the name of a
particular organization, farm or estate, or nonprofit organization
are permitted, provided that the size of any such sign is not in
excess of 16 square feet. Such signs may be increased to a
maximum area of 32 square feet, provided that they are set back a
minimum of 50 feet from side lot lines or ultimate right-of-way. Not
more than two such signs may be placed on any property held in
single and separate ownership unless the property fronts on more
than one street, in which case, one such sign shall be permitted
along each street.
§ 370-3506 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3507
1:936
§ 370-3508. Signs permitted in Corridor Residential/Office and
Professional Office/Light Industrial District. [Amended 5-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-5; 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-6; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
07-05; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
In the CR/O and O-I Districts, the following standards shall govern:
(3) One sign for junkyards, quarries, airports, and similar uses,
provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet
for each construction lot in the subject premises to a maximum of
32 square feet for the entire project. Such sign may be increased to
a maximum area of 32 square feet, provided that it is set back a
minimum distance of 50 feet from the side and street lines.
(4) Temporary signs for the sale of agricultural or horticultural
products are permitted. Such signs shall not exceed 48 square feet
for farm produce or agricultural activities (Warrington Township
Agriculture Security District).
(5) One sign for home occupations or another accessory use are
permitted, provided that the area of the sign shall not exceed 1.5
square feet.
(6) Directional signs are permitted by conditional use approval,
provided such signs do not contain advertising copy and do not
exceed an area of four square feet on one side or a height of five
feet.
C. Off-premises signs.
(1) Community special event signs are permitted, provided that:
(a) No such sign shall exceed 25 square feet in area.
(b) Signs shall not be posted earlier than four weeks before the
occurrence of the exhibit, show, or event and shall be removed
within five days after the termination of the exhibit, show or
event.
(c) A maximum of four such signs may be permitted within the
Township for any one exhibit, show, or event.
(d) No permit shall be issued for the erection of such signs until a
deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors shall be made with the Township. If such signs are
not removed at the end of the ten-day permit period, the
Township may have them removed and keep the full sum
deposited to reimburse the expense incurred by it and for
general purposes.
A. General regulations.
§ 370-3507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3508
1:937
§ 370-3509. Signs permitted in C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts.
[Amended 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
In the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts, the following standards shall
govern:
(1) Freestanding signs are permitted, provided that they shall not
exceed 12 feet in height.
(2) Animated, portable, projecting, promotional, revolving, roof and
vehicular signs, as defined in § 370-3501, herein, are prohibited.
(3) Changeable-copy signs shall be permitted by right in association
with municipal, school, and church land uses and by conditional
use approval with other similar land uses. Changeable copy signs
shall be combined with or be substituted for a permitted sign in the
zoning district.
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Identification signs, including a directory of tenants, of an
apartment building or development, office building, or other
permitted use, shall be permitted in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) Such premises fronts onto Route 611 or Street Road, which are
four lanes.
(b) Freestanding signs. The area on one side of any freestanding
sign shall not exceed 36 square feet, and not more than one
such sign shall be erected on a premises held in single and
separate ownership unless such premises fronts on more than
one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each
street frontage.
(c) Wall signs. One per street elevation or elevation facing a
parking lot, each such sign not to exceed nine square feet.
(2) Professional use or name signs shall be permitted in accordance
with the following limitations:
(a) Freestanding signs. One sign per street frontage of the
professional premises, not to exceed 40 square feet per sign.
Copy on such signs is restricted to the name, address and/or
suitable graphic element designed to identify the premises.
(b) Wall signs. One per street elevation or elevation facing a
parking lot, size of each such sign not to exceed 16 square feet.
Copy on such signs is restricted to the name, address, and/or
suitable graphic element designed to identify the premises. In
addition, the name and specialty of each professional occupant
may be displayed, provided the copy area of each such name
and specialty does not exceed two square feet.
§ 370-3508 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3509
1:938
A. General regulations. Animated, projecting, revolving, and roof signs are
permitted.
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
following limitations:
(a) Such signs shall be limited to one, except for a premises which
fronts on two or more streets, in which case, a sign may be
permitted in each yard fronting on a street; and except for a
use which contains more than 500 lineal feet of front footage,
in which case, one freestanding sign will be permitted for each
additional 500 feet of front footage or portion thereof, provided
that the maximum allowable sign area has not been exceeded
as specified in Table 1. A single freestanding sign may
advertise any number of businesses, provided the maximum
sign area per business and the total maximum sign are not
exceeded.
(b) For a shopping center with a multiple of businesses, the
allowable sign area in Table 1 may be increased, provided that:
[1] That there shall be only one such sign per frontage.
[2] The area and height of any freestanding sign(s) shall not
exceed 100% of the amounts specified in Table 1 a and b or
140 square feet in Table 1 a, whichever is smaller, or 70
square feet in Table 1 b, whichever is smaller.
Table 1 a
§ 370-3509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3509
1:939
1 b
(2) Wall and permanent window signs shall be permitted in accordance
with the following limitations:
(a) There shall be no more than one wall or permanent window
sign per facade per occupant; however, such signs are
prohibited above the first floor elevation of any building.
(b) The maximum area of any wall or permanent window sign per
occupant shall be in accordance with the following:
Maximum Sign
Area
(square feet)
For a premises fronting onto Route
611 or Street Road, where either is 4
lanes:
For facades fronting the street 50
For facades fronting the parking
lot or side yard
32
For a premises fronting onto all other
roads:
For facades fronting the street 32
For facades fronting the parking
lot or side yards
16
(3) Projecting signs located under canopies.
§ 370-3509 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3509
1:940
(a) Such signs shall have a copy no greater than eight square feet
per side and a minimum clearance of 10 feet from the sidewalk,
and shall be mounted as nearly as possible perpendicular to
the building face.
(b) One such sign may be permitted for each entrance to a facility
served by a canopy or other pedestrian walkway, provided that
they do not exceed eight square feet in area.
(4) Time-and-temperature signs.
(a) Time-and-temperature signs shall be displayed only as a part of
a freestanding or a wall sign, subject to all regulations applying
to those signs.
(b) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each
message for not less than five seconds and shall not use red or
green displays.
(5) Roof signs.
(a) The maximum area of a roof sign shall not exceed 7 1/2% of the
total area of the building facade upon which the roof sign sits.
(b) The maximum height that a roof sign may project above a
parapet or eaves of a building shall be a maximum of 10 feet.
(c) Roof signs may exist instead of but not in addition to
freestanding signs on a given premises. Where a premises is
allowed two or more freestanding signs, a roof sign may be
used to substitute for one or more of the freestanding signs.
(6) Changeable-copy sign.
(a) A changeable-copy sign shall be displayed only as a part of a
freestanding or a wall sign, subject to all regulations applying
to those signs.
(b) The changeable-copy sign shall not exceed 1/3 of the total
proposed area of the wall or freestanding sign.
(c) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each
message for not less than five seconds.
(7) Promotional signs.
(a) Promotional signs may be permitted for a period not to exceed
20 days per any one promotion for any one premises or
commercial use unless authorized by the Township. One permit
per year.
(b) Application for a promotional sign permit must be made to the
Township, accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount to be
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors as a guarantee
§ 370-3509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3509
1:941
§ 370-3510. Signs permitted in Planned Industrial 1 and 2 Districts.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-O-06]
In the PI-1 and PI-2 Districts, the following standards shall govern:
that the promotional display shall be promptly and completely
removed at the end of the period authorized. The applicant
may, in lieu of depositing cash with the Township, enter into an
escrow agreement with the Township and a financial institution
approved by the Township in a form to be approved by the
Township Solicitor.
(c) The size of any promotional sign may not be in excess of the
size permitted for any permanent sign of like configuration or
type in the district.
(d) Promotional signs may not revolve, be animated, or have
flashing lights.
A. On-premises signs.
(1) Animated signs. A sign may be animated, provided that the total
cycle of motion or illumination does not exceed five times per
minute.
(2) Projecting signs.
(a) Projecting signs are permitted, provided the area of such sign
does not exceed one square foot for each two lineal feet of
building frontage which is perpendicular to the sign. No
projecting sign may be larger than 50 square feet, nor may any
projecting sign extend in a vertical dimension above the roof
line or highest architectural point of a building.
(b) Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of 10 feet
between the bottom of the sign and the ground and, if
projecting over a public sidewalk, may project not more than 2/
3 the width of the sidewalk.
(c) Projecting signs may exist instead of but not in addition to
freestanding signs on a given premises. Where a premises is
allowed two or more freestanding signs, a projecting sign may
be used to substitute for one or more of the freestanding signs.
(d) Projecting signs may not overhang any place for vehicular
traffic (streets, loading docks, parking lots).
(3) Revolving signs. Such signs shall be permitted as freestanding
signs, provided they do not exceed four revolutions per minute.
(4) Roof signs.
§ 370-3509 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3510
1:942
(a) The maximum area of a roof sign shall not exceed 7 1/2% of the
total area of the building facade upon which the roof sign sits.
(b) The maximum height that a roof sign may project above a
parapet or eaves of a building shall be equivalent to 20% of the
height of the building facade.
(c) Roof signs may exist instead of but not in addition to
freestanding signs on a given premises. Where a premises is
allowed two or more freestanding signs, a roof sign may be
used to substitute for one or more of the freestanding signs.
B. Off-premises signs. Only one sign may be erected per premises fronting
onto a public right-of-way, provided that:
(1) Signs are in the PI-1 or PI-2 Districts.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Right-of-way. No sign or any part thereof shall be erected or
maintained within 50 feet of the ultimate right-of-way of a
public street.
(b) Side or rear yards. No sign or any part thereof shall be erected
or maintained within 100 feet of any side or rear property line
nor within 100 feet of a residence.
(3) No such sign shall be erected within 50 feet of any other such sign
or freestanding sign.
(4) The following minimum landscaping shall be planted and adjacent
to each such sign:
(a) Three-foot-to-four-foot-high evergreen trees planted within a
forty-foot radius on the sides and rear of the base of the sign.
(b) One three-foot-to-four-foot high shrub per three lineal feet of
frontage or 40 shrubs, whichever is greater, to be planted in
front of the sign.
(5) Area and heights.
(a) No sign shall be permitted to exceed a maximum copy area of
50 square feet, including border and trim, but excluding
supports. A sign having two sides back-to-back or a V-shaped
sign with a horizontal angle not greater than 90° is permitted
one on each side or a total maximum area of 100 square feet.
(b) No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height.
§ 370-3510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3511
1:943
§ 370-3511. Signs permitted in CBD Central Business District.
[Added 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-11; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-14;
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-O-06]
In the CBD District, the following standards shall govern:
A. General regulations.
(1) Animated, portable, revolving, roof and vehicular signs as defined
in § 370-3501 are prohibited.
(2) Directly and indirectly illuminated signs are permitted.
B. On-premises signs.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
following limitations:
(a) One freestanding directory sign is permitted for each street
frontage, provided that the total sign area on any one street
frontage of any property in single and separate ownership shall
not exceed 175 square feet. Where any street frontage on
property held in single and separate ownership exceeds 1,000
feet in length, one additional freestanding sign shall be
permitted.
(b) Where an existing tract held in single and separate ownership
is proposed to be developed for two or more individual
establishments without subdividing the tract, there shall be
permitted one freestanding sign for each establishment,
provided that the total area of the sign shall not exceed 80
square feet. These signs shall be in addition to those permitted
in § 370-3511B(1)(a).
(c) The overall height of freestanding signs and any supporting
structure shall not exceed 25 feet, except as set forth in the
Corridor Overlay District, the regulations for which appear in
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code
of the Township of Warrington.
(2) Wall signs and permanent window signs shall be permitted in
accordance with the following regulations:
(a) The total area of all wall signs and permanent window signs for
any individual establishment shall not exceed two square feet
per linear foot of building face. This includes multiple-story
applications.
(3) Projecting signs under canopies.
(a) Signs attached to the underside of a canopy shall have a copy
area no greater than eight square feet per side and a minimum
clearance of 10 feet from the sidewalk; such signs shall be
§ 370-3511 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3511
1:944
mounted as perpendicular as possible to the building face,
except that on individual buildings with a gross floor area of
10,000 square feet or greater, the area of the sign may be
increased to 20 square feet per side.
(b) One under-canopy sign shall be permitted for each entrance to
a facility served by a canopy or other pedestrian walkway.
(4) Time-and-temperature signs.
(a) Time-and-temperature signs shall be displayed only as part of a
freestanding or wall sign, subject to all regulations applying to
those signs.
(b) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each
message for not less than five seconds.
(5) Changeable-copy sign.
(a) A changeable-copy sign shall be displayed only as part of a
freestanding or wall sign, subject to all regulations applying to
those signs.
(b) The changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed 1/3 of
the total area of the wall or freestanding sign.
(c) Any such device with alternating messages shall display each
message for not less than five seconds.
(6) Promotional signs.
(a) Promotional signs may be permitted for a period not to exceed
20 days per any one promotion for each business
establishment unless an extended period is authorized by the
Township. One permit per year.
(b) Application for a promotional sign permit must be made to the
Township, accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount to be
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors as a guarantee
that the promotional sign is promptly and completely removed
at the end of the period authorized. The applicant may, in lieu
of depositing cash with the Township, enter into an escrow
agreement with the Township and a financial institution
approved by the Township in a form to be approved by the
Township Solicitor.
(c) The size of any promotional sign may not exceed the size
permitted for any permanent sign of similar type in the district,
but in any event shall be no larger than 50 square feet on one
side.
(d) Any promotional sign which is electrically energized or which
contains any electrical device must conform to the same
§ 370-3511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3511
1:945
§ 370-3512. Portable signs.178 [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-O-07]
A portable sign, including any such sign that may have been displayed prior
to the adoption of this subsection and which does not have a lawful permit
as a permanent sign, shall only be permitted if it meets all of the following
requirements:
requirements and standards which cover permanent electric
signs under this chapter.
(e) Promotional signs may not revolve, be animated or have
flashing lights, or be fixed or painted on a vehicle.
(7) Directional signs. Signs within the parking lots and associated
travel lanes shall be permitted for directional purposes. Such signs
shall not exceed eight square feet in area and may not contain any
matter of any advertising nature other than the name of a
particular business establishment. These signs shall not be
considered in computing total permitted sign area on the premises.
(8) Construction/development signs. Construction/development signs
are permitted, provided that the aggregate area of the sign shall
not exceed 15 square feet per each 5,000 square feet of lot area in
the subject premises or a maximum of 35 square feet. Not more
than one such sign shall be placed on property held in single and
separate ownership unless the property fronts on more than one
street, in which case, one such sign shall be permitted along each
street. Such signs shall be removed within 10 days after the last
unit has received a certificate of occupancy.
C. Off-premises signs. Community special event signs as defined in this
chapter shall be permitted. All other off-premises signs are prohibited,
unless specifically exempted in accordance with this chapter.
A. Shall be permitted only on the lot of a permitted principal commercial
use.
B. Shall have a maximum sign area of 40 square feet on each of a
maximum of two sides.
C. Shall only include one sign per premises.
D. Shall need a sign permit, which shall state the dates during which the
sign may be displayed.
178. Editor's Note: The prefatory material of Ord. No. 2103-O-07 provided the purpose of this
section as follows: "These standards recognize portable signs as a particular type of sign
that has the characteristics of temporary or promotional signs but that has been
inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This section is based on the policy that if a use
desires to regularly display a sign for regularly changing messages, that it erect a
permanent sign within all the requirements of this chapter."
§ 370-3511 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3512
1:946
E. Shall only be displayed on a lot for one period per year, which shall not
exceed 20 days during a running twelve-month period. Failure to
remove the sign after the 20 days shall constitute a zoning violation.
F. Shall not obstruct safe sight distance to vehicles within or off the lot;
shall not be placed within the existing street right-of-way.
G. Shall not include flashing or blinking lights.
§ 370-3512 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3512
1:947

ARTICLE XXXVI
Supplemental Regulations
§ 370-3601. Nonconforming uses. [Amended 12-15-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-20]
A. Continuation. Any lawful use of a building or land existing on the
effective date of this chapter may be continued although such use does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter.179
B. Extensions.
(1) A nonconforming use of a building may be extended an additional
25% of floor area in a building if no structural alterations are made
therein; such extension may include structural alterations when
authorized as a special exception.
(2) A nonconforming structure may be extended upon a lot occupied by
such use and held in single and/or separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter when authorized as a special
exception, provided that such extension does not replace a
conforming use and does not violate the minimum yard and
coverage requirements of the zone in which the nonconforming use
exists.
C. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) In any district in which single-family houses are permitted, a singlefamily
house and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any lot of record in existence at the effective date of this chapter as
a special exception, provided appropriate sewage disposal facilities
are available. Consideration shall be given by the Zoning Hearing
Board as to desirability and feasibility of resubdividing the area
when two or more nonconforming lots have contiguous frontage
and are in single ownership. This extension shall expire three years
from the effective date of this chapter unless extended for
additional one-year terms by the Board of Supervisors upon
application by the owner.
(2) When authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, a building may be erected or altered on any lot not held in
single and separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter
which is not the required minimum width or area, if such lot is
included in a single subdivision plan in the process of building
development at the effective date of this chapter and if the plan
shall have been previously approved by the Warrington Township
Board of Supervisors under the provisions of prior Township zoning
or subdivision ordinances. This may be granted, providing the lot is
179. Editor's Note: The definitions of "nonconforming lot," "nonconforming structure," and
"nonconforming use," previously contained in this subsection, were moved to § 370-202
pursuant to Ord. No. 2014-O-14, adopted 6-10-2014.
§ 370-3601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3601
1:949
of sufficient size to assure adequate, safe and permitted facilities
for the disposal of sewage. This exemption will expire three years
from the effective date of this chapter unless extended for
additional terms of one year by the Township Board of Supervisors
upon application by the owner.
D. No lot area or width shall be so reduced that the area or width or the
dimensions of the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
E. Restoration.
(1) A nonconforming structure that has been damaged or destroyed by
fire, windstorm, lightning or a similar cause deemed to be no fault
of the owner may be rebuilt when authorized as a special
exception. Request for special exception must be submitted within
one year from the date of damage or destruction or the
nonconforming use shall not be restored.
(2) No rebuilding shall be undertaken as provided herein until plans
for rebuilding have been presented and approved by the Zoning
Officer. Approval shall be for the same use or for a use of a more
restricted classification.
(3) Any reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area and
volume the building destroyed or condemned.
F. Changes. A nonconforming use of a building or land may be changed to
a use of an equal or more restricted classification when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. Whenever a change to
a more restricted classification has been made, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a use of a less-restricted classification.
G. Abandonment.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a building structure or land ceases for a
period of one year or more, subsequent use of such building or land
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that active duty with the Armed Forces of the United
States shall not be determined to be a part of the one-year-period.
(2) Abandonment regulations shall not apply to agricultural uses.
H. Building permits. In a case where a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter, and the proposed use of land
and/or building does not conform with this chapter, said proposed use
shall be regulated by the nonconforming use requirements of this
chapter and shall be considered the same as a lawful nonconforming
use if construction other than excavation and foundations is undertaken
within a period of 30 calendar days after the issuance date of said
building permit and construction thereof is complete within 12 calendar
months from the issuance date of the building permit.
§ 370-3601 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3601
1:950
§ 370-3602. Conditional uses. [Amended 1989 by Ord. No. 89-8]
I. Nonconforming use of open land. All nonconforming signs, billboards,
junk storage areas, storage areas, and similar nonconforming uses of
open land, when discontinued for a period of 90 days or damaged to an
extent of 60% or more of replacement costs, shall not be continued,
repaired or reconstructed.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to approve conditional
uses at a public hearing following public notice for any of the uses for
which this chapter requires the obtaining of such approvals and for no
other use or purpose. Application to the Board of Supervisors shall be
made on the form approved by the Board of Supervisors and shall be
accompanied by the fee set by the Board of Supervisors.
B. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors shall make
findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The Board
shall not grant a conditional use except in conformance with the
conditions and standards outlined in this chapter.
C. General requirements and standards applicable to all conditional uses.
The Board shall grant a conditional use only if it finds adequate
evidence that any proposed use submitted for a conditional use will
meet all of the following general requirements as well as any proposed
use. The Board shall, among other things, require that any proposed
use and location be:
(1) In accordance with the Warrington Township Comprehensive Plan
and consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of this chapter.
(2) The best interest of the Township, the convenience of the
community, the public welfare and be a substantial improvement to
property in the immediate vicinity.
(3) Suitable for the property in question, and designed, constructed,
operated and maintained so as to be in harmony with and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character
of the general vicinity.
(4) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(5) Suitable in terms of effects on street traffic and safety with
adequate access arrangements to protect major streets from undue
congestion and hazard.
D. Criteria requirements.
(1) Compatibility criteria. The proposed conditional use shall:
(a) Be compatible with the existing area uses and those
established or allowed by this chapter or the Comprehensive
Plan in the area proposed.
§ 370-3601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3602
1:951
(b) Be screened from adjacent differing uses. Where sufficient
screening area or existing materials are unavailable, the
Township shall require additional screening area or materials
be provided.
(c) Not to be permitted such that it creates a nuisance or hazard to
adjoining properties by noise, glare, congestion, storage, odor,
fire, explosion, radiation or other similar causes.
(d) For any outside industrial, commercial or residential storage,
including but not limited to junkyards, not be located on land
with a slope in excess of 5% or within 100 feet of an adjacent
industrial, commercial or residential use of a public right-ofway.
(e) For all public buildings or uses, in addition to all applicable
Township requirements, demonstrate conformance with all
applicable county, state and federal regulations.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate the impact of the proposed
conditional use on:
(a) The Township transportation network and the ability of
adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently and safely
move the volume of traffic generated by the proposed
conditional use. Included in this section should be an
assessment of the adequacy for site parking, ingress and
egress, internal circulation and off-site improvements.
(b) The Township's municipal services, with particular emphasis
being put on the ability of these municipal services to provide
services to the proposed conditional use. A detailed estimate of
additional municipal services facilities which will be needed to
provide service to the proposed use must be included.
(c) Municipal services, including but not limited to sewage
disposal and collection systems, water supply and circulation
systems and storm drainage facilities and systems, must be
included in this statement of impact.
(d) The Township's abilities to provide fire protection to the
proposed conditional use.
(e) The Township's recreation facilities including estimates of
additional facilities which will be needed to serve the proposed
conditional use.
(3) Economic. The applicant may be required to provide a cost revenue
analysis which shall identify the net costs of the proposed
conditional use to the Township and to the Central Bucks School
District. The net costs shall be the difference between the
governmental expenditures which will be required to service the
§ 370-3602 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3602
1:952
§ 370-3603. Floodplain restrictions overlay. [Amended 3-17-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-3; 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6; 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-21]
proposed conditional use and the revenues that it will generate.
The cost analysis shall clearly identify whether a net gain or a net
loss is anticipated and shall itemize the measurements used in the
evaluation.
(4) Need. The applicant shall demonstrate an existing need for the
proposed conditional use.
(5) Environmental criteria. The applicant may be required to prepare
an environmental impact assessment which shall indicate his
ability to meet the environmental restriction standards specified in
§ 370-305, Article III, of this chapter, as amended. The assessment
shall address each of the restricted land categories listed in the
above-referenced section.
(6) Time limits on conditional use approvals.
(a) Approved application. Approval of a conditional use application
by the Board of Supervisors shall expire one year after said
approval, unless the applicant has applied for and has been
granted a building permit and construction has commenced.
This expiration date may be extended by the Supervisors upon
good cause shown.
(b) Abandonment. If a conditional use approved by the Board of
Supervisors is discontinued or terminated for a period of one
year or more, then the same shall be deemed abandoned, and
said use may not be resumed without a new conditional use
approval by the Board of Supervisors.
A. A standalone Floodplain Management Ordinance located in Chapter
181, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Township of
Warrington, is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference as if
part of this chapter.
B. All development, as defined in Chapter 181, Floodplain Management,
shall be reviewed prior to the issuance of any zoning or building permit
to determine if the development is required to comply with any aspect
of Chapter 181, Floodplain Management. This requirement shall apply
to all properties located in Warrington Township, regardless of location
with regard to special hazard floodplain areas (SHFAs) shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and updated from time to time.
C. All requests for variances from the requirements of Chapter 181,
Floodplain Management, will be brought before the Warrington
Township Zoning Hearing Board for review and decision following the
§ 370-3602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3603
1:953
§ 370-3604. Roadside stands.
Temporary roadside stands may be erected for the sale of garden products
and garden commodities produced on the same property where offered for
sale; provided, no building or structure other than a portable stand shall
be constructed for such sale; such stand shall be removed during seasons
when such products are not being offered for sale, and in no case remain
longer than for a period of six months of any one year; such stand shall not
be placed closer than 25 feet to any lot line.
§ 370-3605. Sanitary landfill.
Sanitary landfills, in districts where authorized as conditional uses, shall
be regulated by the applicable laws of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. Open dumps and the open burning of refuse shall
not be permitted.
§ 370-3606. Building heights. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
§ 370-3607. Screening and buffering and planting strip
requirements. [Amended 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2; 8-23-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-15; 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2; 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
94-15A; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
procedures in Chapter 370, Zoning, § 370-3707, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
A. Height regulations shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes
not used for human occupancy, or to chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles or towers, radio and television
antennas, silos, and ornamental or necessary mechanical
appurtenances. Any structure designed to have a height of 150 feet or
more above ground level must be approved by the Federal Aviation
Agency and a written statement of approval must accompany the
permit application. These height exceptions shall not apply to any nontower
wireless communications facilities or tower-based wireless
communications facilities. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-04]
B. No dwelling shall be less than one story in height, except during a
reasonable period of construction not to exceed a twenty-four-monthperiod
from the date of issuance of the zoning permit. This time period
may be extended by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Buffering.
(1) Wherever a residential use is adjacent to a nonresidential use, a
buffer zone with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided.
§ 370-3603 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3607
1:954
(2) Wherever another dwelling unit type is adjacent to a mid-rise
apartment, a buffer zone with a minimum width of 35 feet plus one
foot for each foot that the mid-rise is over 35 feet in height shall be
provided.
(3) The buffer zones noted above shall be landscaped as specified in
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) All development in the RA Residential Agricultural District, other
than agricultural uses, shall contain a deed-restricted buffer zone
as part of the open space with a minimum width of 50 feet in
accordance with the following design standards:
(a) A dense planting of evergreens and deciduous trees shall be
planted around the perimeter of the residential use defining a
boundary between the agricultural use and the residential
uses.
(b) In the RA Residential Agricultural District, a continuous fence
shall be erected around the perimeter of all nonagricultural
uses in order to deter trespassing into the agricultural use
area. This fence shall be in keeping with the area's rural
character, minimum height shall be four feet, and it shall be
designed to limit encroachment onto farmlands.
B. Screening.
(1) All outdoor storage, parking and/or loading areas of industrial uses
shall be screened from view from any residential or commercial
development or public right-of-way by a landscape screen or other
visual barrier with plantings. The screening shall be placed
immediately surrounding the area between any industrial parcel
and a contiguous residential and/or commercial zoning district. See
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, Article III,
§ 305-325.
(2) All outdoor industrial use operations, mechanical equipment and
other functional accessories of each building, such as elevator,
penthouse, ventilation pipes and ducts, water pressure tanks,
heating, air-conditioning and power supply units, shall have an
architectural building material screen or covering which is an
integral part of the building envelope and/or which is harmonious
with the building design.
C. Plant strip.
(1) Along each side or rear property line where a nonresidential use
adjoins an existing residence or residential district, a planting strip
of not less than 30 feet shall be provided.
(2) Along each street line where a nonresidential use adjoins an
existing residence or residential district, a fifteen-foot-wide
§ 370-3607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3607
1:955
§ 370-3608. Swimming pools. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 370-3609. Projections into required yard. [Amended 9-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-11]
The following projections into required yards shall be permitted:
planting strip shall be provided, which shall include a five-foot-wide
sidewalk.
A. Private swimming pools. All pool construction shall comply with
Chapter 310, Swimming Pools, as amended.
B. Public swimming pools. Public swimming pools shall comply with the
conditions set forth in the Pennsylvania Code, Title 28, Health and
Safety, Chapter 18, Swimming and Bathing Places, as amended.
A. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills or other similar architectural
features, exterior stairways, fire escapes, rain leaders and chimneys
may extend or project into a required yard by not more than two feet.
B. An arbor, open trellis, flagpole, recreational structures such as a jungle
gym, swings and sandboxes and clothes drying lines shall be permitted
as a projection into the required side and rear yards, provided that they
meet all minimum setback requirements for accessory structures within
the subject zoning district. Nothing contained herein shall prevent
walkways to be constructed to the property line.
C. Patios, porches, decks or similar structures shall be permitted in the
side or rear yard subject to the following conditions:
(1) A masonry, brick, macadam or wood patio, porch, deck and the like
shall be considered a structure. A building permit, together with an
as-built survey plan of the lot prepared by a registered surveyor or
professional engineer, shall be required unless a field inspection or
existing survey is found to be satisfactory for this purpose by the
Township Zoning Officer or his duly authorized representative.
(2) No patio, porch, deck or the like shall be located closer to the side
or rear lot line than 1/2 of the required side or rear yard setback.
(3) The finished floor height of patios, porches, decks or the like shall
not be higher than the first-floor level of the subject dwelling when
authorized by this section; and second-story patios, porches, decks
or the like are not authorized under this section.
(4) A patio, porch, deck or the like that projects into a required yard as
provided by this section shall not be enclosed or roofed.
(5) If a patio, porch, deck or the like extends into a required side or
rear yard pursuant to this section, no other accessory structure
§ 370-3607 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3609
1:956
§ 370-3610. Front yard exception.
§ 370-3611. Intersection clearance.
On a corner lot, no fence, structure or planting higher than two feet above
the curb or street line shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection
of the ultimate right-of-way line or street line.
§ 370-3612. Animals and animal shelters. [Amended 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-O-12]
may be located closer to the patio, porch, deck or lot line than the
permitted setback for said accessory structure.
D. No patio, porch, deck or the like shall be constructed in any easement,
or in such a manner that would block any drainage way or swale, or so
that it blocks the flow of stormwater onto or from the site.
A. In any use district when 50% or more of the frontage of a block
containing a lot upon which a proposed building is to be located is
already improved with buildings having front yards of less depth than
required for that particular use district, the average of such front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the remainder of the
frontage; provided, however, that in no case shall such front yard have a
depth less than 20 feet.
B. In any use district when 50% or more of the frontage of a block
containing a lot upon which a proposed building is to be located is
already improved with buildings that have observed a front yard
greater in depth than that required for the particular use district, new
buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front
yard so established by the existing buildings; provided, however, that in
no case shall the depth of such front yard be required to exceed such
minimum depth by more than 15 feet.
A. In all zoning districts, the keeping and sheltering of domestic animals,
including dogs and cats (three months of age and older), is limited to no
more than three of each type of animal, provided that the total number
of animals may not exceed six animals.
(1) If the animal(s) require an outside shelter or exercise area, the
facility must be maintained, enclosed and located in the rear or side
yard at least 10 feet from any lot line and shall be no closer than 50
feet to the nearest dwelling other than that of the owner.
(2) Kennels and boarding of animals associated with a veterinarian
practice, as defined in various residential and nonresidential
zoning districts, are not governed by this section.
(3) If the required setbacks or dimensions in any zoning district differ
from those listed above, the more stringent setbacks shall be
applied.
§ 370-3609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3612
1:957
§ 370-3613. Wastes and sewage disposal.
All methods and plans for sewage or waste disposal shall be submitted to
the Warrington Township Municipal Authority or other regulating body and
shall be designed in accordance with all applicable regulations pertaining to
the treatment and disposal of sewage and wastes. A certificate or statement
of adequacy from said agencies shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a
building permit.
§ 370-3614. Transition areas. [Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-O-04180]
B. In any zoning district where it is permitted, pigeons and fowl up to a
total of 12 may be maintained only in the rear yard on a noncommercial
basis and strictly as an incidental use. The area in which the fowl or
pigeons are kept shall be enclosed by a fence that will contain them, all
parts of which are at least 50 feet from any lot line and at least 100 feet
from the nearest dwelling other than that of the owner.
C. In any zoning district where it is permitted, up to two saddle horses may
be maintained. No building, corral, fence or stable enclosing them shall
be less than 100 feet from any lot line or 200 feet from the nearest
existing dwelling other than that of the owner, unless stricter
requirements apply. No such structure shall be attached to or be part of
any principal building.
A. Transition areas shall be provided along all Type I streams, water
bodies, natural watercourses, all wetlands, and any floodplains thereof,
along with associated alluvial soils. A width of 100 feet beyond the
limits of these resource-protected lands shall be established.
[Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-O-08]
(1) The following activities are permitted in transition areas:
(a) Normal property maintenance, such as mowing, pruning and
planting of native vegetation.
(b) Streets and driveway crossings, if no feasible alternative
alignments are available, and the crossing does not disturb
more than 0.1 acre of the transition area.
(c) Underground utilities, except as listed in Subsection B of this
section, if no feasible alternatives exist.
(2) The following activities are restricted in transition areas:
(a) Removal, dumping, filling, excavation, or disturbance of the
soils other than that associated with an activity identified in
Subsection A(1) above.
180. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 2314, Stream Setback Requirement.
§ 370-3612 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3614
1:958
§ 370-3615. Open space ownership and maintenance regulations.
[Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15A]
The following open space performance standards shall apply to all uses, as
they are applicable:
(b) Erection of structures or paving, other than in association with
an activity identified in Subsection A(1) above.
(c) Destruction of plant life which would alter vegetation patterns.
B. The width of the transition area for any sewage or waste disposal
system, or any building or structure associated with any sewage or
waste disposal system, shall be 100 feet.
C. Where, in the opinion of the Township, disturbance to the shape, but not
the square footage, of a transition area on a tract or parcel of land will
result in minimal environmental impact and the modified transition
area continues to serve the transition function, the transition area may
be reduced to 50% of its required width, so long as it is compensated by
increasing the transition area in another area on the same site and the
total required transition area square footage is not reduced.
A. General provisions.
(1) It is mandatory that the recorded plan and the deeds indicate that
there shall be no additional development. The open space shall be
restricted against any future building, development or use except
as consistent with that of providing for open space for recreation,
conservation, agriculture and general satisfaction of the residents
of the development or of the general public. Buildings or uses for
noncommercial recreation, cultural or agricultural purposes
compatible with the open space objectives may be permitted only
with the express approval of the Board of Supervisors following
approval of the building, site and operational plans by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) All documents pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance of
the open space shall meet the approval of the Board of Supervisors
as to legal form and effect with recommendations from the
Planning Commission as to suitability for the proposed use of the
open space and be approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of
the final plan approval. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
B. Open space design standards.
(1) Areas set aside for open space shall be suitable for the designated
purpose and shall be consistent with the policy for future land in
the Township. Any such area shall contain no structure other than a
structure related to the purposes of open spaces. Where structures
relating to open space or recreational activity are located in the
§ 370-3614 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3615
1:959
developed open space, no more than 5% of that area, or 10,000
square feet, whichever is greater, may be converted to building
areas. Structures relating to agricultural uses shall conform with
the provisions for permitted uses per § 370-402.
(2) Any land set aside as open space must be made subject to a deed
restriction or agreement in a form acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds in and for Bucks County.
C. Methods of conveyance and maintenance. All open space shown on the
final development plan as filed with the Township and subsequently
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County must be
conveyed in accordance with one or more of the following methods,
either individually or jointly:
(1) Dedication in fee simple to the Township. The Township may, at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, accept any portion or
portions of the open space; provided:
(a) If it is determined that such land is suitable regarding size,
shape, location and access, the Board of Supervisors may
determine that such lands will benefit the general public of the
Township.
(b) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such land.
(c) The titles are conveyed to the Township without cost.
(d) The Board of Supervisors shall adopt a resolution accepting a
deed of dedication from the landowner together with an
account of monies as determined by the Board of Supervisors
which shall be deposited in a special Township account that
shall be used only for the purposes of maintaining the land.
(e) The Township Board of Supervisors shall have 120 days to
accept or reject dedication of open space.
(2) Conveyance of title (including beneficial ownership) to a
conservancy, corporation, association, funded community trust,
condominium, individual landowner or other legal entity:
(a) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include
provisions suitable to the Township requiring such
organization to guarantee:
[1] The continued use of such land for the intended purpose in
perpetuity.
[2] Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the
open space requiring maintenance.
[3] Available funds required for such maintenance.
§ 370-3615 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3615
1:960
[4] Adequate insurance protection.
[5] Provision for payment of applicable taxes.
[6] For the attempt to recover for loss sustained by casualty,
condemnation or otherwise.
[7] The right of the Township to enter upon and maintain such
property at the expense of the organization in the event
the organization fails to maintain the property in
accordance with Subsection E, Lack or failure of
maintenance, included herein.
[8] Create such other covenants and/or easements necessary
to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter.
(b) The following are prerequisites for a corporation or
association:
[1] It must be approved by the Township, prior to final plan
approval, and the linens recorded before any homes or
dwelling units are sold, leased or otherwise conveyed.
[2] Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or
lessee. The organizational papers shall specify the voting
rights as per adult, per unit or per bedroom. The
organizational papers shall set forth the manner and time
of transference of the organization and its assets from
developer to homeowner.
[3] It must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes,
recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or
otherwise, and the maintenance of recreational and other
facilities.
[4] Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro rata share of
the costs and the assessments levied can become a lien on
the property, including any maintenance and associated
administrative costs incurred by the Township.
[5] It must be able to adjust the assessment to meet conditions
by a stated margin of votes.
[6] Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved, nor
shall it dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise,
except to an organization conceived and established to
own and maintain the open space. The corporation or
association must first offer to dedicate the open space to
the Township before any such sale or disposition of the
open space.
(c) The conveyance of open space, streets or other lands to
common ownership of the corporation, association, individual
§ 370-3615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3615
1:961
or other legal entity or the Township shall be absolute and
not subject to reversion for possible future use for further
development.
(3) By conveyance of the restrictive covenants, conservation
easements or other legal device to a municipality or a conservancy,
corporation, funded community trust or other legal entity, the open
space may remain totally lotted off to adjacent fee simple lots;
provided:
(a) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include
provisions to the Township for guaranteeing:
[1] The continued use of such land for the preservation of
open space.
[2] Such other conveyance and/or easement that the Township
shall deem desirable to fulfill the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(b) The following are prerequisites for the conveyance of
easements, etc.:
[1] Such conveyance of the total easements, etc., must
transpire prior to any lots or dwelling units being sold,
leased or otherwise conveyed.
[2] Each owner of the open space shall be responsible for
liability insurance, insurance, taxes, recovery of loss
sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise, and the
general maintenance thereon.
(4) Conveyance of title to an individual for agricultural purposes:
(a) Open space may be retained by the original landowner,
subdivided or sold separately, provided the terms of the
instrument of conveyance include provisions suitable to the
Township which shall guarantee:
[1] The continued use of such land for the preservation of
open space in perpetuity.
[2] Such other conveyance and/or easement that the Township
shall deem desirable to fulfill the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
D. Specific use regulations for common open space.
(1) No motor vehicle usage in the open space area shall be permitted
except for maintenance or agricultural purposes.
(2) No cutting of any trees or destruction or removal of vegetation,
rocks or soil shall be permitted unless in accordance with a
landscape improvement plan or agricultural use approved by a
§ 370-3615 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3615
1:962
majority vote of the association of property owners, if applicable,
pursuant to review and approval by the Board of Supervisors. Such
plan shall be in accordance with all other applicable sections of this
chapter.
(3) No alteration of any stream, pond or lake shall be permitted unless
in accordance with a plan approved by a majority vote of the
association of property owners, if applicable, pursuant to review
and approval by the Board of Supervisors. Such plan shall be in
accordance with other applicable sections of this chapter and all
applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) No structures shall be erected unless in accordance with a plan
approved by a majority vote of the association of property owners,
if applicable, pursuant to review and approval by the Planning
Board. Such plan should be in accordance with all other applicable
sections of this chapter.
(5) Conservation sewerage easement. No sewage disposal system shall
be located within designated common open space or natural
resource protection land resulting from a subdivision or site plan
unless a conservation sewerage easement has been designated.
Such easement shall provide for future expansion of the disposal
area and provide the right of access by the managing organization
and municipality.
(6) Stormwater management easement. No stormwater management
system shall be located within designated common open space or
natural resource protection land resulting from a subdivision or
site plan unless a stormwater management easement has been
designated. Such easement shall provide for future expansion of
the stormwater management area and provide right of access by
the managing organization and municipality.
E. Lack or failure of maintenance.
(1) In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, fails to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the Township
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
residents of the development, setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition; and said notice shall include a demand that
such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days
thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon
which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing,
the Township may modify the terms of the original notice as
corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in
the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days
§ 370-3615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3615
1:963
§ 370-3616. Special regulations relating to accessory apartments.
[Amended 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
All applicants for a special exception for an accessory apartment shall have
the burden of going forward with evidence and the burden of persuasion for
all of the following requirements:
or any extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
taxable value of the properties within the development and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance,
may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same
for a period of one year. Said maintenance by the Township shall
not constitute a taking of said common open space, nor vest in the
public rights to use the same. Before the expiration of said year,
the Township shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization, call a public hearing upon notice to such organization
or to the residents of the development, to be held by the Board of
Supervisors, at which hearing such organization or the residents
of the development shall show cause why such maintenance by
the Township shall not, at the option of the Township, continue
for a succeeding year. If the Board of Township Supervisors shall
determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the Township
shall cease to maintain said common open space at the end of
the year. If the Township shall determine that such organization
is not ready and able to maintain such common open space in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, at its discretion, continue
to maintain said common open space during the next succeeding
year; and, subject to similar hearing and determination, in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be
subject to appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same
time limitations, as is provided for zoning appeals.
(2) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against all the properties within the development and shall
become a lien on said properties when filed. The Township, at the
same time of entering upon said common open space for the
purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the Office of
the Prothonotary of the county upon the properties affected by the
lien within the development.
A. Accessory apartments shall be permitted in no more than 10% (rounded
up to the nearest number of units) of the single-family homes in any
existing or proposed subdivision. This requirement shall not apply to
homes not located in a subdivision.
B. The main dwelling must be owner-occupied.
C. Parking. One additional off-street parking space shall be required for
each accessory apartment.
§ 370-3615 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3616
1:964
§ 370-3617. Minimum width of lots.
All lots shall have access to a public street of at least a fifty-foot width,
except multifamily uses, which may have access to a deed-restricted
parking area and access road, but shall be accessible from a public street.
Lots where the front and rear property lines abut streets shall be prohibited
except in the case of reverse frontage along major thoroughfares.
§ 370-3618. Environmental performance standards. [Added
7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-12; amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-6]
D. Any entrance to an accessory apartment shall be located in the side or
rear yard.
E. All accessory apartments shall have smoke detectors.
F. As a condition to the grant of a special exception for an accessory
apartment, the owner of the main dwelling shall certify to the Township,
by affidavit on an annual basis, the identity and relationship of the
person or persons residing in the accessory apartment.
G. All accessory apartments shall be physically joined with the main
dwelling and shall provide internal access between the main dwelling
and the accessory apartment.
H. In all subdivisions for which plans are filed after March 10, 1998,
accessory apartments shall only be located on lots which contain 20%
more area than the minimum lot size required in the zoning district in
which the property is located.
A. Erosion and sediment control. All construction shall protect streams
and water bodies, including lakes, ponds and wetlands, from
sedimentation and shall control erosion in accordance with 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended from time to
time, and in accordance with the requirements of the Bucks County
Conservation District. [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
B. All construction shall limit stormwater runoff volumes and rates of
discharge as required by Chapter 288, Stormwater Management. All
stormwater management plans must comply with Chapter 288,
Stormwater Management, and the Storm Water Management Act (Act
167)181 and meet the requirements of Pennsylvania Dam Safety Act (Act
325182 and 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105). Procedures and requirements for
stormwater management facilities shall be in accordance with
standards set forth in Chapter 288, Stormwater Management, and
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-O-04]
C. Noise.
181. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
182. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 370-3616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3618
1:965
(1) Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. No
person shall operate or cause to be operated on public or private
property any source of continuous sound in such a manner as to
create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the
receiving land use category in Table I when measured at or beyond
the property boundary of the generating land use.
Table I: Continuous Sound Levels By Generating Land Use
Noise-Origination
Zoning District Day/Time
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
RA, OS/P, CE At any time 50
R-1, R-2, R-3, PRD,
PRD-M, R2-I, and
other residential
districts
1. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
55
2. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
45
C-1, C-2, IU, IU-A,
OI, CR/O, CBD, and
any other
nonresidential
district
1. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
65
2. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m., plus Sundays
and legal holidays
55
RA-A, Q, J 1. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
65
2. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
60
PI-1, PI-2 1. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
55
2. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
50
Any property
abutting Pa. Route
132 or 611
At any time 75
(2) Terminology. All technical terminology used in this section not
defined below shall be in conformance with applicable publications
§ 370-3618 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3618
1:966
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), its latest
approval revisions thereof, or its successor body.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound which is steady state,
fluctuating or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time
in any fifteen-second interval.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Any sound of short duration, with an abrupt
onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time
in any fifteen-second interval.
PURE TONE — A sound sensation characterized by its singleness
of tone.
(3) Standards. For the purposes of measuring sound in accordance
with the applicable provisions of these regulations, test equipment
methods and procedures shall conform to the latest approved
standards as published by ANSI, or its approved equivalent.
(4) Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which
emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set forth in
Subsection C(1) above shall be reduced by 5 dBA. For any source of
sound which emits an impulsive sound, the excursions of sound
pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA over the ambient sound
pressure level, regardless of time of day or night or receiving land
use, using the "fast" meter characteristic of a Type II meter,
meeting the IEC-651 and ANSI SI.4 Type 2 Specification.
(5) Standards for measurement. The sound meter shall be operated in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The sound meter
shall be calibrated with each use. The sound meter shall be
operated using the "A" weighting and fast response settings.
Readings shall be taken at locations that eliminate traffic noise as a
factor in the reading.
(6) Exceptions. The maximum permissible sound levels by receiving
land use established in Subsection C(1) above shall not apply to any
of the following noise sources:
(a) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.
(b) Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public
utilities when public health or safety is involved.
(c) Domestic power tools, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
(d) Explosives, firearms and similar devices, providing a permit
has first been obtained pursuant to established procedures.
(e) Construction operations, providing a permit has first been
obtained pursuant to established procedures.
§ 370-3618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3618
1:967
(f) Agriculture.
(g) Motor vehicle operations.
(h) Noise of aircraft flight operations.
(i) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Township.
(j) The unamplified human voice.
(k) In all zoning districts, the maximum allowable noise level
generated by alternative energy facilities shall be 55 dBA at all
times at or beyond the property boundary of the generating
land use. [Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
D. Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney, or other source of
visible gray opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except smoke of a
shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted
for not more than four minutes in any thirty-minute-period. Smoke from
residential fireplaces and wood stoves shall be exempt from this
limitation.
E. Dust, fumes, vapors and gases.
(1) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can
cause damage to human health, animals, vegetation or other forms
of property, or soiling or staining of persons or property, at any
point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission, is
prohibited.
(2) No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or other
source shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at
any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission. For
measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in stack at full load.
(3) This section shall not apply to emissions from residential fireplaces
and wood stoves.
F. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond the lot lines.
G. Odor. No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such
quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The
guide for determining such quantities of offensive odors shall be 50%
response level of Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air), Research on
Chemical Odors: Part 1, Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercials, October
1968, Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
H. Glare. No use shall produce a strong light or a reflection of a strong
light greater than 0.35 footcandle beyond its lot lines. [Amended
9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-O-11]
§ 370-3618 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3618
1:968
§ 370-3619. Fences. [Added 9-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-12]
I. Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions
detectable beyond its lot lines without the aid of instruments with the
exception of vibration produced by construction.
A. Fences in residential districts.
(1) Fences in front yards prohibited. No continuous constructed
barrier shall be allowed forward of the front building setback line.
Two exceptions to this rule are as follows:
(a) On multiple-frontage lots, a fence may be installed within the
yard which abuts a municipal boundary.
(b) Where the yard on the side of the house (i.e., perpendicular to
the main entrance of the house) is defined by this chapter as a
front yard due to abutting road frontage, a fence may be
erected within this yard perpendicular to the main entrance,
provided the minimum setback of the fence is 10 feet from any
house on an abutting property.
(2) Fences in side and rear yards. Fences may be installed along the
side lot lines between the rear lot line and the building setback line
and along the rear lot line to a height not exceeding six feet.
(3) Materials and construction.
(a) If the fence is wood cover or wood frame, the framework must
face the interior of the lot.
(b) If the fence is open metal mesh supported by posts or frames of
either pipe or wood, the posts and frame must face the interior
of the lot.
(c) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished surface must
be provided on the exterior side.
(4) Fences on corner lots. Fences installed on corner lots shall also be
subject to the provisions of traffic visibility across corner section as
indicated in this chapter.183
(5) Buffering/screen planting. Fences visible and within 300 feet of a
major or minor arterial road shall have a screen planting along the
arterial street side of the fence. The screened side should be of
suitable plants located at intervals of not less than eight feet along
the fence.
B. Fences in Commercial and Industrial District.
(1) Fences in front yard prohibited.
183. Editor's Note: See § 370-3611, Intersection clearance.
§ 370-3618 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3619
1:969
(2) Fences in side and rear yards. Fences of wood, metal or masonry
may be erected to a height not exceeding eight feet along the side
lot line between the building setback line and the rear lot line and
along the rear lot line.
(3) Fences on corner lots. Fences installed on corner lots shall also be
subject to the provisions of the traffic visibility across corners
section of this chapter.184
(4) Excavations and quarries. Every quarry, grave pit and similar
permanent excavation which is hazardous to children or to
passersby shall be enclosed by a sturdy fence at least 10 feet in
height and shall include three strands of barbed wire at a 45° angle
facing outward on the top of the fence.
(5) Construction.
(a) Every fence shall be constructed in a neat and orderly manner
of materials which are not intrinsically unsightly.
(b) No electrified or barbed-wire fence shall be erected or
maintained with the following exceptions: Barbed wire may be
used on fences required by this article to be erected and
maintained. Electrified fences operating on no more than six
volts of electricity and barbed wire fences may be used on
farms for the restraint of livestock.
(6) Buffering/screen planting. Fences visible and within 300 feet of a
major or minor arterial road shall have a screen planting along the
arterial street side of the fence. The screened side should be of
suitable plants located at intervals of not less than eight feet along
the fence.
(7) Berms. Berms should be two feet to six feet high and should be
used to shield and buffer uses such as parking areas or residential
areas abutting a major/minor arterial road.
(8) Hedges. Hedges three feet in from the inside edge of the sidewalk;
18 inches from the side lines and rear line.
C. Easements and drainageways. Fences shall not be placed within the
area of an easement necessary for access and maintenance on any
utility within that easement. Fences shall also not be placed within the
area of any drainageway.
D. Permits. No fence shall be installed or erected without first obtaining a
permit from the Warrington Township Zoning Officer. Failure to obtain a
permit shall result in fines and penalties as provided in this chapter.
184. Editor's Note: See § 370-3611, Intersection clearance.
§ 370-3619 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3620
1:970
§ 370-3620. Tall grass restriction. [Added 10-25-1994 by Ord. No.
94-16]
The following regulations shall apply:
§ 370-3621. Exceptions to minimum lot size. [Added 3-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-6]
A. No lawn on any lot shall be allowed to exceed six inches in height.
B. For any property less than two acres in area, the vegetation in the area
less than 20 feet from the edge of the cartway shall not be allowed to
exceed six inches in height.
C. For any property greater than two acres in net area:
(1) The vegetation in the area less than 20 feet from the edge of the
cartway shall not be allowed to exceed six inches in height.
(2) The vegetation in the area less than 10 feet from a property line of
any adjacent residence shall not be allowed to exceed six inches in
height.
D. For any property located within 500 feet of an intersection of two
arterial streets, as defined within Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Warrington:
(1) The vegetation in the area less than 20 feet from the edge of the
cartway shall not be allowed to exceed six inches in height.
(2) The vegetation in the area less than 10 feet from a property line of
any adjacent residence shall not be allowed to exceed six inches in
height.
E. Upon the failure of any property owner to comply with the
requirements of this section, the Zoning Officer shall issue a written
warning to the property owner. The property owner shall have seven
days from the date of notice in which to comply. In the event that
noncompliance continues for more than seven days after the date of the
warning notice, the Township shall have the right, at the property
owner's expense, to enter the property and to cut the lawn, meadow or
field so as to cause compliance. The Township shall have the right to
collect such charge by any and all legal means, including the recording
and enforcement of a municipal lien.
A. Any vacant lot, including contiguous lots, existing at the effective date
of this amendment whose area or dimensions met the requirements of
the district in which the lot was located in all residential districts prior
to the March 5, 1985, adoption of the zoning ordinance, and which was
a legally subdivided lot, may have a building permit issued for a singlefamily
detached dwelling, provided that the building coverage limit is
not exceeded, parking requirements are met and the yard provisions
are reduced by the same percentage that the area of such lot bears to
§ 370-3620 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3621
1:971
§ 370-3622. Trees on wooded lots. [Added 3-7-1995 by Ord. No.
95-5]
§ 370-3623. Forest protection standards. [Added 3-7-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-4]
the minimum lot size of the respective district; except that no side yard
shall be less than 1/2 that required by the respective district or five
feet, whichever is greater, and no front yard shall be less than required
within the respective district or less than the average of the front yards
of the two adjacent properties, whichever is less.
B. This exception shall not apply to any two or more contiguous lots which
have been in a single ownership at any time subsequent to the effective
date of this section or in any case where a reparceling or replatting
could create one or more lots which would conform to applicable
district standards.
A. No live trees of a diameter greater than 10 inches measured at a point
of four feet above grade shall be removed in connection with a land
development or building permit unless a zoning permit for a specific
number of trees in a specific location is first obtained from the Zoning
Officer upon recommendation by the Planning Commission. Permits will
be granted only where tree removal will not adversely affect the intent
of this section or the utility and character of the overall foliage of the
parcel or lot in question. In no case will removal of trees exceed the
standards for steep slope disturbance of woodland protection. The
permit provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landowner who
wishes to remove an individual tree not in conjunction with a land
development or building permit. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
B. For all healthy trees of a diameter greater than 10 inches as measured
at a point of four feet above grade, the following standards shall apply.
No greater than 1/3 of the roots may be disturbed by the removal of
topsoil or paving; provided, that a similar amount of the canopy has
been removed by a trained arborist. Any filling within 35 feet of the
trunk shall require a tree well and aeration channels in accordance with
the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
A. A forest is a woodland comprising of one or more acres of wooded land
where the largest trees measure at least six inches in diameter at
breast height (dbh) or 4.5 feet from the ground or a grove of trees
forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least 10 inches
dbh. "Forestry" is the ongoing program of clear cutting timber
resources within forests and must be coordinated with a reforestation
program. Forestry does not include authorized clearing in accordance
with plans approved pursuant to this section, nor the issuance of a
building permit, nor removal of sick or dead trees.
§ 370-3621 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3623
1:972
§ 370-3624. Flag lots. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-14]
Flag lots may be permitted as conditional uses only in the RA, PRD and
R-1 Zoning Districts. See Articles IV through VIII, IX, X and § 370-3602 for
specific conditions necessary for approval. Flag lots are prohibited in all
other zoning districts.
§ 370-3625. Special regulations for retail stores. [Added 5-9-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-O-06]
Shops and stores selling commodities and goods to consumers: Not
included under this use are the over-the-counter sale of alcoholic beverages
in taverns and bars, and stores with greater than 15 square feet of floor area
devoted to the display of pornographic materials. For the purposes of this
section, any retail store that provides for gasoline or fuel sales for motor
B. Forestry is permitted, provided that the landowner obtains a five-year
permit, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The application for a permit shall include a written and graphic
reforestation or forest maintenance program prepared by either a
professional forester or arborist showing a program for the
establishment of the forest or wooded area on a sustained-yield
basis.
(2) If clear cutting of timber resources are programmed, such
operations shall be limited to no greater than 20% of the forested
area per year, and shall include a soil sedimentation and erosion
control plan which is subject to the review by the Township.
Furthermore, all clear-cutting operations shall be coordinated with
a reforestation program.
(3) An agreement must be signed by the landowner and recorded with
the Township stating that no such forestry operation shall be
considered to reduce the area of the forest or woodland as defined
within this section. The application for a permit must indicate the
existing amount of forested or wooded land for the total site prior
to the commencement of any forestry operation.
(4) The landowner shall be responsible that all such forested or
wooded areas are either reforested or maintained in a forested
state. In addition, the landowner shall be responsible for the
installation and maintenance of the soil sedimentation and erosion
control plan. The Township may require a performance bond to
insure that these standards are met.185
185. Editor's Note: Former § 2324, Regulations Governing Communications Antennas and
Communications Equipment Buildings as Conditional Uses, and former § 2325, Standards
for Communications Towers as Conditional Uses, both added 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10
and which immediately followed this section, were repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-02. For current provisions, see Article XXXIX of this chapter.
§ 370-3623 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3625
1:973
vehicles directly to retail customers shall be considered to be a "motor
vehicle service station." No drive-through service is permitted.
A. No single structure or use shall contain more than 35,000 square feet of
building area.
B. Parking. One off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of sales
floor area. Parking areas shall be adequately screened as required by
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Retail stores with a floor area of more than 20,000 square feet shall
meet the following additional requirements:
(1) This use shall be permitted in the Corridor Overlay District and
shall comply with all of the requirements of the Corridor Overlay
District as outlined in Section 330 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. If there is a conflict between the
provisions of this section and those of Section 330 of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the provisions of
this section shall apply.
(2) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal. These stations shall be located to the rear of the structure
and shall be screened from view and landscaped in accordance
with Township Subdivision and Land Development ordinance
requirements.
(3) Building design. Buildings shall be designed in accordance with the
design standards in § 305-329 of Chapter 305, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(4) The use shall be designed to safely accommodate pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. Continuous pedestrian circulation shall be
provided throughout the site, inclusive of pad sites, and pedestrian
connections shall be provided to adjacent sidewalks. No pedestrian
connection may cross the vehicular path of a drive-up window.
Sidewalks are required along any facade of the building that has a
public entrance, abuts a parking area and/or abuts a public street.
Minimum sidewalk width shall be eight feet, and all sidewalks shall
be placed a minimum of six feet from the building facade, and that
area shall be utilized for foundation landscaping over at least 70%
of its length. All primary pedestrian walkways shall be required to
provide landscaping for not less than 50% of the length of such
walkways and shall be designed in accordance with § 305-325 of
Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development. Benches and
trash containers shall be provided at a minimum of one per every
100 feet along the walkway.
(5) The plan shall provide for shopping cart corrals if shopping carts
are to be used. Cart corrals shall be provided in addition to the
required parking spaces.
§ 370-3625 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3625
1:974
(6) The applicant must submit as part of the preliminary land
development or subdivision plan an economic impact study based
upon a ten-year horizon and indicating the market for the proposed
facility and the area from which patrons will be attracted. The
economic impact study shall evaluate the projected costs and
benefits to the community resulting from the project, including:
(a) Projected costs to the Township arising from the demand for
and required improvements to public services and
infrastructure, including roads;
(b) Value of improvements to public services and infrastructure to
be provided by the project;
(c) Projected tax revenues to be generated by the project;
(d) Projected impact of the project on surrounding land values and
the potential loss or increase in municipal tax revenues
resulting from such increase or decrease. (The project shall be
designed to minimize any negative impacts to adjoining
property values);
(e) Short-term and long-term projection of increased Township
revenues and costs resulting from the proposed project;
(f) The estimated net impacts to local employment, wages and
salaries, retained profits, and the local income tax. The change
in the estimated number of employees, employment types, and
estimated wages generated by the project for purposes of
determining this impact, the applicant must identify the
number of jobs displaced or created, the quality of the jobs,
whether the jobs are temporary or permanent, and the
employment sector in which the lost or gained jobs are located;
(g) Estimate of how much revenue generated by the project will be
retained and redirected back into the economy of Warrington;
(h) The impacts (including displacement of existing retailers) on
business within the Township;
(i) Any measures available that will mitigate any materially
adverse economic impacts, if any, identified by the applicant, if
necessary;
(j) Establishing the market and financial feasibility of the project,
including any market studies prepared for the project and any
plans for phased construction;
(k) Demonstration of the applicant's financial ability to complete
the project and to achieve long-term financial stability;
(l) Whether prior efforts to establish a retail store larger than
20,000 square feet within Warrington Township have been
§ 370-3625 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3625
1:975
unsuccessful or whether the proposed use will have an adverse
impact or economic benefit on grocery or retail shopping
centers in the Township;
(m) Whether any restrictions exist on the subsequent use of the
property on which the retail store is proposed to be located,
including the provisions of a lease if applicable, which, in the
event the owner or operator of the retail store vacates the
premises, would require the premises to remain vacant for a
significant amount of time; and
(n) A proposal addressing plans for the reuse of the site in the case
that the applicant abandons the large-scale building. The plan
shall include design features that demonstrate availability of
flexible features such as partitions and multiple entryways to
facilitate reuse by multiple tenants if the building is
abandoned. The plan for reuse shall be reviewed and adopted
by the Board of Supervisors.
(7) Retail stores with a floor area of more than 15,000 square feet shall
include a public amenity, such as an outdoor plaza, patio seating
area, water feature, clock tower, or other amenity that will enhance
the character of the area. The scale of the public amenities shall be
in proportion to the size of the proposed store.
(a) Subsection C(6)(n) above: A plan for reuse is still required.
(8) Parking. One off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of
sales floor area. Only 50% of required parking spaces may be
located between the front facade and the main road frontage. The
remainder of the parking shall be distributed on other sides of the
building or separated by means of intervening buildings, amenities,
or other site features. All sides of the building that abut parking
areas must have a customer entrance.
(9) Loading docks shall be in the rear of the building and shielded from
view and shall not be visible from adjacent residential districts or
from public streets.
(10)No deliveries or trash pickup may occur between 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. when this use abuts a residential property.
D. Tractor trailers, cargo boxes, or other vehicles or structures meant to
be transportable shall not be used as accessory buildings or structures
for storage. These shall be loaded or unloaded within 48 hours and shall
not remain on a lot beyond this period of time. The Zoning Officer may
approve of temporary storage, up to 60 days, for seasonal product in an
area screened from view.
E. The facade or side of any structure facing an abutting residential use
shall comply with the requirements in § 305-329 of Chapter 305,
§ 370-3625 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3625
1:976
§ 370-3626. Medical marijuana dispensary. [Added 6-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
Conditional use criteria:
Subdivision and Land Development, and shall not contain any loading
docks, trash containment areas, and outside work areas.
A. A medical marijuana dispensary shall provide a copy of the medical
marijuana permit issued by the Department of Health or proof that a
medical marijuana permit has been sought and is pending approval,
and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-to-date medical
marijuana permit with the Department of Health. Should a medical
marijuana permit be denied, not renewed, or revoked at any time, any
conditional use shall immediately become void.
B. A medical marijuana dispensary shall at all times operate in compliance
with all Department of Health regulations pertaining to such facilities.
C. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be operated or maintained on
a parcel within 1,000 feet, measured by a straight line in all directions,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
point on the property line of a parcel containing a public, private or
parochial school or a day-care center.
D. A medical marijuana dispensary must operate entirely within an indoor,
enclosed, and secured facility. No exterior sales, and no sidewalk
displays, shall be permitted. No drive-through, dropoff, or pickup
services shall be permitted.
E. A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a
medical marijuana grower/processor.
F. A medical marijuana dispensary shall be limited to hours of operation
not earlier than 9:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00 p.m.
G. A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit a disposal plan to, and
obtain approval from the Township Chief of Police. Medical marijuana
remnants and by-products shall be disposed of according to an
approved plan, and shall not be placed within an exterior refuse
container.
H. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors or odors which can be
seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the medical marijuana dispensary is operating.
I. No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in a medical marijuana
dispensary, unless accompanied by a caregiver as required under
Section 506 of the Medical Marijuana Act.186
186. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.506.
§ 370-3625 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3626
1:977
§ 370-3627. Medical marijuana grower/processor. [Added 6-27-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-O-09]
Conditional use criteria:
J. No use of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises of a
medical marijuana dispensary.
K. The minimum size of a medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be
2,000 square feet in total floor area.
L. A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit a security plan to, and
obtain approval from, the Township Engineer, the Township Planner,
and the Township Police Chief. The medical marijuana dispensary shall
demonstrate how it will maintain effective security and control. The
security plan shall specify the type and manner of twenty-four-hour
security, tracking, recordkeeping, record retention, and surveillance
system to be utilized in the facility as required by Section 1102 of the
Medical Marijuana Act187 and as supplemented by regulations
promulgated by the Department of Health pursuant to the Medical
Marijuana Act.
M. A medical marijuana dispensary shall provide proof of a contract with a
private security company, and shall be staffed with/monitored by
security personnel 24 hours a day and seven days a week.
N. A medical marijuana dispensary shall submit a site plan for approval by
the Township Engineer and a floor plan for approval by the Township
Building Code Official. The floor plan shall identify internal security
measures. All medical marijuana product, by-product, and waste shall
be stored in an interior secure vault or receptacle in such a manner as
to protect against dissemination.
A. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall provide a copy of the
medical marijuana permit issued by the Department of Health or proof
that a medical marijuana permit has been sought and is pending
approval, and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-todate
medical marijuana permit issued by the Department of Health.
Should a medical marijuana permit be denied, not renewed or revoked
at any time, any conditional use shall immediately become void.
B. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall at all times operate in
compliance with all Department of Health regulations pertaining to
such facilities.
C. A medical marijuana grower/processor must be located on a lot
containing not less than two acres.
D. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall not be operated or
maintained on a parcel within 1,000 feet, measured by a straight line in
187. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.1102.
§ 370-3626 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3627
1:978
all directions, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest point on the property line of a parcel containing a public,
private or parochial school or a day-care center.
E. A medical marijuana grower/processor must operate entirely within an
indoor, enclosed, and secure facility.
F. A medical marijuana grower/processor may not operate on the same
site as a medical marijuana dispensary.
G. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall be limited to hours of
operation not earlier than 9:00 a.m. and not later than 9:00 p.m.
H. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit a disposal plan to,
and obtain approval from the Township Police Chief. Medical marijuana
remnants and by-products shall be disposed of according to an
approved plan, and shall not be placed within an exterior refuse
container.
I. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors or odors which can be
seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the medical marijuana grower/processor is operating.
J. No one under the age of 21 shall be permitted in a medical marijuana
grower/processor.
K. No retail sales of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises
of a medical marijuana grower/processor.
L. No use of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises of a
medical marijuana grower/processor.
M. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit a security plan to
and obtain approval from the Township Police Chief. The medical
marijuana grower/processor shall demonstrate how it will maintain
effective security and control. The security plan shall specify the type
and manner of twenty-four-hour security, tracking, recordkeeping,
record retention, and surveillance system to be utilized in the facility as
required by Section 1102 of the Medical Marijuana Act188 and as
supplemented by regulations promulgated by the Department of Health
pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Act.
N. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall contract with a private
security company, and the medical marijuana grower/processor shall be
staffed with/monitored by security personnel 24 hours a day and seven
days a week.
O. A medical marijuana grower/processor shall submit a site plan for
approval by the Township Engineer and a floor plan for approval by the
Township Building Code Official. The floor plan shall identify internal
security measures. All medical marijuana product, by-product, and
188. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.1102.
§ 370-3627 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3627
1:979
waste shall be stored in an interior secure vault or receptacle in such a
manner as to protect against improper dissemination.
§ 370-3627 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3627
1:980
ARTICLE XXXVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 370-3701. Zoning Officer.
A. The Zoning Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by
an agent to be appointed by the Board of Township Supervisors, who
shall be known as the "Zoning Officer."
B. Deputy. The Board of Supervisors may designate an employee or
employees of the Township as Deputy Zoning Officer, who may exercise
all the powers of the Zoning Officer.
C. Compensation. The compensation for the Zoning Officer and Deputy
Zoning Officers shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Duties and responsibilities. The Zoning Officer shall have all the duties
and powers conferred by this chapter in addition to those reasonably
implied for that purpose. No permit shall be issued in connection with
any contemplated erection, construction, alteration, repair, extension,
replacement and/or use of any building, structure, sign and/or land
unless it first conforms with the requirements of this chapter, all other
ordinances of the Township and with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. He shall:
(1) Receive applications, process the same and issue permits for the
erection, construction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement
and/or use of any building, structure, sign and/or use of any
building, structure, sign and/or land in the Township.
(2) At his discretion, examine or cause to be examined, all buildings,
structures, signs, and/or land or portions thereof for which an
application has been filed for the erection, construction, alteration,
repair, extension, replacement and/or use before issuing any
permit. Thereafter, he may make such inspections during the
completion of work for which a permit has been issued. Upon
completion of the building, structure, sign and/or change, a final
inspection shall be noted, and the holder of the permit shall be
notified of any discrepancies.
(3) Keep a record of all applications received, all permits and
certificates issued, reports of inspection, notices and orders issued
and the complete recording of all pertinent factors involved. He
shall file and safely keep copies of all plans permitted, and the same
shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available
for the use of the Board of Township Supervisors and other officials
of the Township. At least annually, he shall submit to the Board of
Township Supervisors a written statement of all permits and
certificates of use and occupancy issued, and violations and stopwork
orders recommended or promulgated.
§ 370-3701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3702
1:981
§ 370-3702. Fees. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with the Township Fee
Schedule to be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, and all such fees shall be paid into the Township Treasury.
Each applicant for an appeal, special exception or variance shall, at the time
of making application, pay a fee, in accordance with the aforementioned
Fee Schedule,189 for the cost of advertising and mailing notices as required
by this chapter and the rules of the Zoning Hearing Board. The resolution
establishing the Fee Schedule may provide that deposit shall be required
upon the issuance of a zoning permit authorizing the erection, construction,
or alteration of any building or portions thereof, which deposit shall be
refunded to the holder of such permit upon certification by the Zoning
Officer that the work has been inspected and approved as being in
conformity with the zoning permit and the provisions of this and other
applicable ordinances.
§ 370-3703. Permits. [Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-11]
A. Requirements. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or
the construction or erection of any building, including an accessory
building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building,
including an accessory building, until the Zoning Officer has issued a
building permit for such work. No permit shall be required for repairs
to or maintenance of any building, structure or grounds, provided such
repairs or maintenance do not change the use, change or add to the
building structurally or otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter.
It shall also be unlawful to commence any development as defined in
Chapter 181, Floodplain Management, on any property in Warrington
Township, regardless of location in relationship to special hazard
floodplain areas identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and updated from time to
time, without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer and
floodplain administrator. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-21]
B. Form of application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in
such form as shall be prescribed by the Board of Supervisors and shall
be accompanied by the required fee as hereinafter prescribed.
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of any
building or structure, or the agent of either; provided, however, that if
the application is made by a person other than the owner or lessee, it
shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner or the
qualified person making an application, that the proposed work is
authorized by this owner. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officer, if the owner or lessee is
a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
C. Required documentation.
189. Editor's Note: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 370-3702 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3703
1:982
(1) Description of work. The application shall contain a general
description of the proposed work, use and occupancy of all parts of
the building, structure or sign and such additional information as
may be required by the Zoning Officer. The application for the
permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan of the proposed
building, structure or sign drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to
show the nature and character of the work to be performed,
including off-street parking and loading space if required, the
location of new and existing construction, and the distances of
same from the existing lot lines.
(2) Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the
application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale,
showing the size and location of new construction and existing
structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established
street grades and the proposed finished grades. The plan shall be
drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey.
(a) In the case of applications for a new residential or
nonresidential building, structure or additions to
nonresidential buildings and structures, the site plan shall be
prepared in three stages (plot plan, confirmation plan and asbuilt
plan) by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
registered to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
All plans shall be drawn to an accurate scale of not less than 50
feet to the inch with all elevations established by the builder or
owner's engineer or land surveyor on the subdivision or land
development plan.
(b) In addition to the general requirements listed in Chapter 305,
Subdivision and Land Development, plans shall show the
following:
[1] Plot plan.
[a] Location of property showing the nearest intersecting
street and distance in feet and decimal parts thereof,
of property therefrom, together with a north point.
[b] Dimensions, bearings and lot numbers as a plan of
record.
[c] The location of boundary monuments and pins.
[d] Lot area in square feet or acres.
[e] Building area in square feet.
[f] Size and location of existing and proposed
improvements.
§ 370-3703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3703
1:983
[g] All existing and proposed easements, restrictions,
utility structures, land features and surrounding
properties.
[h] Topographical information, at contour intervals of no
less than two feet.
[i] Current zoning information, including name of
district, minimum lot size, minimum setbacks and
maximum impervious surfaces.
[j] Zoning restriction lines, including front, side, rear and
buffer yard setbacks.
[k] The proposed method for discharge of rainwater and
surface waters from the premises, including proposed
grading.
[l] In the case of a plot plan being prepared for a Zoning
Hearing Board hearing, the plan shall show square
foot area of each floor.
[m] In the case of a plot plan being prepared for a Zoning
Hearing Board hearing showing a building
encroaching in a restricted area, the plan shall show
the distance between front, side or rear property lines
and the encroaching building.
[n] Proposed basement, garage and first floor elevation.
[o] The plan shall be drawn to scale, dated, bear the job
number, and be signed and sealed by the responsible
registered professional. The plan shall bear the name
of the person for whom the plan has been prepared,
the address, tax parcel number, subdivision lot
number and name of the development.
[2] Confirmation plan. After the building permit is issued,
there shall also be filed a confirmation plan to be used to
confirm the submitted plot plan or amend the plan to the
actual basement, garage and first floor elevations
immediately following the building foundation
construction. The plans shall include locations, elevations,
reference points or bench marks, dates signed and sealed
by the responsible registered professional.
[3] As-built plan. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, an "as-built" survey, with all details required
for plot plans established in § 370-3703C(2)(b)[1],
containing the approval of the Township Engineer shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer.
§ 370-3703 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3703
1:984
(c) In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction
to be demolished and the location and size of existing
structures and construction that are to remain on the site or
plot.
(d) In the case of residential additions, accessory buildings,
structures and alterations, the Zoning Officer is authorized to
waive or modify the requirement for a site plan. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
D. Time limit for applications. An application for a permit for any proposed
work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date
of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a
permit shall have been issued; except that reasonable extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each may be granted
at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
E. Issuance of permits. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer
shall examine the same within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application or plans do not conform to the provisions of all pertinent
local laws, he shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons
therefor. He shall inform the applicant of his right of appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board in the event such application is rejected. If
satisfied that the proposed work and/or use conforms to the provisions
of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that
the certificate of use and occupancy as required herein has been
applied for, he shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practical.
F. Expiration of permit. The permit shall expire after one year from the
date of issuance; provided, however, that the same may be extended
every six months for a period not to exceed an additional one year.
G. Revocation of permits. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plan
on which the permit or approval was based or for any other cause set
forth in this chapter.
H. Posting of permit. A true copy of the permit shall be posted and kept on
the site of operations open to public inspection during the entire time of
prosecution of the work or use and until the completion of the same as
defined on the application.
I. Temporary permit. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Officer for a nonconforming structure or use which it deems
necessary to promote the proper development of the community,
provided that such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely
removed upon expiration of the permit without cost to the Township.
Such permits shall be issue for a specified period of time not to exceed
§ 370-3703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3703
1:985
§ 370-3704. Demolition permits. [Added 3-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-5]
one year and may be renewed annually for an aggregate period not
exceeding three years.
J. Payment of fees. No permit to begin work for the erection, construction,
alteration, repair, extension, replacement and/or use of any building,
structure, sign and/or land for construction or use purposes shall be
issued until the fees prescribed by the Board of Township Supervisors
pursuant to resolution shall be paid to the Zoning Officer. The payment
of fees under this section shall not relieve the applicant or holder of said
permit from payment of other fees that may be required by this chapter,
or any other ordinance or law.
K. Compliance with ordinance. The permit shall be a license to proceed
with the work and should not be construed as authority to violate,
cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
stipulated by the Zoning Hearing Board.
L. Compliance with permit and plot plan. All work or uses shall conform to
the approved application and plans for which the permit has been
issued as well as the approved plot plan.
A. Definitions. When used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
DEMOLISH or DEMOLITION — To alter a structure by rendering it
unfit for use to such an extent that repair is not feasible or is so costly
as to be economically prohibited.
B. Requirement for demolition permit. No building or other structure may
be demolished without first securing a demolition permit from the
Township. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence the
demolition of any building, structure or portion thereof until a permit
has been duly issued therefor.
C. Application for demolition permit. An application for a demolition
permit shall be made to the Township Zoning Officer in writing on a
form furnished by the Township, and any demolition permit fee adopted
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, which fee may be amended
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be
paid.
D. Issuance of demolition permit.
(1) The Township Zoning Officer may hold any application for a permit
to demolish a building for a period not to exceed 30 days from the
date of the application. During the thirty-day period, the applicant
shall permit the Township and/or its duly authorized historical
commission and/or such consultants as are experts in the fields of
architectural restoration, structural engineering, and like fields as
§ 370-3703 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3704
1:986
§ 370-3705. Certificate of use and occupancy.
the Township or the historical commission sees fit, to enter upon
and inspect the structure to be demolished to assess its historical
significance. If the application is for a property which is found
to be on the National Register of Historical Places or is found to
be eligible for registration on the National Register of Historical
Places, the application shall be held for an additional 60 days to
permit time to investigate how the property may be preserved.
(2) If historically significant features are discovered, e.g., stairways,
decorative trim paneling, beams, etc., during the period the
application is held, the applicant shall cooperate in permitting
these features to be removed for preservation before the building is
demolished.
A. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building, sign
and/or land portion thereof for which a permit is required herein until a
certificate of use and occupancy for such structure, building, sign and/
or land or portion thereof has been issued by the Zoning Officer. The
application for issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy shall be
made at the same time an application for a permit is filed with the
Zoning Officer, as herein required.
B. The application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be in such
form as the Zoning Officer may prescribe and may be made on the same
application as is required for a permit.
C. The application shall specify the intended use and/or occupancy of any
structure, building, sign, and/or land or portion thereof for which a
permit is required herein. Any such structure, building, sign and/or land
or portion thereof for which a permit has been issued shall be used for
only the use(s) specified and none other.
D. The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, or sign within
10 days upon notification that the proposed work that was listed under
the permit has been completed, and if satisfied that the work is in
conformity and compliance with the work listed in the issued permit
and all other pertinent laws, he shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the intended use listed in the original application.
E. The certificate of use and occupancy or a true copy thereof shall be kept
available within the Township offices for official inspection at all times.
F. Upon request of a holder of a permit, the Zoning Officer may issue a
temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a structure, building,
sign, and/or land, or portion thereof, before the entire work covered by
the permit shall have been completed, provided such portion or
portions may be used and/or occupied safely prior to full completion of
the work without endangering life or public welfare. The Zoning Officer
shall also issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for such
§ 370-3704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3705
1:987
§ 370-3706. Enforcement, penalty and remedy. [Amended 1989 by
Ord. No. 89-8]
temporary uses as tents, use of land for religious or public or
semipublic proposes and similar temporary use and/or occupancy. Such
temporary certificates shall be for the period of time to be determined
by the Zoning Officer; however, in no case for a period exceeding six
months.
A. The construction, erection, replacement, alteration, repair, extension
and/or use of any structure, building, sign and/or land or the change of
any use, area of use, percentage of use or extension or displacement of
use of any structure, building, sign and/or land without first obtaining a
permit, or the use of any building, structure, sign, and/or land without
receipt of a certificate of use and occupancy or the failure to comply
with any other provisions of this chapter, are hereby declared to be
violations of this chapter.
B. Enforcement notice.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall send a written enforcement notice to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred,
to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record.
(2) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
C. See Chapter 38, Ordinance Enforcement Procedures, Article II, Tickets
for Certain Offenses. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 370-3705 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3706
1:988
§ 370-3707. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-1; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
D. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of any ordinance enacted under this Act or prior to
the enabling laws, the Board of Supervisors, or with the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved
owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person
will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping
or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct,
business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun
by serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Supervisors of the
Township. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
E. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by Warrington Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred
by Warrington Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, Warrington
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to Warrington Township.
A. Creation and membership. The Zoning Hearing Board created under
previous ordinances shall continue, said members having been
appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The Board shall consist of five
members, each of which shall serve a term of five years. Terms shall be
staggered so that one member's term shall expire on December 31 of
each year. The members of the Board shall be removable for cause, by
the Board of Supervisors, in accordance with the provisions in Act 247.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Supervisors for
§ 370-3706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3707
1:989
the unexpired term of any member whose term become vacant. The
Board of Supervisors may also reappoint members of the Board whose
terms have expired.
B. General procedures. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be governed by
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247 of 1968, amended, by Act 93 of 1972, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
may be amended or revised, and such other Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania laws as may be applicable. As used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term "Board" shall refer to
such Zoning Hearing Board, and "Act 247" shall refer to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, as cited
above.
C. Officers. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves.
D. Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Board Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine.
E. Hearings. Hearings will be held and records will be kept in accordance
with Article IX, Act 247.190
F. Powers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any
ordinance adopted pursuant hereto.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions authorized by this chapter. In
granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those
expressed in the chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter. In any case where a special exception
is granted, construction must commence within six months;
otherwise, the special exception shall have deemed to have
expired. The procedures shall be the same as those specified under
this section. The following requirements also apply:
(a) Application shall be made in writing indicating the section of
this chapter under which an exception is sought. A reasonably
exact dimensional sketch shall be furnished showing
placement and use of the proposed buildings; details of
parking, loading and lighting; sidewalks and other pedestrian
areas.
(b) Further, a description of the uses proposed shall be included in
sufficient detail that the objectionable side effects, if any, can
be determined.
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 370-3707 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3707
1:990
(c) In granting special exceptions, the Zoning Hearing Board shall,
in addition to such other factors as it may deem relevant:
[1] Give full consideration to the size, scope, extent and
character of the exception desired and assure itself that
such request is consistent with the plan for future land use
in the Township and with the spirit, purpose and intent of
this chapter.
[2] Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired
and the extent to which the new expanded use is
susceptible of regulation or restriction by appropriate
conditions and safeguards.
[3] Consider the public interest in, or the need for the
proposed use or change, and determine that the proposal
will service the best interests of the Township, the
convenience of the community (where applicable), and the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare, but shall
not constitute a change of use to one not specifically
permitted by exception in that district.
[4] Consider, where pertinent, the effects of the proposed
change with respect to congestion on the roads or
highways, the most appropriate use of land, conserving
the value of buildings, safety from fire, panic and other
dangers, adequacy of light and air, the prevention of
overcrowding the land, congestion of population and the
adequacy of public and community services.
[5] Make certain that the proposed change is reasonable in
terms of the logical efficient and economic extension of
public services and facilities, such as public water, sewers,
police and fire protection, transportation and public
schools.
[6] Take into consideration the character and type of
development in the area surrounding the location for
which the request is made and determine that the
proposed change or modification, as permitted, will
constitute an appropriate use in the area and will not
substantially injure or detract from the use of surrounding
property or from the character of the neighborhood.
(3) To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to public interest,
where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, in
order that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed and
substantial justice done.
§ 370-3707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3707
1:991
(4) Variances to the delineated one-hundred-year floodplain line and
elevations as specified in the Floodplain Management Ordinance
located in Chapter 181, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the
Township of Warrington.
(5) In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as believed proper. Notice
of such decision shall forthwith be given to all parties in interest.
G. Notice of public hearing. Upon receiving an appeal, the Board shall fix a
reasonable time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall give
the notice thereof:
(1) By advertising notice once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
(2) By mailing due notices at least six days prior to the date of the
hearing to the public in interest. Such parties shall be at least those
persons adjoining or across public roads from the property in
question.
(3) By posting said hearing notice conspicuously on the affected tract
of land.
H. Public hearing. The Board shall conduct a public hearing on such
appeal at which hearing any party may appear in person, or by agent or
attorney, and all of said parties so affected shall be given an opportunity
to be heard.
I. Decision of the Board. The Board shall decide the issue involved within
45 days after the hearing or, if said hearing is continued, within 45 days
after said continued hearing. If the Board does not make a decision
within 45 days after the hearing or continued hearing, it shall be
deemed that such Board has decided in favor of the Board of Township
Supervisors. Such amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall be
submitted to the Township Planning Commission for its
recommendations and shall be specially found by the Board of Township
Supervisors to be in accordance with the spirit and intent of the
formally adopted portions of the Comprehensive Plan before final action
shall be taken by the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 4-8-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
J. Effect of Board's decision.
§ 370-3707 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3707
1:992
§ 370-3708. Amendments. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
The Board of Township Supervisors may, from time to time, after public
notice and hearing as hereinafter prescribed, amend, supplement, change
or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map. Any amendment,
supplement, change or repeal may be initiated by the Township Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors or by a petition to the Township
Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the permanent records
of the Township.
(1) If the variance is granted or the issuance of a permit is approved, or
other action by the appellant is authorized, the necessary permit
shall be secured and the authorized action begun within six months
after the date when the variance is finally granted or the issuance
of the permit is finally approved, or the other action by the
appellant is authorized; the building or alteration, as the case may
be, shall be completed within 12 months of said date. For good
cause, the Board may, upon application in writing stating the
reasons therefor, extend it for an additional six months.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said six-month-period, or having obtained the
permit, should he fail to commence work thereunder within such
six-month-period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
appellant or applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his
appeal or his application, and all provisions, variances and permits
granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the
Board.
(3) Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or
alteration within said six-month-period, but should he fail to
complete such construction or alteration within said twelve-monthperiod,
the Board may rescind or revoke the granted variance, or
the issuance of the permit, or permits, or other action authorized to
the appellant or applicant. If the Board finds that a good cause
appears for the failure to complete within such twelve-monthperiod,
and if the Board further finds that conditions have so
altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the
variance, permit or action, that revocation or rescission of the
action is justified.
A. Amendments initiated by the Township Planning Commission. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Township
Planning Commission, the proposal shall be presented to the Board of
Township Supervisors, which shall then proceed in the same manner as
with a petition to the Board of Township Supervisors which has already
been reviewed by the Township Planning Commission.
B. Amendment initiated by the Board of Township Supervisors. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Board of
§ 370-3707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3708
1:993
Township Supervisors, it shall submit the proposal to the Township
Planning Commission for review and recommendations.
C. Amendments by citizens' petition. Whenever the owners of 75% or more
of the adjacent properties, including those with opposite street frontage
in any area where a change of zoning regulations is sought, shall
present to the Board of Supervisors a petition duly signed and
acknowledged, requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal of regulations prescribed for or the Zoning Map
including such area, it shall be the duty of the Board of Supervisors to
hold a public hearing thereon and cause written notice to be given to
each property owner having frontage on the subject area not less than
14 days in advance of said public meeting and notices to be given in a
manner prescribed in Subsection G of this section. For purposes of this
section, the area wherein a change in zoning is sought shall be not less
than five acres or 1,000 feet of lineal frontage, whichever is less.
D. Procedure for petition. The petition for amendment, supplement,
change or repeal shall contain as fully as possible all the information
requested by the Zoning Officer and shall be signed by at least one
record owner of the property in question, whose signature shall be
notarized attesting to the truth and correctness of all the facts and
information presented in the petition. A fee established by the Board of
Township Supervisors shall be paid upon the filing of such petition for
change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings
prescribed herein.
E. Referral to Township Planning Commission. After receipt of the petition
by the Board of Township Supervisors, said petition shall be presented
to the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendations
at least 30 days prior to the public hearing. A report of said review,
together with any recommendations, shall be given to the Board of
Township Supervisors in writing within 30 days from the date of
referral. If the Township Planning Commission shall fail to file such a
report within the time and manner specified, it shall be conclusively
presumed that the Township Planning Commission has approved the
proposed amendment, supplement, change or repeal.
F. Referral to professional consultants. In addition to review by the
Township Planning Commission, the Township Board of Supervisors
may submit proposed amendments to professional consultants for
review and recommendations. A report of said review and
recommendations must be given to the Board of Supervisors within 45
days from date of referral. If such a report is not filed within the time
and manner specified, it shall be concluded that the professional
consultants are in agreement with the proposed amendment,
supplement or change.
G. Public hearing. The Board of Supervisors shall fix a time and place for a
public hearing at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearings
§ 370-3708 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3708
1:994
shall be published in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Township once each week for two successive weeks, not more than 30
days and not less than seven days prior to the date of said hearings.
[Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
H. Action by the Board of Township Supervisors. At the time and place
specified, the Board of Township Supervisors shall conduct a hearing on
said petition to amend, supplement, change or repeal this chapter or
the Zoning Map of the Township and shall thereafter within a period of
30 days either reject the proposed change or adopt an ordinance
implementing the proposed change. The Board of Township Supervisors
may adjourn said hearing at its discretion to a time and place certain.
I. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a
change in the boundary of a zoning district or reclassification of the
zoning district adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the
Official Map shall be made, and shall be duly certified by the person or
Township Official aggrieved or affected who is seeking relief. All actions
of the Board shall be by resolution and a copy shall be furnished to the
parties in interest and the Zoning Officer and said resolution shall be
retained by the Zoning Officer as a public record.
§ 370-3708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3708
1:995

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Transportation Impact Study
[Added 9-20-1988 by Ord. No. 88-17]
§ 370-3801. Purpose.
A transportation impact study shall be required for all major subdivisions
and land developments or zoning changes, special exceptions or conditional
uses as defined in § 370-3803. This study will enable Warrington Township
to assess the impact of a proposed development, zoning change, special
exception or conditional use on the transportation system, both highways
and public transportation in Warrington Township. Its purpose is to insure
that proposed developments or zoning changes do not adversely affect the
transportation network and to identify any traffic problems that are created
in the existing highway network as a result of the development, zoning
changes, special exception or conditional use. The study's purpose is also
to delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements
to be incorporated into the proposed development or to the highway and/
or public transportation system within the study area as designated in
§ 370-3804. The study shall assist in the protection of air quality, the
conservation of energy and the encouragement of public transportation use.
§ 370-3802. Conduct of the traffic impact study.
The traffic impact study shall be prepared by an experienced traffic
engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study
experience. The procedures and standards for the traffic impact study are
set forth in § 370-3805 of this article.
§ 370-3803. Applicability.
A. A transportation impact study shall be submitted for all change of
zoning requests, special exceptions and conditional uses and as part of
the preliminary plan application for all subdivisions and/or land
developments for all commercial or industrial applications and for
residential applications of 10 or more dwelling units.
B. The application for change of zoning requests and preliminary
subdivision and/or land development plans which meet the aforesaid
criteria shall not be considered complete until the transportation
impact study is submitted to the Township Manager in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
C. The Warrington Planning Commission, at its discretion, may require
any subdivision, land development, zoning change, special exception, or
conditional use application to be accompanied by a traffic impact study,
provided that the Warrington Township Manager notifies the applicant
immediately after the first meeting of the Planning Commission to
consider the proposal. Such notification shall specify the reason for the
requirement, citing the proposal's particular location or existing
§ 370-3801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3803
1:997
§ 370-3804. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPACITY ANALYSIS — Intersection approach capacity is the maximum
rate of vehicular flow that can pass through an intersection under roadway,
traffic and signalization conditions. The analysis compares actual or
projected traffic volume to the intersection capacity and in a volume/
capacity (v/c) ratio.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) — As described in the 1985 Highway Capacity
Manual Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, is a qualitative
measure of the operational conditions within the traffic stream and their
perceptions by motorists. Levels of service are defined in terms of delay for
signalized intersections and reserve capacity for unsignalized intersections.
Six levels of service (A through F) are defined for each type of facility with
LOS "A" representing least congested operating conditions and LOS "F"
representing a breakdown in the operating conditions.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection, either signalized or
unsignalized, where traffic generated by the proposal will have a significant
impact on the operation of the intersection. The transportation engineer
shall seek guidance from the Warrington Township Engineer prior to the
initiation of the traffic impact study to ensure agreement on the location of
major intersections.[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07]
OFF-SITE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS — Other transportation
related improvements which are generally not contiguous with the property
being developed and not required as an on-site improvement but found to
be necessary as a result of the proposed development.
ON-SITE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT — All improvements on or
adjacent to the development site in the public right-of-way required to
be constructed by the developer pursuant to any ordinance, resolution
or requirement of Warrington Township and/or directly related to the
transportation needs of the subdivision and/or land development.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Transportation services for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers, generally but not
necessarily on a regular-route basis, by the Southeastern Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority or a private operator offering service to the public.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend along the adjacent roadways in both
directions from all access points to at least the first major intersection along
these roadways but no further than two miles. The transportation engineer
shall seek guidance from the Warrington Township Engineer prior to the
initiation of the traffic impact study to ensure agreement on the study area
boundaries.[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07]
problems or type of use (e.g., generation of heavy truck traffic).
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-05]
§ 370-3803 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3804
1:998
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of trips to and from a study
site per unit of land use, as measured by parameters like dwelling units,
acres, etc. The Trip Generation Report, Third Edition, or as amended by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers, shall be referenced to determine
specific rates.
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — A series of tests
which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes or other criteria
necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These warrants are
contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, 1978, as amended.
§ 370-3805. General requirements and standards.
A transportation impact study shall contain the following information:
A. General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion date
of the proposed land development. If the development is residential,
types of dwelling units shall also be included. The general site
description shall also include probable socioeconomic characteristics of
potential site users to the extent that they may affect the transportation
needs of the site (i.e., number of senior citizens). A brief description of
other major existing and proposed land development within the study
area shall be provided.
B. Transportation facilities description.
(1) The description shall contain a full documentation of the proposed
internal and existing external transportation system. This
description shall include proposed internal vehicular, bicycle and
pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations,
all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions,
traffic channelizations and any traffic signals or other intersection
control devices at all intersections within the site. The site design
shall be shown to maximize potential public transportation usage to
and from the development, by providing adequate turning radii at
all access points to allow a bus to enter the development and
designating bus shelter and sign locations where appropriate.
(2) The report shall describe the entire external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study area shall be
identified and illustrated. All existing and proposed public
transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the
site shall also be documented. Regional rail stations within three
miles shall be noted. All future highway improvements, including
proposed construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This
information shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation's Twelve-Year Highway and Bridge Program and
Warrington Township's Public Works Department. Any proposed
§ 370-3804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3805
1:999
roadway improvements due to proposed surrounding developments
shall be recorded.
C. Existing traffic conditions.
(1) Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented for
all roadways and intersections in the study area and shall include
current average daily traffic volumes, peak highway hour(s) traffic,
and peak development generated hour(s) traffic. Manual traffic
counts at major intersections in the study area shall be conducted,
encompassing the peak highway and development generated
hour(s), and documentation shall be included in a technical
appendix to the report. Volume/capacity (v/c) and delay analysis
based upon existing volumes shall be performed during the peak
highway hour(s) and the peak development generated hour(s) for
all roadways and major intersections in the study area. Volume/
capacity ratios and delay levels of service shall be determined for
each location according to the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual.
(2) This analysis will determine the adequacy of the existing roadway
system to serve the current traffic demand. Roadways and/or
intersections experiencing levels of service D, E or F or v/c ratios
greater than or equal to 1.0 shall be noted as congested locations.
(a) Existing traffic conditions (when a municipality-wide
transportation study has been conducted). The Warrington
Township Area Transportation Study, as adopted, shall be
considered the baseline for determining existing conditions.
Updated average daily traffic volumes and manual turning
movement counts shall be provided for the peak highway
hour(s) traffic and peak development generated hour(s) traffic.
All data shall be included in the technical appendix to the
report. Volume/capacity (v/c) and delay analyses, based on the
updated traffic volumes, shall be performed for the peak
highway hour(s) and the peak development generated hour(s)
for all roadways and intersections in the study area. V/c ratios
and delay levels of service (LOS) shall be determined for each
location.
(3) All changes from the baseline conditions shall be noted.
D. Transportation impact study.
(1) Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall be
completed for the average daily peak highway hour(s) and peak
development generated hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to
be used for this calculation shall be obtained from the Institute of
Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Report, Third Edition,
or as amended. For land uses not listed in the Institute's report, the
transportation engineer shall seek guidance from the Township
Engineer. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07]
§ 370-3805 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3805
1:1000
(2) All turning movements shall be calculated. These generated
volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the
existing roadways and intersections throughout the study area.
Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution and
assignment phases shall be provided. Traffic volumes shall be
assigned to individual access points. Pedestrian volumes shall also
be calculated, if applicable. If school crossings are to be used,
pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any
characteristics of the site that will cause particular trip generation
or distribution problems shall be noted.
E. Analysis of transportation impact.
(1) The total future traffic shall be calculated and shall consist of the
existing traffic volume expanded to the project completion year
using an annual background growth factor plus the development
generated traffic and the traffic generated by other proposed
developments in the study area. The annual background growth
factor shall be determined using projected rates of population and
employment growth as determined by the Bucks County Planning
Commission and the average annual traffic growth of the area's
roadways as determined from the Delaware Valley Regional
Planning Commission's "Highway Network Coverage Traffic
Counts" and current twenty-four-hour traffic counts.
(2) Volume/capacity and delay analyses shall be conducted using the
total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging of
the proposed development is anticipated, calculations for each
stage of completion shall be made.
(3) The analyses shall be performed for the peak highway hour(s) and
peak development generated hour(s) for all roadways and major
intersections and proposed access points of the development. It is
usually at these locations that capacity is most restricted.
(4) All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined as to
the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation shall
compare the project traffic and pedestrian volumes to the warrants
for traffic signal installation.
F. Conclusions and recommended improvements.
(1) Levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity (v/c) ratios shall be
listed for all roadways and intersections. All roadways and/or
intersections showing levels of service D, E or F or v/c ratios equal
to or greater than 1.0 shall be considered deficient. Also, the
proportion of site-generated traffic to total future traffic shall be
identified at each intersection approach that is considered
deficient. Specific recommendations for the elimination of all
deficiencies shall be listed and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following elements: internal circulation design, site access
location and design, external roadway intersection design and
§ 370-3805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3805
1:1001
§ 370-3806. Subdivision and land development ordinances.
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-O-05]
§ 370-3807. Zoning change requests. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-O-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-05]
improvements, traffic signal installation and operation including
signal timing and transit design improvements. All physical
roadway improvements shall be illustrated.
(2) Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also be
addressed. A listing of all actions to be taken to insure public
transportation usage for development generated trips and
improved service, if applicable, shall be included.
A. Time of submission.
(1) The transportation impact study shall be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission
with the preliminary plan application or sketch plan, whichever has
been submitted.
(2) Improvement plans shall not be submitted to PennDOT until the
plans have been reviewed by the Warrington Township Planning
Commission, the Township's transportation consultant or Township
Engineer, and the Bucks County Planning Commission and
approved by the Board of Supervisors. This submittal to PennDOT
shall be accompanied by the comments of Warrington Township.
B. Implementation. The Warrington Township Planning Commission, the
Bucks County Planning Commission, the Warrington Township
Engineer or transportation consultant and the Board of Supervisors
shall review the impact study to analyze its adequacy in providing
solutions to traffic problems that will occur, either totally or in part, as a
result of the subdivision and/or land development. Transportation
improvements required in order to eliminate deficient conditions on or
adjacent to the site that result from the development may be mandatory
for plan approval and may be attached to the conditions of approval by
the Board of Supervisors. The Township may also conclude that
additional off-site improvements are necessary. The developer shall
have the opportunity to resubmit alternative improvements designed
for approval.
A. Time of submission. The transportation impact study shall be submitted
to the Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning
Commission with the application for zoning change.
B. Implementation. The Warrington Township Planning Commission, the
Bucks County Planning Commission, the Warrington Township
Engineer or transportation consultant and the Board of Supervisors
§ 370-3805 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3807
1:1002
§ 370-3808. Conditional uses and special exceptions.
§ 370-3809. Study waiver.
The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirements of a traffic impact
study and require the applicant to contribute to the Township a sum equal
to the cost of a study as determined by the Township Engineer to be used
for general Township traffic needs.
shall review the impact study to analyze its adequacy in solving any
traffic problems that will occur due to the proposed use. The Board
of Supervisors shall consider the impact study and the analysis of the
impact study before the change of zoning is approved or denied.
A. Time of submission. The transportation impact study shall be submitted
to the Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township for conditional uses
and the Zoning Hearing Board for special exceptions with the
appropriate application.
B. Implementation. The Board of Supervisors of Warrington Township or
the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the impact study and the
analysis of the impact study before the application is approved or
denied. In acting on the application, the Board of Supervisors of
Warrington Township or the Zoning Hearing Board may, if adverse
impacts or major problems are identified:
(1) Reject the proposal.
(2) Require specific on- or off-site improvements as a conditional
approval.
(3) Require the reduction of the intensity of use as a conditional
approval.
(4) A combination of Subsection B(2) and (3) above.
§ 370-3807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3809
1:1003

ARTICLE XXXIX
Wireless Communications Facilities
[Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-02]
§ 370-3901. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Warrington Township Wireless
Communications Facilities Ordinance."
§ 370-3902. Purpose; findings of fact.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in Warrington Township. While the Township
recognizes the importance of wireless communications facilities in
providing high-quality communications service to its residents and
businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to
protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such
facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
B. By enacting this article, the Township intends to:
(1) Promote the health, safety and welfare of Township residents and
businesses with respect to wireless communications facilities.
(2) Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless
communication and accommodates the needs of both Township
residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations.
(3) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the public
rights-of-way.
(4) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable WiFi and
other wireless communications facilities.
(5) Encourage the co-location of wireless communications facilities on
existing structures rather than the construction of new towerbased
structures.
(6) Protect Township residents from potential adverse impacts of
wireless communications facilities and preserve, to the extent
permitted under law, the visual character of established
communities and the natural beauty of the landscape.
(7) Update the Township's wireless facilities regulations to incorporate
changes in federal and state laws and regulations.
§ 370-3901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3903
1:1005
§ 370-3903. General requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities:
A. Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safetyrelated
codes, including, but not limited to, the most-recent editions of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of the
National Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same
shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
B. Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind according to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E Code, as
amended). Such structures must be designed to withstand wind gusts of
at least 100 miles per hour.
C. Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. All tower-based WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the total height of the
structure. The maximum total height of any tower-based WCF shall not
exceed 150 feet, which height shall include all subsequent additions or
alterations.
D. Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere with
public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
E. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on
a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the
facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
§ 370-3903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3903
1:1006
F. Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in
excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but not
limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65,
entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
G. Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF may be located on
a building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the Township or
which has been designated by the Township as being of historic
significance.
H. Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in
the event of an emergency.
I. Lighting. Tower-based WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, except as
required by law. Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rustpreventive
paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a
detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and
inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal
regulations.
J. Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as not to
produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law
and the Township Code, except in emergency situations requiring the
use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be
exceeded on a temporary basis only.
K. Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
L. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating
the application for approval of the tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the
terms and conditions of this article. The applicant and/or owner of the
WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in
connection with these activities.
M. Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that
may be required to complete such application. All applications for
tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of
a fully completed application for the approval of such tower-based WCF,
and the Township shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to complete an
§ 370-3903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3903
1:1007
application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day
review period.
N. Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be
repaired and restored at their former location but must otherwise
comply with the terms and conditions of this article.
O. Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of
its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be
removed as follows:
(1) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
Township.
(2) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer
period approved by the Township, the WCF and accessory facilities
and equipment may be removed by the Township and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the WCF.
(3) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within six months of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
P. Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a tower-based WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
Q. FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the name,
address, and emergency telephone number for the operator of the
facility.
R. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence
and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000
per occurrence covering the tower-based WCF.
S. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents,
at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including
death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by
§ 370-3903 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3903
1:1008
§ 370-3904. Tower-based facilities outside rights-of-way.
The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way:
or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in
which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited
to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all
other costs of indemnification.
T. Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower and antenna
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
U. Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCF are
permitted via conditional use at a height necessary to satisfy their
function in the WCF applicant's wireless communications system. As
part of the conditional use process, the applicant shall demonstrate the
proposed facility satisfies all applicable requirements, and complies
with all pertinent regulations, in the Township Zoning Code. [Added
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
V. Replacement of WCF on existing wireless support structures or within
existing compounds may be performed without obtaining building or
zoning permits from the Township pursuant to the Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act.191 However, any applicant proposing the replacement,
collocation or modification of a WCF shall submit an application to the
Township which will be reviewed to determine conformance with
Township ordinances and the Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.
[Added 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
A. Development regulations.
(1) Prohibited in residential zones. No tower-based WCF shall be
located in a district zoned residential or within 500 feet of a lot in
residential use or a residential district boundary.
(2) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and that the
type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which
191. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-3903 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3904
1:1009
to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence
of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's
decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCFs.
(3) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted as a sole use on a
lot, subject to the minimum lot area and yards complying with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district.
(a) Setback. The tower-based WCF shall be set back from any
residential property line by at least 500 feet and from any other
property line by at least 50 feet.
(4) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be permitted
on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in
combination with another industrial, commercial, institutional or
municipal use, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in
the applicable district and need not be affiliated with the
communications facility.
(b) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the area
needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and guy wires,
the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting.
(c) Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF and accompanying
equipment building shall comply with the requirements for the
applicable zoning district, provided that no tower-based WCF
shall be located within 500 feet of a lot in residential use or a
residential district boundary or within 50 feet from any other
property line.
B. Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a tower-based WCF, the
Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property zoned residential on the same street within 1,000 linear feet of
the site of the proposed facility and of every property zoned residential
not on the same street within 500 feet of the proposed facility.
C. Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF shall not be
approved unless the Township finds that the wireless communications
equipment planned for the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a
comprehensive inventory of all existing towers and other suitable
structures within a two-mile radius from the point of the proposed
tower, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Township
that a different distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot
be utilized.
D. Design regulations.
§ 370-3904 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3904
1:1010
(1) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to
the approval of the Township.
(2) Any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Township. The Township reserves the right to
deny such requests based upon aesthetic and land use impact, or
any other lawful considerations related to the character of the
Township.
(3) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future users.
E. Surrounding environs.
(1) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees
and shrubs located within proximity of the WCF structure shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(2) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA 222-E, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
F. Fence/screen.
(1) A security fence having a maximum height of eight feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF, guy wires, or any
building housing WCF equipment.
(2) An evergreen screen that consists of a hedge planted three feet on
center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on
center maximum, shall be located along the perimeter of the
security fence. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
G. Accessory equipment.
(1) Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected with, a
tower-based WCF shall be underground or screened from public
view using stealth technologies, as described above.
(2) All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which
they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
H. Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
§ 370-3904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3904
1:1011
§ 370-3905. Tower-based facilities in the rights-of-way.
The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and economically
feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any
additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of the
Township.
I. Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be
provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to a towerbased
WCF. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private,
shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all
times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF
owner shall present documentation to the Township that the property
owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility. The easement
shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to a width
of at least 10 feet with a dust-free, all-weather surface.
J. Parking. For each tower-based WCF, there shall be at least one offstreet
parking space.
K. Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a tower-based
WCF outside the ROW shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a
surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond or
other form of security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an
amount of $100,000, to assure the faithful performance of the terms
and conditions of this article. The bond shall provide that the Township
may recover from the principal and surety any and all compensatory
damages incurred by the Township for violations of this article, after
reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall file the bond
with the Township.
L. Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of any tower-based WCF
based upon visual and/or land use impact.
M. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any tower-based
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and any
other provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law.
The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
A. Location and development standards. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-04]
§ 370-3904 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3905
1:1012
(1) Tower-based WCF in the ROW shall not exceed 35 feet in height
and are prohibited in, and within 75 feet of, areas in which all
utilities are located underground.
(2) Tower-based WCF in the ROW shall not be located in the front
facade area of any structure.
(3) Tower-based WCF shall be permitted along certain collector roads
and arterial roads throughout the Township with conditional use
authorization from the Township Board, regardless of the
underlying zoning district, provided that they are not situated
within 50 feet of an area in which utilities are underground. A map
of such permitted roads is kept on file at the Township Zoning
Office and is adopted annually via resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and that the type
of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that
gap in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCFs in the ROW.
C. Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a tower-based WCF, the
Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property zoned residential on the same street within 1,000 linear feet of
the site of the proposed facility and of every property zoned residential
not on the same street within 500 feet of the proposed facility.
D. Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF in the ROW
shall not be approved unless the Township finds that the proposed
wireless communications equipment cannot be accommodated on an
existing structure, such as a utility pole or traffic light pole. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a
comprehensive inventory of all existing towers and other suitable
structures within a one-mile radius from the point of the proposed
tower, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Township
that a different distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot
be utilized.
E. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place
and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations.
For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements
of the Public Utility Code.192
192. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 370-3905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3905
1:1013
F. Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists, or to otherwise inconvenience public use
of the ROW as determined by the Township. In addition:
(1) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping
be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(2) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded shall
be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Township.
(4) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10 business days
of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(5) Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
G. Design regulations.
(1) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to
the approval of the Township.
(2) Any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Township and shall not increase the overall
height of the tower-based WCF to more than 75 feet. The Township
reserves the right to deny such requests based upon aesthetic and
land use impact, or any other lawful considerations related to the
character of the Township.
(3) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future users.
H. Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny the
construction or placement of any tower-based WCF in the ROW based
upon visual and/or land use impact.
I. Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs in the ROW, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a
written commitment that it will allow other service providers to colocate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install
§ 370-3905 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3905
1:1014
any additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of
the Township.
J. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of a tower-based WCF in the ROW shall, at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any WCF when the Township, consistent with its
police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way.
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way.
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
K. Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described in
§ 370-3903P above, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is subject to
the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for
ROW use shall be directly related to the Township's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by the
Township. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee
to the Township to compensate the Township for the Township's costs
incurred in connection with the activities described above. The annual
ROW management fee for tower-based WCFs shall be determined by
the Township and authorized by resolution of the Township Board and
shall be based on the Township's actual ROW management costs as
applied to such tower-based WCF.
L. Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a surety
licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond, or other
form of security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an amount of
$100,000 to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions
of this article. The bond shall provide that the Township may recover
from the principal and surety any and all compensatory damages
incurred by the Township for violations of this article, after reasonable
notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall file a copy of the bond
with the Township.
§ 370-3905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3906
1:1015
§ 370-3906. General requirements for all non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that do not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
(1) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are
permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions and conditions
prescribed below and subject to the prior written approval of the
Township.
(2) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(3) Wind. Any non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E
Code, as amended).
(4) Public safety communications. No non-tower WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(5) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(6) Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including,
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65, entitled, "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines
for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,"
as amended.
(7) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
§ 370-3906 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3906
1:1016
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within three months of the cessation of operations at
the site unless a time extension is approved by the Township.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within three
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(8) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any information
that may be required to complete such application. Within 60
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Township
shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to complete
an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninety-day
review period. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(9) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(10) Conditional use authorization required. Conditional use
authorization is required for non-tower facilities that are not
subject to the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.193
Non-tower WCF shall be located on utility poles and traffic signal
structures when technologically feasible. If such placement is not
possible, non-tower WCF are permitted by conditional use in all
zones subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed in this
section and subject to applicable permitting by the Township.
[Added 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
(11) Notification of replacement. Warrington Township acknowledges
that the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
requires issuance of a permit for all WCF attached to a traffic signal
structure. Therefore, all applications submitted that propose the
attachment of WCF to a traffic signal structure shall be
accompanied by proof of approval by PennDOT. [Added 2-23-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
(12) Replacement of WCF on existing wireless support structures or
within existing compounds may be performed without obtaining
193. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-3906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3906
1:1017
building or zoning permits from the Township pursuant to the
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.194 However, any applicant
proposing the replacement, co-location or modification of a WCF
shall submit an application to the Township which will be reviewed
to determine conformance with Township ordinances and the
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. [Added 2-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-O-04]
B. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that substantially change the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
(1) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are
permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions and conditions
prescribed below and subject to the prior written approval of the
Township. Non-tower WCFs shall not be located on any dwelling
unit.
(2) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(3) Compliance with Township Building Code.195 Any applicant
proposing non-tower WCFs to be mounted on a building or other
structure shall submit evidence from a professional engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building
or other structure. The applicant must further provide detailed
construction and elevation drawings indicating how the non-tower
WCFs will be mounted on the structure for review by the Township
Engineer for compliance with the Warrington Township Building
Code and other applicable laws and regulations.
(4) Wind. Any non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222-E
Code, as amended). Such structures shall be able to withstand wind
gusts of up to 100 miles per hour.
194. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes.
§ 370-3906 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3906
1:1018
(5) Public safety communications. No non-tower WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(6) Historic buildings. No tower-based WCF may be located on a
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the Township
or has been designated by the Township as being of historic
significance.
(7) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(8) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(9) Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including,
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65, entitled, "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines
for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,"
as amended.
(10) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within three months of the cessation of operations at
the site unless a time extension is approved by the Township.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within three
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
§ 370-3906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3906
1:1019
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(11) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower wireless facility is filed with the
Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
Township shall make its final decision on whether to approve the
application and shall advise the applicant in writing of such
decision. The Township shall notify the applicant as to
completeness of the WCF application within 30 days of receipt.
This timing requirement applies only to applications for facilities
that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation
Act.196 [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-O-04]
(12) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of this article. The applicant and/or owner
of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(13) Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a non-tower
WCF shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a surety
licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond, or
other form of security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an
amount of $25,000 to assure the faithful performance of the terms
and conditions of this article. The bond shall provide that the
Township may recover from the principal and surety any and all
compensatory damages incurred by the Township for violations of
this article, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The
owner shall file a copy of the bond with the Township.
(14) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
(15) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF
shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the nontower
WCF.
196. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 370-3906 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3906
1:1020
§ 370-3907. Non-tower wireless facilities outside rights-of-way.
The following additional regulations shall apply to non-tower wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way that
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
(16) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the non-tower
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(17) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a non-tower WCF
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structure
engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located on
existing structures, such as existing buildings or tower-based WCFs,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) Non-tower WCFs shall not be located on any dwelling unit.
(2) Such WCF does not exceed a maximum height of 150 feet.
(3) If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the communications
equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply with
the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district.
(4) An eight-foot-high security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
B. Design regulations.
(1) Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be treated to
match the supporting structure in order to minimize aesthetic
§ 370-3906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3907
1:1021
§ 370-3908. Non-tower wireless facilities in rights-of-way.
The following additional regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(2) Non-tower WCFs which are mounted to a building or similar
structure may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or
parapet, whichever is higher, unless the WCF applicant obtains a
variance.
(3) All non-tower WCF applicants must submit documentation to the
Township justifying the total height of the non-tower structure.
Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
(4) Antennas, and their respective accompanying support structures,
shall be no greater in diameter than any cross-sectional dimension
that is reasonably necessary for their proper functioning.
(5) Noncommercial usage exemption. Township citizens utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone and/or Internet connections at their respective
residences shall be exempt from the design regulations
enumerated in § 370-3907B of this article.
C. Removal; replacement; modification.
(1) The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or accessory
equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the WCF is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not increase the
overall size of the WCF or the number of antennas.
(2) Any material modification to a wireless telecommunication facility
shall require a prior amendment to the original permit or
authorization.
D. Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of any non-tower WCF
based upon visual and/or land use impact.
E. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law. The
Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
A. Co-location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles.
§ 370-3907 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3908
1:1022
B. Design requirements.
(1) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint
utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no
more than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
(2) Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying equipment shall be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the
support structure upon which they are mounted.
C. Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
above, every non-tower WCF in the ROW is subject to the Township's
right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for
use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall
be directly related to the Township's actual ROW management costs,
including, but not limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and
other ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of each
non-tower WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for its costs incurred in connection with the activities
described above. The annual ROW management fee for non-tower
WCFs shall be determined by the Township and authorized by
resolution of the Township Board and shall be based on the Township's
actual ROW management costs as applied to such non-tower WCF.
D. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place
and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations.
For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements
of the Public Utility Code.197
E. Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and accessory equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use
of the ROW as determined by the Township. In addition:
(1) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping
be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(2) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded shall
be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
197. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 370-3908 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3908
1:1023
§ 370-3909. Determination of violations applicable to all wireless
facilities.
In the event a determination is made that a person has violated any
provision of this article, such person shall be provided written notice of the
determination and the reasons therefor. Except in the case of an emergency,
the person shall have 30 days to cure the violation. If the nature of the
violation is such that it cannot be fully cured within such time period, the
Township may, in its reasonable judgment, extend the time period to cure,
provided the person has commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its
efforts to cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed,
the Township may take any and all actions authorized by this article and/or
federal and/or Pennsylvania law and regulations.198
landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Township.
(4) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10 business days
of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(5) Any underground vaults related to non-tower WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
F. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way.
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way.
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
G. Visual or land use impact. The Township retains the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of a non-tower WCF
based upon visual and/or land use impact.
§ 370-3908 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-3910
1:1024
§ 370-3910. Police powers.
The Township, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant
to this article, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police
powers vested in the Township under applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations.
198. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1 of this section, Penalties, which immediately
preceded this paragraph, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 370-3910 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-3910
1:1025

ARTICLE XL
Alternative and Emerging Energy Facilities
[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-O-16]
§ 370-4001. Purpose and objectives.
§ 370-4002. Applicability and permitted uses.
§ 370-4003. Land use and dimensional requirements.
A. Warrington Township seeks to provide opportunities for alternative and
emerging energy facilities while regulating the use of potentially
intrusive facilities, equipment and machinery.
B. The purpose of this Article XLof this chapter is to establish provisions
for the design, permitting, construction, operation and
decommissioning of alternative and emerging energy facilities within
Warrington Township that will protect the public health, safety and/or
general welfare of the community.
A. This § 370-4002 shall apply to all alternative and emerging energy
facilities that are proposed to be constructed after the effective date of
this article.
B. Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities constructed prior to the
effective date of this article of this chapter shall not be required to meet
the requirements specified under this article. Any physical modification
to an existing alternative or emerging energy facility that alters the
size, type and generating capacities of the facilities shall require a
permit and shall comply with the applicable provisions specified under
this article of this chapter.
C. Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities may be considered as an
accessory use within all zoning districts, provided that the principal use
is a permitted use or conforming use within the zoning district on which
the alternative and/or emerging energy facility is located.
D. Alternative and/or emerging energy facilities may be utilized as the
primary energy source by the principal use of the lot on which they are
located. Surplus energy may be exchanged, transferred and/or sold to a
public or private utility company, provided that such surplus energy is
exchanged, transferred and/or sold in accordance with the provisions
established by the Public Utility Commission and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Private energy and utility providers, as defined under § 370-202 of this
chapter, shall comply with all provisions established by the Public
Utility Commission and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The following provisions shall specifically apply to wind turbines or
wind energy facilities:
§ 370-4001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4003
1:1027
(1) Windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be
permitted by special exception, provided that such facilities are
located in an RA District only, with a minimum lot size of three
acres, in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter. Any such facility may not be located on any parcel utilizing
TDRs.
(2) Windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities that are designed
and permitted as an attached or freestanding alternative energy
facility shall comply with the height requirements specified by this
chapter.
(3) All windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be
located, designed and installed as per the manufacturer's
specifications as well as all zoning, building code and utility
requirements.
(4) All windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be set
back from all occupied buildings located on a nonparticipating
landowner's property a distance of not less than five times the
turbine height, as measured from the center line of the wind
turbine base to the nearest point of the occupied building(s). All
such wind energy facilities shall comply with the building and lot
coverage requirements of the zoning district on which they are
located.
(5) All windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be set
back from the nearest property line or public road a distance of not
less than the normal setback requirements for that zoning
classification or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is greater.
The required setback distance shall be measured from the center
line of the wind turbine base to the property line.
(6) All windmills, wind turbines or wind energy facilities shall be
located behind the front facade of the building occupying the
permitted use. No wind turbine shall be permitted in the front yard
of the lot on which it is located. Spacing between adjacent turbines,
and to any occupied building on the participating landowner
property, shall be not less than 1.1 times the turbine height.
(7) The minimum height of a windmill or turbine shall be 15 feet, as
measured from the ground surface to the turbine rotor plane at its
lowest turning movement.
(8) The maximum height of a windmill or turbine shall be 55 feet, as
measured from the ground surface to the turbine rotor plane at its
highest turning movement.
(9) A nonparticipating landowner shall not intentionally block,
interfere with or disrupt the functional operation from an existing
wind resource to an alternative energy facility. If such action or
event should occur, the matter shall be resolved as a civil dispute
§ 370-4003 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-4003
1:1028
between the landowners and Warrington Township shall not be
held responsible.
(10) All windmills, wind turbines, or wind energy facilities shall be
completely enclosed by a fence, suitably labeled to indicate
"DANGER" or "HIGH VOLTAGE," as appropriate.
B. The following provisions shall specifically apply to solar energy
systems:
(1) Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be permitted by right for
single-family detached dwellings in all applicable zoning districts.
All other solar energy systems shall be permitted by special
exception, provided that such facilities are located on a lot with a
permitted use in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Solar energy systems may be designed and permitted as an
attached alternative energy facility, provided that no structural
components of the solar energy system exceed the permitted
building height requirements of the zoning district on which they
are located. The building height shall be measured from the
average ground elevation of the building to the highest point of the
solar panel(s) or other structural components of the solar energy
facilities. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Solar energy systems designed and permitted as a freestanding
alternative energy facility shall be located at least 15 feet from a
property line or public road and shall not exceed 15 feet in height,
as measured from the ground surface to the highest extended point
of the structure. All such solar energy systems shall comply with
the building and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district on
which they are located.
(4) Solar energy systems shall be located, designed and installed as
per the manufacturer's specifications as well as all zoning, building
code and utility requirements.
(5) Freestanding solar energy systems shall be located behind the
front facade of the building occupying the permitted use. No solar
energy system shall be permitted in the front yard of the lot on
which it is located.
(6) A nonparticipating landowner shall not intentionally block,
interfere with or disrupt the functional operation of an existing
solar energy system. If such action or event should occur, the
matter shall be resolved as a civil dispute between the landowners,
and Warrington Township shall not be held responsible.
§ 370-4003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4003
1:1029
(7) Solar energy panels shall be designed and located in order to
minimize glare towards any occupied residential use and prevent
glare toward any public road.
(8) All freestanding solar energy systems shall be completely enclosed
by a fence, suitably labeled to indicate high voltage.
C. The following provisions shall specifically apply to geothermal energy
systems:
(1) Geothermal energy systems shall be permitted by special
exception, provided that such facilities are limited to heating and
cooling of buildings and located on a lot with a permitted use in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2) Geothermal energy systems shall be located, designed and
installed as per the manufacturer's specifications as well as all
zoning, building code and utility requirements.
(3) Geothermal energy systems may be located on a lot with a
permitted use, provided that all structural components comply with
the building setback requirements and lot coverage requirements
of the zoning district on which they are located.
(4) A nonparticipating landowner shall not intentionally block,
interfere with or disrupt the functional operation of a geothermal
system. If such action or event should occur, the matter shall be
resolved as a civil dispute between the landowners, and Warrington
Township shall not be held responsible.
(5) Any application for a geothermal energy system must meet the
requirements for water wells as required by this chapter, the Bucks
County Health Department and Chapter 353, Water, of the Code of
the Township of Warrington, as well applicable regulations of the
DRBC Groundwater Protection Area, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and USDEP NPDES requirements.
D. The following provisions shall specifically apply to emerging energy
facilities:
(1) Emerging energy systems shall be permitted by special exception,
provided that such facilities are located on a lot with a permitted
use in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2) Emerging energy systems may be located on or attached to an
occupied building, provided that the structural components of the
emerging energy facilities do not exceed the permitted building
height requirements of the zoning district on which they are
located.
(3) Emerging energy systems may be located on a lot with a permitted
use, provided that all structural components comply with the
§ 370-4003 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-4003
1:1030
§ 370-4004. Basis of permitting.
building setback requirements and lot coverage requirements of
the zoning district on which they are located.
(4) Emerging energy systems may be located on a lot, provided that it
is located, designed and installed considering the health, safety and
general welfare of the adjacent property owners. As part of the
special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may
attach reasonable conditions and safeguards.
(5) Wood-fired boilers, as defined under § 370-202 of this chapter, shall
be prohibited as an alternative or emerging energy facility serving
any permitted use.
(6) Anaerobic digesters, as defined under § 370-202 of this chapter,
shall be prohibited as an alternative or emerging energy facility
serving any permitted use.
A. The following energy resource protection provisions shall apply to
alternative or renewable energy resource protection:
(1) The landowner shall provide documentation of the land and
airspace on his property which must remain open to assure
adequate solar access and/or wind to the renewable energy system,
as well as demonstrate no impact to wetlands. Warrington
Township may request a study of wind turbine effects on migratory
birds or bats should sufficient reason exist to suspect such impacts.
All such documentation shall be considered as part of the permit
application or special exception application.
(2) As part of the permit application, the landowner shall notify the
Zoning Officer that the alternative or renewable resource system
has been installed. The landowner shall also provide the Zoning
Officer with any other permits that have been obtained from
agencies with jurisdiction in order to locate the alternative or
renewable energy resource system on his property.
(3) Alternative energy facilities shall comply with the design standards
set forth in Chapter 305, Subdivision and Land Development, which
are incorporated by reference. When, in the sole discretion of the
Zoning Officer, the proposed energy facility does not comprise a
land development, land development approval will not be required.
In such cases, the applicant must obtain zoning approval and all
applicable building permits as well as all other permits that may be
required by federal, state, and county agencies.
B. The following setback modifications may be considered for alternative
and/or emerging energy facilities as part of a zoning variance
application:
§ 370-4003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4004
1:1031
§ 370-4005. Permits and special exception applications.
(1) A landowner may obtain a modification of the setback requirements
specified under other parts of this chapter (occupied buildings on
nonparticipating landowner's property) by having a modification
agreement executed between the adjoining landowners which sets
forth the applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed
changes.
(2) The written modification agreement shall notify the property
owner(s) of the setback required by this section of this chapter,
describe how the proposed alternative and emerging energy
facility is not in compliance, and testify that consent is granted for
the alternative or emerging energy facility not to be set back as
required by this section of this chapter.
(3) Any such modification agreement shall be recorded in the Bucks
County Recorder of Deeds' office. The modification agreement shall
describe the properties benefited and burdened and inform all
subsequent purchasers that the modified setback shall run with the
land and may forever burden the subject property. The Zoning
Officer may not issue any permits containing setback modifications
without first receiving and placing into the Township records a fully
executed, recorded copy of the modification agreement and proof
of recording.
(4) Any modification pertaining to the dimensional setback
requirements from public roads or street rights-of-way shall not be
considered as part of any application.
(5) Any modification pertaining to the dimensional setback
requirements from an adjacent property owner shall not be
considered as part of any application.
C. The following provisions shall apply to noise, shadow flickering and/or
interference involving alternative and/or emerging energy facilities:
(1) Audible sound from any alternative and/or emerging energy facility
shall not exceed 55 dBA, as measured at the applicant's property
line. Warrington Township has the right to inspect, measure and
record sound levels at the applicant's expense.
(2) The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow
flicker at the property line.
(3) The applicant shall not disrupt radio, telephone, television or
similar communication signals and shall mitigate any harm caused
by the alternative and/or emerging energy system.
A. No alternative or emerging energy facility shall be located, modified or
constructed within Warrington Township unless a permit has been
§ 370-4004 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-4005
1:1032
issued to the landowner in accordance with the provisions of this
section of this chapter.
B. The permit application and special exception application shall be
accompanied with a fee in the amount specified by Warrington
Township.
C. The permit application and special exception application shall
demonstrate that the alternative or emerging energy facility will
comply with the provisions contained under this section of this chapter.
The following specific items shall be provided by the applicant:
(1) A complete narrative describing the proposed alternative or
emerging energy facility, which shall include: a project overview;
the project location; the number of the alternative or emerging
energy facilities; the area and height of the alternative or emerging
energy facilities; the initial and potential generating capacities; the
facility dimensions; and the manufacturer's specifications.
(2) For commercial applications, an affidavit or similar evidence of
agreement between the landowner and the facility owner/operator
demonstrating that the facility owner/operator has the capabilities
and permission of the landowner to apply for necessary permits for
construction and operation of the alternative or emerging energy
facility.
(3) The properties within 500 feet of that on which the proposed
alternative or emerging energy facility will be located.
(4) A site plan showing the boundary lines of the property occupied by
the alternative or emerging energy facility and the properties
within 500 feet of that on which the proposed alternative or
emerging energy facility will be located. The site plan shall also
include: topographical and natural features; the planned location of
the alternative or emerging energy facilities; the building setback
lines; the access road and turnout locations; buildings and
structures; and all public utilities.
(5) The existing and projected annual energy needs of the permitted
use that will benefit from the alternative or emerging energy
facility, including the amount of surplus energy that will be
exchanged, transferred and/or sold to a public or private utility
company.
(6) Documents related to the potential abandonment and/or
decommissioning of the alternative or emerging energy facilities.
(7) Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as may
be reasonably requested by Warrington Township to ensure
compliance with this section of this chapter.
§ 370-4005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4005
1:1033
D. As part of the permit or special exception application, Warrington
Township may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards in order to
consider the health, safety and general welfare of the applicant and the
adjacent property owners. The permit must be prepared and signed and
sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
E. The following provisions shall apply to emergency service requirements
for an alternative or emerging energy facility:
(1) The applicant shall provide a copy of the permit application to the
local emergency response providers (police, fire and ambulance) of
Warrington Township.
(2) If required by the Zoning Officer, the applicant, in conjunction with
the emergency service providers, shall establish an emergency
response plan for the alternative or emerging energy facility.
F. Pursuant to the time limitations specified for a permit application,
Warrington. Township will determine whether the application is
administratively complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
G. Pursuant to the time limitations specified by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code199 and the Uniform Construction Code,200
as amended from time to time, Warrington Township shall consider the
permit or special exception application. The applicant may be afforded
an opportunity to present the project to the designated municipal
officials, as well as answer questions about the project.
H. Throughout the permit process, the applicant shall promptly notify
Warrington Township of any changes to the information contained in
the permit or special exception application.201
199. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Codes.
201. Editor's Note: Original Section 2706, Violations, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 370-4005 WARRINGTON CODE § 370-4005
1:1034
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1995 Code to 2019 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in
nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1995 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Township Officials
A. Township Manager Ch. 31
B. Board of Supervisors
§ 111, Compensation of Members of the
Board of Supervisors
Ch. 71, Art. I
C. Tax Collector
§ 121, Compensation of the Tax Collector Ch. 71, Art. II
Part 2, Planning Commission Ch. 9, Art. I
Part 3, Police Department
§ 301, Creation of Police Department Ch. 57
§ 302, Police Officers' Authority to Arrest
Without Warrant
Ch. 38, Art. I
Part 4, Department of Water and Sewer Ch. 78
Part 5, Volunteer Firemen's Relief
Association
Ch. 20
Part 6, Park and Recreation Board Ch. 9, Art. II
Part 7, Pension Plans Ch. 46 (reference to plans
on file)
A. Police Pension Plan NI
B. Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan NI
C. Nonuniformed Defined Contribution
Pension
NI
Part 8, Agencies, Boards and Committees
A. Impact Fee Advisory Committee NI
§ 370-4005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1035
Chapter/Title From 1995 Code Location in 2019 Code
B. Pension Advisory Board Ch. 9, Art. III
C. Emergency Management Agency NI
D. Industrial Advisory Board NI
E. Open Space and Land Preservation
Task Force
Ch. 9, Art. IX
F. Economic Development Advisory Board NI
G. Historic Commission Ch. 9, Art. IV
H. Environmental Advisory Council Ch. 9, Art. VIII
I. Permanent Finance Committee REP
J. Veterans Affairs Committee Ch. 9, Art. V
K. Communications Advisory Board (CAB) Ch. 9. Art. VI
L. Emergency Services Radio Committee
Task Force
NI
Part 9, Drug and Alcohol Policy Ch. 54, Art. I
Part 10, Public Records Ch. 63, Art. I
Part 11, Interim Procedures for Issuing
Tickets for Minor and Non-Traffic-Related
Offenses
Ch. 38, Art. II
Ch. 2, Animals
Part 1, Dogs Running at Large Ch. 97, Art. I
Part 2, Animal Noise Control Ch. 97, Art. II
Part 3, Animal Defecation Prohibited Ch. 97, Art. III
Part 4, Maximum Number of Animals Ch. 97, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Bicycles (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 4, Buildings
Part 1, Lessor Occupancy Status Report Ch. 248, Art. I
Part 2, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 119
Part 3, Occupancy Certificates Upon Sale or
Lease of Buildings
Ch. 140, Art. I
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Pennsylvania Construction Code Ch. 140, Art. II
Part 2, Water Conserving Fixtures REP
Part 3, Construction Code Amendments Ch. 140, Art. IV
Part 4, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 236
Part 5, Building Demolition Ch. 140, Art. III
§ DT-1 WARRINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1036
Chapter/Title From 1995 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1 (Reserved) Omitted
Part 2, Curfew Ch. 153
Part 3, Loitering REP
Part 4, Motorized Dirt Bikes and All-Terrain
Vehicles
Ch. 337
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Rapid Access Key Boxes Ch. 174, Art. I
Ch. 8, Floodplains Ch. 181
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating
Part 1, Control of Earthmoving and Related
Items
Ch. 165
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Cigarette Vending Machines Ch. 131
Part 2, Multifamily Grass or Weed Nuisances Ch. 113, Art. I
Part 3, Filling of Land, Dumping or Burying
Waste
Ch. 280, Art. I
Part 4, Nuisance Prohibited
A. General Ch. 214, Art. I
B. Motor Vehicle Nuisances Ch. 214, Art. II
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Sex Offender Residency Restrictions REP
Ch. 12, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Part 1, Peddlers and Solicitors Ch. 229
Part 2, Cable Communications Regulations Ch. 126
Part 3, Automatic Fire Protection Devices Ch. 90
Part 4, Contractor Licensing Ch. 146
Part 5, Regulations at Public Gatherings Ch. 104
Part 6 (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home
Parks (Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 330
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1037
Chapter/Title From 1995 Code Location in 2019 Code
Part 1, Open Space, Parks and Recreation Ch. 223, Art. I
Part 2, Park Names Ch. 223, Art. II
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Holding Tanks Ch. 257, Art. II
Part 2, Sewer Connections Ch. 257, Art. I
Part 3, Wastewater Control Ch. 257, Art. IV
Part 4, Grinder Pumps Ch. 257, Art. III
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards
Part 1, Placement of Overhead Signs and
Banners
NI
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Waste Collection and Transportation Ch. 280, Art. II
Part 2, Recycling Ch. 280, Art. III
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Snow and Ice Removal from
Sidewalks and Roofs
Ch. 294, Art. II
Part 2, Street Excavations Ch. 294, Art. I
Part 3, Construction, Reconstruction and
Repair of Sidewalks and Curbs
Ch. 294, Art. III
Part 4, Right-of-Way Management Ch. 294, Art. IV
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 305
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools
Part 1, Swimming Pool Regulations Ch. 310
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Earned Income Tax NLP; see Ch. 318, Art. I
Part 2, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 318, Art. III
Part 3 (Reserved) Omitted
Part 4, Local Service Tax Ch. 318, Art. IV
Part 5, Video Programming Municipal Tax Ch. 318, Art. II
Part 6, Mercantile and Business Privilege
Tax
REP
Part 7, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 25, Trees (Reserved) Omitted
§ DT-1 WARRINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1038
Chapter/Title From 1995 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Stormwater Management Ch. 288
Part 2, Drought Contingency Plan Ch. 353, Art. I
Part 3, Well Rules and Regulations Ch. 353, Art. II
Part 4, Public Water Ch. 353, Art. III
Ch. 27, Zoning Ch. 370
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory NI
B. Bond Issues and Loans NI
C. Franchises and Services NI
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
NI
E. Plan Approval NI
F. Public Property NI
G. Sewers NI
H. Streets and Sidewalks NI
I. Water NI
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances NI
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1039
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2016-O-02
2-9-2016 Boards, councils, commissions
and committees: Bike and Hike
Trails Committee
Ch. 9, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2016-O-03
2-9-2016 Boards, councils, commissions
and committees: Environmental
Advisory Council amendment
Ch. 9, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2016-O-04
2-23-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2016-O-05
2-23-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2016-O-06
2-23-2016 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 305
Ord. No.
2016-O-07
2-23-2016 Boards, councils, commissions
and committees: Planning
Commission amendment
Ch. 9, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-O-08
3-8-2016 Creating Penn Valley Pump
Water District
NCM
Ord. No.
2016-O-09
4-12-2016 Boards, councils, commissions
and committees: Historic
Commission amendment
Ch. 9, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2016-O-11
11-22-2016 Municipal claims and liens:
attorneys' fee
Ch. 209, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-O-12
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330, Art.
IV
Res. No.
2016-R-27
4-12-2016 Boards, Councils, Commissions
and Committees: Planning
Commission amendment
Ch. 9, Art. I
Res. No.
2016-R-37
5-24-2016 Boards, Councils, Commissions
and Committees: Planning
Commission amendment
Ch. 9, Art. I
Res. No.
2016-R-42
7-12-2016 Manager amendment Ch. 31
Res. No.
2016-R-55
10-25-2016 Records: disposition of records Ch. 63, Art. II
Ord. No.
2016-O-10
7-12-2016 Incurrence of debt NCM
Res. No.
2016-R-59
11-22-2016 Boards, councils, commissions
and committees: Open Space
and Land Preservation
Committee
Ch. 9, Art. IX
§ DL-1 WARRINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1040
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-O-01
1-10-2017 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 181
Ord. No.
2017-O-02
1-10-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2017-O-03
3-28-2017 Salaries and compensation:
Board of Supervisors
amendment
Ch. 71, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-O-04
4-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2017-O-05
5-9-2017 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 305
Ord. No.
2017-O-06
5-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2017-O-07
6-13-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 236
Ord. No.
2017-O-08
6-13-2017 Construction codes: occupancy
certificates upon sale or lease of
buildings amendment
Ch. 140, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-O-09
6-27-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2017-O-10
6-27-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 370, table
only
Ord. No.
2017-O-11
7-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2017-O-12
7-25-2017 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
NI; see Ch. 46
Ord. No.
2017-O-13
8-8-2017 Intergovernmental agreement:
collection of residential and
commercial recycling data
NCM
Ord. No.
2017-O-14
11-14-2017 Pawnbrokers and dealers in
precisous metals, antiques and
secondhand or used goods
Ch. 225
Ord. No.
2017-O-15
11-14-2017 Streets and sidewalks: street
trees
Ch. 294, Art. V
Res. No.
2017-R-51
11-28-2017 Salaries and compensation:
compensation of tax collector
Ch. 71, Art. II
Res. No.
2018-R-09
1-9-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 370, table
only
Ord. No.
2018-O-1
1-23-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1041
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2018-O-2
1-23-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2018-O-03
2-27-2018 Water amendment Ch. 353
Ord. No.
2018-O-04
2-27-2018 Water district assessment NCM
Ord. No.
2018-O-05
6-12-2018 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 370, table
only
Ord. No.
2018-O-06
7-10-2018 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 370, table
only
Ord. No.
2018-O-07
7-10-2018 Zoning amendment; Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 370; Ch.
370, table only
Ord. No.
2018-O-08
7-24-2018 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 370, table
only
Ord. No.
2018-O-09
8-14-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2018-O-10
8-28-2018 Pensions: Nonuniformed
Employee Pension Plan
amendment
NI; see Ch. 46
Ord. No.
2018-O-11
9-25-2018 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-O-12
11-13-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 330
Ord. No.
2018-O-13
11-13-2018 Construction Codes:
Amendments to Construction
Codes
Ch. 140, Art.
IV
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2019-O-01
1-8-2019 Agreement NCM 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-02
1-8-2019 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-03
1-8-2019 Nonuniformed
Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
See Ch. 46 2
§ DL-1 WARRINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1042
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No.
2019-R-10
1-22-2019 Boards, Councils,
Commissions and
Committees:
Tennis and Swim
Club Advisory
Council
Ch. 9, Art. X 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-04
2-12-2019 Municipal Claims
and Liens:
Attorneys' Fees
Amendment
Ch. 209, Art. I 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-05
2-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 330 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-06
3-26-2019 General
Obligation Bonds
NCM 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-07
4-23-2019 Boards, Councils,
Commissions and
Committees: Park
and Recreation
Board
Amendment;
Historic
Commission
Amendment;
Veterans Affairs
Committee
Amendment;
Communications
Advisory Board
Amendment;
Environmental
Advisory Council
Amendment; Open
Space and Land
Preservation
Committee
Amendment;
Boards, Councils,
Commissions and
Committees: Bike
and Hike Trails
Committee
Amendment; Ad
Hoc and Special
Committees
Ch. 9, Art. II;
Ch. 9, Art. IV;
Ch. 9, Art. V;
Ch. 9, Art. VI;
Ch. 9, Art. VII;
Ch. 9, Art. VIII;
Ch. 9, Art. IX;
Ch. 9, Art. XI
2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1043
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2019-O-08
5-14-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 370 2
Res. No.
2019-R-38
7-9-2019 Boards, Councils,
Commissions and
Committees:
Tennis and Swim
Club Advisory
Council
Amendment
Ch. 9, Art. X 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-09
10-8-2019 Nonuniformed
Employee Pension
Plan
See Ch. 46 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-10
10-8-2019 General
Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Ch. 1 1
Ord. No.
2019-O-11
11-26-2019 Sewers and
Sewage Disposal:
Oil and Grease
Interceptors and
Traps
Ch. 257, Art. V 2
Ord. No.
2019-O-12
11-26-2019 Sewers and
Sewage Disposal:
Grinder Pumps
Amendment
Ch. 257, Art. III 2
Ord. No.
2020-O-01
1-14-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 330 2
Ord. No.
2020-O-02
1-14-2020 Street Vacation NCM 2
§ DL-1 WARRINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1044

KA Draft 04- 30- 19
06- 17- 19
07- 15- 19
08- 18- 19
08- 19- 19
10- 07- 19
10- 08- 19
10- 22- 19
11- 26- 19
11- 27- 19
02- 02- 20
02- 25- 20
ORDINANCE NO. 2020 - 0 —0 Y
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WARRINGTON,
BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,
AMENDING THE WARRINGTON TOWNSHIP
ZONING ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, Warrington Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, by Ordinance Number 85- 2, as
amended, duly established zoning rules and regulations within Warrington Township that were
codified as Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of Warrington Township; and
WHEREAS, On October 8, 2019, the Township enacted Ordinance 2019- 0- 10, which adopted
newly codified zoning rules and regulations for Warrington Township contained in Chapter 370
of the Codified Ordinances of Warrington Township; and
WHEREAS, the Township has identified a desirable housing type, to wit, town center apartment
buildings developed in connection with and forming an integrated part of mixed use
developments having shops, services, dining and having easy pedestrian access to all of those
amenities and attractions utilizing a conventional pattern of streets and sidewalks; and the
Township wishes to provide for such use.
NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby enacted and ordained by the Board of Supervisors of Warrington
Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania that Ordinance No. 2019- 0-10, Chapter 370 of the
Codified Ordinances, as amended, is further amended to provide as follows:
Section 1. § 370- 202. Definitions, is hereby amended by adding the following subsection to
the definition of Dwelling Types:
1
DWELLING TYPES
N. TOWN CENTER APARTMENT
A type of multifamily dwelling permitted only as part of a mixed use
development. Town Center Apartments shall be limited to studio, one
bedroom and two bedroom units.
Section 2. § 370- 2903. Conditional Use, is hereby amended by adding the following
subsection:
370- 2903. E. Town Center Apartments, as regulated by § 370- 2904. C( 2), subject to the
following specific conditions:
a) Town Center Apartments shall only be permitted on a tract that is
developed or is proposed to be developed as a mixed- use center.
b) The subject tract shall have, or be proposed to be developed with,
a variety of small scale ( not big box) uses which must include at
least 20 distinct tenancies and must include retail, service, dining,
and office uses primarily located in mixed use buildings.
c) The plan for the subject tract shall provide that each of the uses,
including the town center apartments, are accessible by a
circulation system comprised of public and/ or private streets
having on -street parking and associated street front sidewalks.
Section 3. § 370- 2904. Area Requirements, is hereby amended by deleting the existing
370- 2904. 0 and replacing it with the following:
370- 2904. C. Mixed -Use Development. A mixed- use development is intended to
provide for a large tract of land to be developed in a planned, orderly
manner. It is to encourage and support a mix of land use types. Tracts
are required to be developed with at least three different land use types,
such as office uses, including professional/ business/ financial/ municipal;
retail uses, including theater/ fitness center/ service/ restaurant/ day
care/ automotive service; age -restricted residential uses; light
manufacturing uses, including research and, development/ flex space;
and/ or hotel/ motel use. In addition to age -restricted residential uses,
2
the use townhouse village development may be included as a permitted
land use type if authorized as a conditional use. Town Center Apartments
are permitted by conditional use in accordance with the requirements of
370-2904. C( 2) No one use group shall occupy more than 60% of the
gross site area. Age -restricted housing and townhouse village
development may not exceed 30% maximum nor be less than 15% of the
gross site area. Age -restricted housing is limited to a maximum density of
eight units per acre of the age -restricted portion of the site. Townhouse
village development housing is limited to a maximum density of 4 1/ 2
units per acre of that portion of the tract allocated for such housing type.
Age -restricted housing, townhouse village development and town center
apartments are not an essential requirement of the mixed- use
development. Whenever a mixed- use development includes a
townhouse village development as a land use type, the requirements of
370- 307 shall apply. The requirements of §370-307 shall not apply to
town center apartments in a mixed- use development.
Section 4. § 370- 2904. Area Requirements, is hereby amended by adding the following
subsection:
370- 2904. C( 2) When an existing tract is proposed to be developed to include town
center apartments, the standards of §370- 2904. C( 1) shall apply except as specifically
modified as follows:
1) Minimum gross site area: 30 acres.
2) Coverage limitations.
a) Maximum building coverage: 35% of gross site area.
b) Maximum impervious coverage: 75% of gross site area.
The density shall not exceed 8 dwelling units per gross acre of the
entire development tract.
3)
4) In addition to the off-street parking requirements for other uses
on the mixed- use development site, a minimum of 1. 6 parking
spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
3
5) The maximum height for a building containing
town center apartments shall not exceed 60 feet.
6) Any new or reconfigured buildings intended to accommodate
town center apartments shall be designed to complement the
overall character of the mixed use development; color palates
shall be consistent with existing buildings within the
development. The architectural design and detailing of the
buildings shall respect existing architectural guidelines in
Warrington Township and shall be reviewed by the Board of
Supervisors as part of the conditional use process.
7) Town Center Apartments shall be located above street level uses
or shall be located within a building serviced by an elevator and
constructed to meet current fire code standards.
8) Town Center Apartments shall be located within one- quarter mile
of the retail, service, dining and office uses of the center and shall
be directly linked to a conventional street/ sidewalk system.
9) Town Center Apartments within any mixed- use development shall
consist of no more than 35% two bedroom units. The remaining
units shall be a mix of one bedroom and studio apartments.
10) Any development containing Town Center Apartments shall
provide not less than 30 square feet of amenity space for each
apartment unit for the exclusive use of the occupants of the
apartments; in no event shall this amenity space total less than
5, 000 square feet. Amenity space may include, but shall not be
limited to: fire pits, dog walking areas, barbecue grills, swimming
pool, fitness area, media rooms, and gathering rooms. In
addition, there shall be provided a minimum of 30, 000 square
feet of civic/ open space within every development containing
Town Center Apartments. This civic/ open space may include
decorative pavers, lawn areas, seating areas, landscaping,
walkways and other similar improvements. Existing civic/ open
space areas may be used to satisfy this requirement when
approved by the Board of Supervisors. The required amenity
space and civic open space areas shall be owned and maintained
by the owner of the parcel upon which they are located.
4
Section 5. Repealer. This Ordinance hereby repeals any provision inconsistent with the
Zoning Ordinance now in effect or of other Ordinances, to the extent of such
inconsistency. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Warrington
Township, not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 6. Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If
any provision of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall have no
effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 7. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective five ( 5) days after its
adoption.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED on this ( 5 day of 44D 020.
BOARD OF SUPERVISIORS OF WARRINGTON TOWNSHIP
5
ENACTED AND ORDAINED on this dSday of ) C(,((, L( 2020.
ATTEST:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF WARRINGTON TOWNSHIP
Barry `P . Luber Fred R. Gaines, Chair
Township Manager
uth L. Sche,Vice Chair
Eileen Albillar, Member
PylmenaCarol T. Baker, Member
X/ tr
Mark E. Lomax, ember
6