Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Warwick, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 195,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Warwick, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Warwick,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warwick, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Warwick which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-3-2002.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 WARWICK CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Legislation regarding the adoption of a Fire Prevention Code for the
Township.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with §1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, all references to the Pennsylvania
"Department of Environmental Resources" (or "DER") are updated to
refer to the "Department of Environmental Protection" (or "DEP").
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
replaced with the following history: " Amended (added, deleted) 3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-6 WARWICK CODE § 1-10
1:6
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after this Third day of March, 2003.
§ 1-14 WARWICK CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 7
COOPERATIVE AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE I
Cooperative Purchasing
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 2:300 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code]
§ 7-1. Agreement authorized.
Warwick Township, upon the adoption of this article, authorizes and adopts
an intergovernmental cooperative agreement pertaining to the purchase
and use of materials, supplies, equipment and services with surrounding
municipalities who likewise adopt an ordinance similar to this one.
§ 7-2. Conditions of agreement.
The intergovernmental cooperative agreement referred to in § 7-1 shall:
A. Be conditional upon the participating municipality acting in cooperation
in the advertisement for bids for the purchase and use of equipment,
materials, supplies and services.
B. Be for a perpetual term, but any participating municipality may
withdraw from the cooperative purchasing agreement by giving all
other participating municipalities at least 60 days' prior written notice
of its intention to withdraw.
C. Be for the purpose and objective of obtaining cost benefits by
cooperation in advertising for bids and the cost benefits inherent in the
bulk purchasing and use of equipment, materials, supplies and services.
D. Provide for each participating municipality to be solely liable for
materials and/or supplies purchased by it. The cost of advertising for
any particular bid shall be shared equally by those municipalities
participating in that particular bid. All other costs properly incurred
under the terms of the agreement shall be shared equally by all
participating municipalities which are members of the Central Bucks
Cooperative Purchasing Council.
E. Provide that each municipality that wishes to cooperate shall appoint a
representative to serve on a committee known as the "Central Bucks
Cooperative Purchasing Council," which Council shall be charged with
the responsibility of carrying out the terms of the agreement.
F. Provide that all real and/or personal property acquired by reason of the
cooperative agreement shall be the sole property for management
purposes, disposition, etc., of the individual municipality paying for the
same as if the same had been purchased in accordance with the
provisions of the Second Class Township Code or the Borough Code2
without regard to any cooperative agreement.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq. and 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., respectively.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:11
§ 7-3. Agreement incorporated by reference.
The Cooperative Purchasing Agreement which is in the possession of the
Board or its designee is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in
its entirety and is hereby approved by the Board.
§ 7-3 WARWICK CODE § 7-3
1:12
ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 5-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
§ 7-4. Authorization.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warwick hereby approves
and the appropriate officers of the Township are hereby authorized and
directed to execute the mutual aid agreement which is attached hereto and
incorporated by reference and noted as Exhibit A. A copy of the mutual aid
agreement is available for inspection and review at the Township offices.
The mutual aid agreement may be amended, from time to time, subsequent
to the enactment of this article, in order to conform to any requirements
imposed by any laws and/or regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States.
§ 7-5. Duration.
The duration of the term of the said Agreement is for a period of one year
and thereafter from year to year until terminated as provided for therein.
§ 7-6. Purpose and objective.
The purpose and objective of the said agreement is to provide for the
creation of a response team composed of police officers from the Township
of Warwick and the other member Police Departments from Bucks County
that are parties to the said agreement in order to respond to high-risk
emergency situations which exist within the geographical boundaries of
said participating municipalities, and to otherwise back up an established
team on the scene of an existing high risk emergency.
§ 7-7. Responsibilities of participating municipalities.
Each participating municipality shall be responsible for providing
workmen's compensation, errors and omissions insurance, law enforcement
liability and general liability insurance coverage, at its own cost, on each
of its respective police officers participating pursuant to the mutual aid
agreement. All other costs and expenses associated with the said agreement
shall be equally shared and paid by the participating municipalities.
§ 7-8. Contribution of property.
Each participating municipality may contribute property to be used to
carry out the purpose and objective of the said agreement, which property
shall be itemized and listed as an exhibit to said agreement and shall be
returned to the contributing municipality, in its then existing condition,
upon withdrawal of such municipality from the said agreement in
accordance with the terms thereof.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:13
§ 7-9. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Act 60 1995
Second Class Township Code reenacting and amending the act of May
1, 1933 (PA.. 103, No. 69) entitled "An Act Concerning Townships of the
Second Class," and the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law,
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 7-9 WARWICK CODE § 7-9
1:14
ARTICLE III
Cable Television Services Agreement
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
§ 7-10. Authorization.
The appropriate officers of Warwick Township are hereby authorized to
enter into an intergovernmental agreement with other Bucks County
municipalities to obtain legal services for the negotiation of an agreement
with Verizon for cable television services. A true and correct copy of the
intergovernmental agreement, which is adopted hereby, is attached hereto
as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:15

ARTICLE IV
Purchase of Utility Services
[Adopted 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-7]
§ 7-11. Authorization.
The appropriate officers of Warwick Township are hereby authorized to
enter into the amended and restated intergovernmental cooperation
agreement ("agreement") with other Pennsylvania municipalities appointing
MUA3 as the consultant of Warwick Township to obtain services. A true
and correct copy of the agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference.4
§ 7-12. Execution of joinder.
The appropriate officers of Warwick Township are hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the MUA a joinder to the agreement.
§ 7-13. Appointment of MUA as consultant.
The conditions and purpose of the agreement are to appoint MUA as
Warwick Township's consultant in order to cooperate with other
municipalities in Pennsylvania in bidding for and purchasing utility products
and services including, but not limited to, electric power,
telecommunications, energy conservation, natural gas, heating oil, or such
other products and services as authorized by the bylaws and resolutions of
the MUA.
§ 7-14. Financing.
The agreement will require no financing. Warwick Township will pay for
service it solicits and receives.
§ 7-15. Lead agency designated.
Lower Paxton Township will serve as the lead agency for the purpose of
administering the MUA.
§ 7-16. Real or personal property.
There will be no real or personal property acquired, managed, licensed or
disposed of under the terms of the agreement.
§ 7-17. MUA authorized to enter into contracts.
The MUA, as administered through the lead agency, is empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits.
3. Editor's Note: Refers to Municipal Utility Alliance.
4. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:17
§ 7-18. Notices.
Written notices under Section 18(a) of the agreement intended for this
agency shall be sent to the following individual at the address shown:
Warwick Township
1733 Township Greene
Jamison, PA 18929
§ 7-18 WARWICK CODE § 7-18
1:18
ARTICLE V
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3]
§ 7-19. Agreement adopted.
§ 7-20. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 7-21. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the trust:
§ 7-22. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust upon withdrawal.
A. Warwick Township adopts the restated trust agreement and agrees to
participate in the trust in accordance with the amended and updated
terms of the restated trust agreement, and the Chairman of the Board
of Supervisors of Warwick Township is hereby authorized to sign the
restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary for the
Township's participation in the trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 1733 Township Greene, Jamison, PA 18929. The
restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in
accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
trust. The Township may withdraw from the trust in accordance with
the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors of
Warwick Township determines the modifications or amendments are
not in the best interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:19
§ 7-23. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be immediate.
§ 7-24. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 7-25. Organization.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees.
Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized
to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to perform
various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 7-26. Provision of funds for operation.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 7-27. Insurance and benefits for employees.
The trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the trust, if any.
§ 7-28. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 7-29. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the trust.
§ 7-30. Additional actions by Board authorized.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township is hereby authorized to
take any and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of
the attached restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
§ 7-31. Duration of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
§ 7-23 WARWICK CODE § 7-31
1:20
withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 7-32. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township hereby specifically finds and
determines as follows:
§ 7-33. Rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 7-34. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that i) funds
to implement the Township's obligations under the agreement shall
come from the normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township
employee compensation and employee benefits and ii) no borrowing is
anticipated to be required.
E. The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 7-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-34
1:21
Chapter 10
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 73.
§ 10-1. Establishment.
A local emergency management agency is hereby established and shall be
known as "Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency."
§ 10-2. Authority.
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency is established pursuant
to the provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code (35
Pa.C.S.A. § 7501 et seq.).
§ 10-3. Duties and responsibilities.
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall have the
responsibility for emergency management and disaster response and
recovery within Warwick Township, including but not limited to the
preparation and maintenance of an Emergency Management Plan. The
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall also provide
emergency management and disaster response and recovery services
outside Warwick Township as required by the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 10-4. Declaration of disaster emergency.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared by the Board of
Supervisors of Warwick Township. In addition, the Township Manager,
upon recommendation of the Emergency Management Coordinator, is
hereby authorized to declare a local disaster emergency subject to
ratification by the Board of Supervisors within seven days of such
declaration.
B. The declaration of a local disaster emergency shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven days unless approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and a
copy of any such order or proclamation shall be filed promptly with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
D. Upon declaration of a local disaster emergency, the applicable response
and recovery aspects of Warwick Township Local Emergency
§ 7-34 WARWICK CODE § 10-4
10:22
§ 10-5. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, Warwick Township, pursuant
to § 7301(c) of the Emergency Management Services Code,5 shall be
authorized to exercise the powers granted in the chapter without regard
to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the
employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase
of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds. In addition, upon the declaration of a disaster
emergency Warwick Township is authorized to avail itself of the provisions
of Act of August 5, 1941 (P.L. 752, No. 286),6 known as the "Civil Defense
Act," in connection with the employment of personnel in local organizations
established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10-6. Responsibilities, appointment, qualifications and training of
Coordinator.
Management Plan shall be activated, and all provisions for aid and
assistance thereunder shall be authorized.
A. Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall have a
Coordinator who shall be responsible for the planning, administration,
and operation of the agency subject to the direction and control of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. The Coordinator of Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency
shall be appointed by the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania upon recommendation of Warwick Township. Warwick
Township may, upon agreement by resolution with adjoining
municipalities, recommend to the Governor a candidate for Coordinator
for emergency management activities in the said political subdivisions.
The Warwick Township Emergency Management Coordinator shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Coordinator of Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency
shall:
(1) Be professionally competent and capable of planning, effecting and
coordinating operations among agencies of government and
controlling coordinated operations by local emergency
preparedness forces;
(2) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within one year after
appointment;
5. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301(c).
6. Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 741.1 et seq.
§ 10-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-6
10:23
§ 10-7. Powers and duties of Agency.
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency is hereby directed to:
(3) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within three years after
appointment;
(4) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training
conferences called by the Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and/or its Director of Training and Education;
D. Failure to attend and successfully complete the career development
program phases, as described above, or failure to attend a prescribed
training program for two consecutive years shall be cause for
replacement of the Coordinator of Warwick Township Emergency
Management Agency;
E. Responsibility for the professional in-service training of the Coordinator
of Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall rest with
the Emergency Management Coordinator of Bucks County.
F. Warwick Township will reimburse its Coordinator for actual expenses
incurred as the result of his or her attendance at scheduled meetings
and training programs.
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current an Emergency Operations Plan for
Warwick Township for the prevention and minimizing of injury and
damage caused by disaster, for prompt and effective response to
disaster and for disaster emergency relief and recovery in consonance
with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Plan and the Bucks
County Emergency Management Plan;
B. Establish, equip, and staff an emergency operations center for Warwick
Township;
C. Establish a warning and communications system for Warwick Township
that will support governmental operations in emergencies;
D. Provide essential facilities and equipment to those agencies and
organizations that have been assigned emergency functions under the
provisions of this chapter;
E. Provide individual and organizational training programs for police
officers, fire fighters, rescue personnel, ambulance personnel,
emergency management volunteers and the general public to insure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services;
F. Organize, prepare, and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment, and facilities necessary for disaster
emergency readiness, response and recovery;
§ 10-6 WARWICK CODE § 10-7
10:24
§ 10-8. Membership; terms; meetings; duties.
G. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of a disaster;
H. Execute and enforce such rules, regulations and orders as Warwick
Township Emergency Management Agency may adopt pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter;
I. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agencies or
entities in achieving any purpose of this chapter;
J. Have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules, regulations, and orders of the
Governor and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency;
K. Review all ordinances which have the potential to impact emergency
management in Warwick Township and submit recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors;
L. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public;
M. Review the features of and responses to past emergencies to improve
future responses;
N. Make monthly reports to Warwick Township on the status and programs
of Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency, its personnel,
programs, and plans;
O. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as may be adopted by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency;
P. Make timely recommendations to and secure the consent of Warwick
Township concerning the development of plans, the acquisition of
materials, supplies, and equipment and the development of a budget for
the agency, except as provided for in disaster emergencies;
Q. Identify areas within Warwick Township that are particularly vulnerable
to disaster;
R. Upon request of the Board of Supervisors or designated official, assist
Warwick Township and/or its police, fire, rescue, or emergency medical
services in handling and coordinating special, nondisaster emergencies
and situations.
A. The Emergency Management Agency shall consist of nine members,
and shall include member(s) of the Board of Supervisors, the Chief of
Police, Warwick Township EMC, the Warwick Township Fire Marshal,
the Chief of Warwick Township Fire Company No. 1, the Township
Manager, the Warwick Township Public Works Director, the Chairman
of Emergency Services, and a practicing physician or nurse.
§ 10-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-8
10:25
§ 10-9. Mutual aid agreements.
The Coordinator of Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency
shall develop and maintain mutual aid agreements with adjacent political
subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance. The agreements shall
be consistent with the plans and program of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and the Bucks County Emergency Management
Agency. The agreements shall stipulate that direction of emergency disaster
assistance is the responsibility of the lowest level of government affected,
that the County Emergency Management Agency shall provide coordination
and support when more than one political subdivision within Bucks County
is affected, and that the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency
or its area organization, as outlined above, having responsibility for
coordination and, in time of emergency, it shall be the duty of Warwick
Township Emergency Management Agency to render assistance in
accordance with these mutual aid agreements. In all cases, support services
provided from outside the affected area shall remain under the command
and control of the receiving area.
(1) The members of the Emergency Management Agency shall serve
continuously during their term of public office except for the
physician or nurse, who shall serve until replaced by Warwick
Township;
(2) Only designated members of the Emergency Management Agency
may vote on matters before the Agency;
(3) In the event that one of the members of the Agency is unable to
attend a meeting of the Emergency Management Agency, the
member may send a representative from his or her department or
agency in his stead.
B. Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall:
(1) Elect its own Chairman and other officers as the body may deem
appropriate;
(2) Provide recommendations and assistance to the Coordinator as
deemed appropriate concerning the plans, activities, and role of
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency;
(3) Assist in the preparation and maintenance of Warwick Township
Disaster Emergency Plan;
(4) Recruit and assist in the training of emergency personnel and
represent Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency at
training programs, seminars and public meetings;
(5) Review all emergency declarations and make recommendations to
the Board of Supervisors and the Coordinator. Provide whatever
other aid or assistance that the Coordinator may request.
§ 10-8 WARWICK CODE § 10-10
10:26
§ 10-10. Approvals and ratifications of agreements.
§ 10-11. Gifts and grants of monies.
Any gift or grants of monies made to Warwick Township Emergency
Management Agency or to Warwick Township for the payment of expenses
incurred or to be incurred by or for the Emergency Management Agency
shall be deposited in the treasury of Warwick Township and shall be
appropriated only for the purpose for which the gift or grants were made.
§ 10-12. Representation on boards and agencies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting Warwick Township
Emergency Management Agency or Warwick Township Emergency
Management Advisory Council from providing representation to other
boards or agencies, as outside emergency management advisory boards,
emergency health services councils, and/or regional communications
committees, that coordinate with or otherwise impact the delivery of
emergency management services.
§ 10-13. Insignia and identifying marks.
Warwick Township Emergency Management Agency shall, with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, adopt such insignia and/or other identifying
marks or markings as are necessary to ensure the correct, prompt
identification of its personnel, equipment and facilities.
§ 10-14. Applicability of state statutes.
The provisions of the "Emergency Management Services Code" of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 1978-323 (P.L. 1332),7 shall govern the
emergency management activities of Warwick Township and the Warwick
Township Emergency Management Agency Council except in circumstances
A. Except during local disaster emergencies, the Board of Supervisors
shall:
(1) Approve all expenditures of Warwick Township Emergency
Management Agency in advance;
(2) Approve attendance and participation of personnel of the
Emergency Management Agency at training sessions, seminars,
and meetings;
(3) Review and approve Warwick Township's Emergency Management
Plan.
B. All mutual aid agreements (§ 10-9) shall be ratified by the Board of
Supervisors and by the governing bodies of the other affected
municipalities prior to implementation.
7. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 10-10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-14
10:27
where the "Emergency Management Services Code" does not address local
provisions or conditions provided for by this chapter.
Chapter 13
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 13-1. Participation authorized.
The Township shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act8 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the Trust) and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter
originally was adopted.
§ 13-2. Purchase and redemption of shares.
The Board is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time to time
with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These actions
are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to
general or specific instructions by the Board.
§ 13-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of the
Township's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the Trust.
§ 13-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,9 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 13-1;
B. The Township's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing the Township's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments;
8. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 10-14 WARWICK CODE § 13-4
13:28
Chapter 17
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 17-1. Office created.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created.
§ 17-2. Appointment; term; qualifications.
§ 17-3. Removal from office.
The Board of Supervisors may remove the Township Manager at any time by
a majority vote of its members. Notice of removal of the Township Manager
shall be given 30 days before the effective date of removal. Upon removal,
the Board of Supervisors shall pay his salary under the provisions stated
in the contract with the Manager; provided, however, that if the Manager
is removed for conviction of an illegal act, or further provided that if the
Manager voluntarily resigns, the Township shall have no duty to pay any
salary after the removal date or the voluntary resignation, as the case may
be.
§ 17-4. Powers and duties.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust;
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein; and
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as the
Township may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
A. The Township Manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board
of Supervisors for an indefinite term. He shall be chosen by the Board
solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications,
with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office hereinafter set
forth.
B. No Supervisor shall receive such an appointment during the term for
which he shall have been elected nor within one year after the
expiration of his term.
A. The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township, and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors for
the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the Township.
The powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall
be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers.
§ 13-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 17-4
17:29
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, the powers
and duties of the Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
(2) He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision with the
exception of department heads, who shall be appointed, suspended
or discharged with the advice and consent of the Board of
Supervisors, provided that persons covered by the civil service
statutes shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance
with such provisions, and provided, further, that the Manager
report, at the next meeting thereafter of the Board of Supervisors,
any action taken by authority of this subsection.
(3) He shall have the power to establish a standard schedule of pay for
each appointive office and position in the Township service,
including minimal, intermediate and maximum rates of pay, within
a range previously determined by the Board.
(4) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors as of the
end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
(5) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors an annual
budget, together with a message describing its important features,
and be responsible for its administration after adoption.
(6) He shall keep the Board of Supervisors advised of the financial
condition and future needs of the Township and make such
recommendations as he may deem desirable. He shall prepare,
periodically, recommendations as to a capital expense budget, and
he shall also prepare a quarterly report on current budget
expenditures.
(7) He shall recommend to the governing body, from time to time,
adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient
for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the
improvement of administrative services.
(8) He shall consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or
units under his jurisdiction, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Supervisors. The Manager may be the head of one or more
departments.
(9) He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors unless
excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters
coming before the Board of Supervisors. He shall receive notice of
all subsidiary meetings of the Board and its committees and also
attend such subsidiary Board meetings as the Board of Supervisors
shall from time to time direct.
§ 17-4 WARWICK CODE § 17-4
17:30
§ 17-5. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, he
shall designate one qualified member of his staff to perform the duties of the
Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated shall
not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
approval of the Board.
§ 17-6. Bond.
The Township Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the
Board of Supervisors and to be conditioned on the faithful performance of
his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Township.
(10)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon
some other Township officer.
(11)He shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Township's claims.
(12)He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township, and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Township
Code,10 all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the Township. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when
directed by the Board, make a full written report thereof. He shall
also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the
Board, governing the procurement of all municipal supplies and
equipment.
(13)He shall see that the provisions of all laws, ordinances, contracts,
franchises, leases, permits and privileges granted by the Township
are observed and duly enforced.
(14)He shall investigate the affairs of the Township or any department
or division thereof. The Manager shall investigate all complaints in
relations to matters concerning the administration of the
government of the Township. All complaints regarding Township
services shall be referred to the office of the Manager. He or an
officer designated by him shall dispose of such complaints, and the
Manager shall report thereon to the Board.
(15) He shall supervise the routing of all reports and correspondence.
(16)He shall perform such other duties as may be required by the
Board of Supervisors, not inconsistent with the law or ordinances.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 17-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 17-7
17:31
§ 17-7. Compensation.
The Township Manager shall receive such compensation as the Board of
Supervisors shall fix from time to time by motion or resolution.
§ 17-8. Filling of vacancy.
Any vacancy in the office of the Township Manager shall be filled within 60
days after the effective date of such vacancy.
Chapter 23
PENSION PLANS
§ 17-7 WARWICK CODE § 17-8
17:32
ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8;11 amended in its entirety
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2]
§ 23-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL COMPENSATION — The actual base salary of a participant during
a calendar year. The term "salary," as used in this section, and in this
pension plan and trust, shall mean all compensation for which payroll
deductions have been required and withheld.
AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — The average monthly salary of a
participant during the last 36 months of employment.
BENEFICARY — Any person designated by a participant to receive any
death benefit upon the death of the participant.
DISABILITY — The inability to substantially perform functions of
employment by reason of a physical or mental impairment which can be
expected to result in death or to be of long-continued and indefinite
duration. With mutual agreement of the participant and the Trustees,
disability shall be determined by a licensed physician. However, if either
the participant or the Trustees desire, disability shall be determined by a
majority of three licensed physicians, two selected by the participant and
the Trustees individually and one selected by their mutual agreement. In
addition to satisfying the above definition of total and permanent disability,
a participant must have completed 10 years of full-time employment before
such disablement in order to qualify for Disability benefits. Disability
benefits shall commence six months after the date of disablement.
EARLY REQUIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with
or next following the 55th birthday or completion of 10 years of full-time
employment, whichever is later.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The nonuniformed defined benefit pension plan is
effective January 1, 1986. The defined contribution pension transition date
is September 9, 2013.
EMPLOYEE — A permanent, full-time employee of Warwick Township who
is not a member of the police force.
FULL-TIME — "Full-time" for participants in the defined benefit pension
shall mean employees who have worked at least 1,000 hours of service
during a twelve-month period for defined benefit pension accrual purposes.
"Full-time" for participants in the defined contribution pension shall mean
employees who customarily work at least 35 hours per week.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan, adopted 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6
§ 23-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-1
17:33
NORMAL REQUIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident
with or next following the 65th birthday.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in either the defined benefit or defined contribution pension.
SUPERVISORS — The Supervisors of Warwick Township for the time in
office at any time of reference.
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TRUSTEES — The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township.
§ 23-2. Eligibility.
§ 23-3. Defined benefit pension: retirement benefits.
A. Age and service. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
(1) For the defined benefit pension: Each full-time, permanent,
nonuniformed employee of the Township hired before September 9,
2013, shall become eligible on the first day of the month after
attaining age 21 and completing one year of service, whichever is
later.
(2) For the defined contribution pension: Each full-time, permanent,
nonuniformed employee hired on or after September 9, 2013 shall
become eligible upon completion of six months of service.
(3) Change in status: In the event a participant who remains in the
service of the Township ceases to be an employee eligible for
participation hereunder, no further benefit accruals shall occur
until the participant again qualifies under such participation
requirements. Such a requalified participant shall immediately
commence accrual of additional benefits hereunder upon becoming
eligible to participate.
B. Exclusions. Part-time, temporary or seasonal employees are not eligible
to participate in the plan.
C. Contributions. Employees eligible to participate in the defined benefit
pension in accordance with Subsection A shall not be required to make
contributions to the defined benefit pension. [Amended 7-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-1]
A. Normal retirement benefit. The monthly retirement benefit to which a
participant shall be entitled upon retirement at his/her normal
retirement date shall be an amount equal to 1.2% of the first $800 of the
average monthly compensation plus 1.8% of any excess of the average
monthly compensation over $800, all multiplied by the years and
completed months of full-time employment as of the normal retirement
date.
§ 23-1 WARWICK CODE § 23-3
17:34
§ 23-4. Defined benefit pension: other benefits.
B. Early retirement benefit. The monthly retirement benefit to which a
participant shall be entitled, upon retirement on or after his/her early
retirement date, but before his/her normal retirement date, shall be
computed by the benefit formula described in Subsection A above.
Average monthly compensation and the period of full-time employment,
however, shall be determined as of the actual retirement date. The
amount of early retirement benefit thus determined shall be reduced by
the appropriate factor of actuarial equivalency for each completed
month by which such actual retirement date precedes the normal
retirement date.
C. Cost-of-living increase. For employees hired before January 1, 2012, the
plan hereby provides for a cost-of-living increase of participants
receiving retirement benefits. The cost-of-living increase shall be at the
rate of 2% per year. There shall be a maximum lifetime cost-of-living
increase of 30%. Employees hired after January 1, 2012, shall not
receive any cost-of-living increase from the plan.
A. Disability benefit. The amount of disability benefit shall be the
retirement benefit accrued through the date of disability, determined in
accordance with the benefit formula described in § 23-3 and based on
average monthly compensation and period of full-time employment as
of the date of disablement, reduced by the full amount of workers'
compensation benefits, if any. Disability benefits shall be payable until
recovery or death. The Plan Administrator shall have the authority to
require medical evidence of continuing total and permanent disability
at his/her discretion from time to time. Payment of disability benefits is
contingent upon continuing acceptability of medical evidence which is
satisfactory to the Plan Administrator.
B. Death benefit. If a vested participant dies before retirement, the
surviving spouse, or, in the absence of a surviving spouse, another
beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive an annuity equal to the amount
of benefit accrued at the participant's death. If a participant dies after
reaching the early retirement date, the surviving spouse or other
beneficiary shall receive payments equal to those that would have been
payable if the participant had retired with an immediate joint and fiftypercent
contingent annuity on the day before his/her death. If a
participant dies on or before the early retirement date, the surviving
spouse or other beneficiary shall receive payments equal to those that
would have been payable had the participant separated from service on
the date of death, survived to his early retirement date, retired with an
immediate joint and fifty-percent contingent annuity at that age, and
died on the day after the early retirement date.
C. Vesting.
(1) If a Township employee's employment is terminated, or if he/she
ceases to be an employee, as defined above, before his/her normal
§ 23-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-4
17:35
§ 23-5. Defined benefit pension: payment of benefits.
retirement date, he/she shall be vested in benefits accrued through
his/her termination date according to the following five-year Cliff
Schedule:
Completed Years of Service Vesting Percentage
Less than 5 0%
5 100%
(2) No payments shall be due to any person no longer a Township
employee until such time as the employee reaches his/her early or
normal retirement date.
A. Normal form of annuity. Retirement benefits defined in §§ 23-3 and 23-4
shall be payable monthly during the balance of each participant's life
following actual retirement.
B. Optional forms of annuity. Instead of the retirement benefit payable for
life, the employee may elect to have the retirement benefit he/she is
entitled to receive in any of the following forms, whereby the annual
amount of retirement benefit so received shall be the actuarial
equivalent of the annual amount of the retirement benefit, payable for
life, as the employee is entitled to on his/her retirement date.
(1) Life annuity with payments for 10 years certain. This form of
retirement benefit provides for monthly payments to be made for
life, commencing on the retirement date, but in the event of death
of the annuitant before 120 payments have been made, such
payments shall be continued to the beneficiary named by the
annuitant until a total of 120 payments have been made.
(2) Joint and fifty-percent contingent annuity option. This form of
retirement benefit provides for monthly payments to be made
commencing on the retirement date, until the later of the death of
the annuitant or the death of the contingent annuitant specified by
the participant. If the annuitant is not living to receive the monthly
payments, the remaining payments will be made to the contingent
annuitant, and the amount of each monthly payment to the
contingent annuitant shall be 50% of the amount of each monthly
payment to the annuitant.
(a) This annuity shall not take effect if the contingent annuitant
dies prior to the date on which payments are to commence to
the annuitant. However, the death of the contingent annuitant
on or after such date shall not affect the amount payable
monthly to the annuitant.
(b) The annual retirement benefit, in the case of any eligible
employee who was married throughout the year preceding the
annuity starting date, shall be in the form of a joint and fifty-
§ 23-4 WARWICK CODE § 23-5
17:36
§ 23-6. Defined benefit pension Plan Administrator; duties of
Trustees; expenses of administration.
percent contingent annuity, unless he/she has elected
otherwise in writing as provided in Subsection B(2)(c) below. A
spouse must sign off if other than a joint and survivor's annuity
clause is chosen.
(c) At least 90 days and no more than six months before an
employee shall reach the earliest date on which an eligible
employee could elect to receive retirement benefits as
provided herein, the Plan Administrator shall give such
employee a written statement of his/her approximate
anticipated benefits if he/she should take early retirement
during the next year. If the employee is married, the statement
shall clearly explain the difference between the joint and fiftypercent
contingent annuity and other available annuities, both
in terms of the anticipated annuity amounts in each case, and
that if he/she does not elect otherwise prior to his/her
retirement, his/her benefit will be paid in the form of a joint
and fifty-percent contingent annuity if he/she has been married
throughout the year preceding his/her retirement. The
employee shall have 90 days after the receipt of such
statement to file with the Plan Administrator, on a form
provided by the Plan Administrator, an election to take the
single life annuity or the life annuity with payments for 10
years certain or the joint and fifty-percent contingent annuity.
C. Actuarial equivalence. Actuarially equivalent annuity conversion
factors and early retirement reduction factors shall be derived based on
the 1971 Group Annuity Mortality Table with an assumed interest rate
of 8% per annum. Such conversion factors and reduction factors shall
be sex-neutral; participants and beneficiaries of the same age shall be
treated the same regardless of sex.
A. Plan Administrator. The Township Nonuniformed Employees' Defined
Benefit Pension Fund shall be under the direction of the Board of
Supervisors of Warwick Township or such committee, persons, or
corporate trustee as the Board of Supervisors from time to time
designates by resolution, who shall be known as the Defined Benefit
Pension Administrator, and who shall act as Trustees of the Township
Nonuniformed Employees' Pension Fund, and such Trustees shall have
full responsibility for the administration of the plan established
hereunder.
B. Duties of Trustees. The Trustees shall hold, invest, reinvest and
distribute all funds or other property received pursuant hereto in trust
for the purposes of the plan. The Trustees may receive at any time, and
from time to time, gifts, grants, devises, or bequests to the Township
Nonuniformed employees' Pension Fund of any money or property, real,
personal or mixed, to be held by them in trust for the benefit of this fund
§ 23-5 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-6
17:37
§ 23-7. Defined benefit transfer or assignment.
The pension payments herein provided for shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall
be payable only to the participant or his/her designated beneficiary. No
participant or his/her beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, encumber
or assign any assets of the fund held by the Trustees on his/her behalf, or
any of the benefits or payments or proceeds of any contract or agreement
purchased or acquired by the Township hereunder. Any contract or
agreement purchased or acquired pursuant to this plan upon the life of
such participant shall contain a provision, in substance, that to the extent
permitted by law, none of the benefits or payments or proceeds of such
and in accordance with the provisions hereof. The Trustees shall be
subject to such rules and regulations as may from time to time be
adopted by the Board of Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The
Trustees shall have full power and authority by a majority action of its
members, either directly or through their designated representatives,
to do all acts, execute, acknowledge and deliver all instruments and
to exercise for the sole benefit of the participants hereunder any and
all powers and/or discretions necessary to implement and effectuate
the purposes of the plan, including for purposes of illustrations but not
limited to any and all of the following:
(1) To hold, invest and reinvest all funds received pursuant to the plan
in such investments as may be authorized as legal investments
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(2) To enter into contracts or deposit agreements on behalf of Warwick
Township with one or more insurance companies, in order to
provide the pension and other benefits herein set forth, and to pay
the premiums and deposits required by the purchase of said
contract;
(3) To retain or purchase as an investment any form of annuity or
contracts of similar nature, and to exercise with respect thereto
any right or incident of ownership;
(4) To retain property which may, at any time, become an asset of the
fund, as long as said Trustees may deem it advisable; and
(5) To make distribution of the monies in the fund, in accordance with
the terms of this plan.
C. Expenses of administration. The expense of administrating the defined
benefit pension, including compensation of an actuary, any custodian of
the fund and any user charges or expenses related thereto, exclusive of
the payment pensions, may be paid by the Township by appropriations
made by the Board of Supervisors; from the assets of the Nonuniformed
Employees' Defined Benefit Pension Fund; or from state aid to the
pension plan, if any.
§ 23-6 WARWICK CODE § 23-7
17:38
contract or agreement shall be subject to any legal process by any creditor
or such participant or beneficiary of such participant.
§ 23-8. Failure to designate beneficiary.
In the absence of an effective beneficiary designation, the Plan
Administrator shall first pay death benefits to the spouse of an employee, if
any, then to his/her children, if any, then to the employee's estate.
§ 23-9. Defined benefit lump sum distribution.
A. In the event that for any reason the benefits payable to any employee
under the defined benefit plan are determined by the Plan
Administrator, in his/her sole discretion, to be too small to feasibly
provide the normal or optional retirement benefits, then a lump sum
distribution calculated to be actuarially equivalent shall be made.
B. Optional transfers.
(1) In the event that any payment or payments to be made under the
defined benefit plan to a participant, a beneficiary who is the
surviving spouse of a participant, an alternate payee who is the
former spouse of a participant, or a beneficiary who is not an
alternate payee or the surviving spouse of a participant, would
constitute an eligible rollover distribution, the individual may
request that such payment or payments be transferred directly
from the defined benefit plan to the trustee of a) an individual
retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code; b) an individual retirement annuity described in
Section 408(b) of the Code (other than an endowment contract); c)
an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code; d) a
qualified retirement plan, the terms of which permit the
acceptance of rollover distributions; or e) effective for distributions
made on or after January 1, 2002, 1) an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the Code
maintained by an eligible employer described in Section
457(e)(1)(A) of the Code that separately accounts for eligible
rollover distributions; or 2) an annuity contract described in
Section 403(b) of the Code; provided, however, that i) clauses c)
and d) shall not apply to an eligible rollover distribution made prior
to January 1, 2002, to a beneficiary who is the surviving spouse of a
participant; ii) in the case of a distribution to a beneficiary who is
not the surviving spouse or an alternate payee who is the former
spouse of a participant, only clauses a) and b) shall apply; and iii)
effective January 1, 2009, a plan described in clause a) shall include
a Roth IRA described in Section 408(A) of the Code. Any such
request shall be made in writing, on the form prescribed by the
Trustees for such purpose, at such time in advance as the Trustees
may specify. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any eligible rollover
distribution in excess of $1,000 made after final regulations are
§ 23-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-9
17:39
§ 23-10. Defined benefit pension funding arrangement.
This plan shall be self-insured and self-administered by the Trustees.
§ 23-11. Nondiversion of defined benefit pension assets.
Under no circumstances, prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with
respect to participants and their beneficiaries under the defined benefit
plan, shall any part of the assets of the trust be used or diverted to any
purpose other than the exclusive benefit of defined benefit plan participants
or their beneficiaries.
§ 23-11.1. Defined benefit pension: determination of final average
monthly compensation.
issued by the Department of Labor with respect to Section
401(a)(31)(B) of the Code shall be transferred directly to the
individual retirement plan of a designated trustee or insurer, unless
the participant elects to receive such distribution.
(2) For purposes of this section, "eligible rollover distribution" shall
mean a distribution from the defined benefit plan, excluding a) any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic
payments (not less frequently than annually) over the life (or life
expectancy) of the individual, the lives (or life expectancies) of the
individual and the individual's designated beneficiary, or a specified
period of 10 or more years; b) any distribution to the extent such
distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and c) any distribution to the extent such
distribution is not included in gross income. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, clause c) of the preceding sentence shall not apply to a
distribution that is made on or after January 1, 2002, and rolled
over to an eligible retirement plan described in clause a) or b) of
the preceding subsection or a qualified defined contribution plan
or, effective January 1, 2007, an annuity contract described in
Section 403(b) of the Code or a qualified defined benefit plan that
will separately account for the portion of the distribution that is
included in gross income.
A. Notwithstanding the above, annual compensation taken into account in
determining final average monthly compensation shall not exceed
$450,000 (or, effective January 1, 2002, $200,000), as adjusted in
accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(17)(B) [the
"Section 401(a)(17) compensation limit"]. Except as provided below, the
Section 401(a)(17) compensation limit in effect for a calendar year
applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which
compensation is determined ("determination period") and which begins
in such calendar year.
B. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the Section
401(a)(17) compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the
§ 23-9 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.1
17:40
§ 23-11.2. IRC § 415 maximum benefit limitations.
numerator of which is the number of months in the determination
period, and the denominator of which is 12. In determining
compensation for purposes of applying the Section 401(a)(17)
compensation limit for plan years beginning before January 1, 1997, the
family aggregation rules of Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue
Code shall apply.
C. Effective January 1, 2002, for purposes of determining the final average
compensation of a participant who completes an hour of service on or
after January 1, 2002, the Section 401(a)(17) compensation limit for any
determination period beginning before January 1, 2002, shall be the
Section 401(a)(17) compensation limit for the 2002 calendar year.
A. General limitation.
(1) Except as provided to the contrary in Subsections B and C of this
section, the annual retirement benefit attributable to employer
contributions accrued by, or payable to, any participant will not
exceed the dollar limitation in effect for the limitation year under
Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), as adjusted pursuant
to Section 415(d) of the Code, in the form of a qualified joint and
survivor annuity or a single life annuity, the reduced actuarial
equivalent of such dollar limitation (as adjusted) per annum annuity
in the form of a single life annuity. The dollar limitation (as
adjusted) described in the preceding sentence will be increased
using an interest rate of 5% per year and the mortality table
described in Section 417(e)(3) of the Code. If a participant's
benefits are payable in a form subject to Section 417(e)(3) of the
Code, such benefits will be adjusted, for purposes of applying the
limitations under this section, to their actuarial equivalent in the
form of a single life annuity, using the mortality table described in
Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code and 1) for plan years prior to 2004,
the interest rate set forth in Section 417(e)(3)(C) of the Code; 2) for
the 2004 and 2005 plan years, the greater of A) the interest rate set
forth in Section 417(e)(3)(C) of the Code; or B) 5.5%; and 3) for
plan years beginning after 2005, the greatest of A) the interest rate
set forth in Section 417(e)(3)(C) of the Code; B) 5.5%; or C) the
interest rate that provides a benefit of not more than 105% of the
benefit that would be provided if the interest rate set forth in
Section 417(e)(3)(C) of the Code was used.
(2) For purposes of this section: A) the increase in dollar limitation
described under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) that is
effective January 1, 2002, will only apply to an employee who
completes an hour of service on or after January 1, 2002; B)
"compensation" has the meaning given to such term in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(b) and (c), plus compensation, if any, credited to the
participant pursuant to Section 414(u)(7) of the Code and, effective
January 1, 2009, differential wage payments described in Section
§ 23-11.1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.2
17:41
§ 23-11.3. Validity.
Pennsylvania law shall govern the construction, validity and administration
of this plan and trust agreement. Should any section or any provision of
either plan be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the plan as a whole or any other part thereof.
§ 23-11.4. Appendix: defined contribution pension.
3401(h) of the Code, subject to the applicable annual compensation
limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Code for the plan year; and
c) the limitations of Section 415 of the Code shall be adjusted
automatically each January 1 for increases in cost of living under
Section 415(d); provided, however, that such adjustments shall not
apply to any employee who does not complete an hour of service on
or after such January 1.
B. Exceptions to the general limitation. No benefit will be deemed in
violation of the limitation expressed in Subsection A if the amount of the
benefit does not exceed $10,000 for the current plan year or any prior
plan year, and the employer has not at any time maintained a defined
contribution plan in which the participant participated.
C. Short service limitation. In the case of a participant who has less than
10 years of credited service, the limitation set forth in Subsection A will
be reduced by multiplying it by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
number of a participant's years of credited service (or parts thereof),
and the denominator of which is 10. The limitation described in the
preceding sentence will be applied separately with respect to each
change in the benefit structure, to the extent required by the Secretary
of the Treasury. In the case of a participant who has less than 10 years
of vesting service, the limitation set forth in Subsection B will be
reduced by multiplying it by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
number of the participant's years of vesting service (or parts thereof)
and the denominator of which is 10. This Subsection C shall not apply to
disability benefits or death benefits.
D. Coordination with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. The
provision of this section shall be interpreted and implemented in
accordance with Section 415 of the Code and all rulings, notices and
regulations issued thereunder.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in connection
with the defined contribution pension, shall have, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning given to them in this section.
ACCOUNT — The entire interest of a participant in the defined
contribution pension.
ADMINISTRATOR — The person, entity, or committee named as such by
the Board of Supervisors, or, in the absence of any such appointment,
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 23-11.2 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.4
17:42
AGE — The age attained by the employee at his or her last birthday.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — Any January 1 after the effective date.
BENEFICIARY —
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — The participant's gross pay before any payroll
deductions. Compensation shall exclude any amounts paid after
termination of employment.
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION — The money purchase pension
plan for the nonuniformed employees of Warwick Township as herein
set forth and as the same may hereinafter be amended. This pension
plan is intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code as a governmental money purchase plan.
EFFECTIVE DATE — This article shall be effective five days after
enactment.
FUND — All money, property, and investments held and invested in the
name of the defined contribution pension.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — Upon retirement, participants may
withdrawal funds at 59 1/2 years of age and must begin withdrawals by
age 70 1/2.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has satisfied the eligibility
requirements established in the defined contribution pension and who
has been admitted to participation in the defined contribution pension.
The term "participant" shall include active participants (those who are
currently eligible to share in employer contributions to the pension)
and retired participants (those former employees presently receiving
benefits under the plan or immediately entitled to receive such
benefits).
PARTICIPANT ACCOUNT — Each participant's individual account
maintained within the fund to include the share of investment earnings
or losses.
PAY PERIOD — The period of time at the end of which an employee is
compensated for his/her services to the Township.
As to any participant who is married at the time of his/her death,
the participant's spouse, except as provided in Subsection (2) of
this definition;
(1)
As to any participant who 1) is not married at the time of his/
her death; or 2) is married, but the participant has completed a
designation of beneficiary form designating someone other than
his/her spouse, the persons or entities designated by the
participant in writing to be his/her beneficiaries hereunder.
(2)
§ 23-11.4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.4
17:43
PLAN YEAR — A period of 12 consecutive months commencing on any
January 1 and ending on the following December 31.
PTO — Paid time off.
ROLLOVER ACCOUNT — The distribution amount transferred to the
plan by a participant from a qualified pension or profit-sharing plan.
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
TRUST AGREEMENT — The contract between the Township and the
Trustee establishing the terms by which and under which the Fund is
invested, distributed, accounted for and terminated, as the same now
exists and as it may hereafter be amended.
TRUSTEE — The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township or any
other agency or person appointed by the Board to serve in that capacity
as set forth in the trust agreement.
VALUATION DATE — The last day of the plan year and each other
interim date during the plan year on which a valuation of the fund is
made.
B. Eligibility.
(1) Any full-time (works 35 hours a week or more), permanent,
nonuniformed employees of the Township hired before November
1, 2013, may opt to transfer into the defined contribution pension.
(2) Each full-time, permanent, nonuniformed employee hired on or
after November 1, 2013, shall become eligible upon completion of
six months of service and attaining age 21.
(3) Change in status. In the event that a participant who remains in the
service of the Township ceases to be an employee eligible for
participation hereunder, no further benefit accruals shall occur
until the participant again qualifies under such participation
requirements. Such a requalified participant shall immediately
commence accrual of additional benefits hereunder upon becoming
eligible to participate.
(4) Exclusions. Part-time, temporary or seasonal employees are not
eligible to participate in the plan.
C. Contributions.
(1) Township contributions. The Township shall contribute, on behalf
of each participant employed on the last day of a pay period, an
amount equal to 6% of the participant's gross compensation for
that pay period. Should the Township, for any reason, fail to make a
contribution as provided for herein, then such deficiency shall be
made up in the pay period immediately following. Township
contributions shall be made only on gross earned salary for time
actually worked or PTO taken while actively employed.
§ 23-11.4 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.4
17:44
(2) Participant contributions. Participants may make voluntary
contributions to the plan. Maximum employee contributions shall
be governed by federal and state laws and regulations. Employee
contributions shall be made by payroll deduction based on an
election in writing by the participant based on notice and
procedures established by the Township.
(3) Rollovers and transfers. The Trustee may receive on behalf of a
participant all or part of the entire amount of any distribution from
a qualified plan that is eligible for rollover in accordance with
requirements of Internal Revenue Code Sections 401(a), 402(c),
403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), 408(d)(3)(A)(ii), or 457(16). Employees
voluntarily opting to transfer into the defined contribution pension
from the defined benefit pension will have their present value of
accumulated benefit transferred into the defined contribution
pension. This amount will be calculated using the actuarial
equivalence as defined under the defined benefit plan provisions,
except the required interest rate should be 7%. If employees
transition into the defined contribution plan, they will no longer
accrue benefits under the defined benefit plan after the date of
transfer.
(4) State aid. The portion of the payments made by the State Treasurer
to the Township and designated by the Board to be allocated to the
Nonuniformed employee's Pension Fund from money received from
taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies
may be used to reduce or eliminate the Township's contributions
pursuant to § 23-11.4C(1) hereof and offset the payment of any
administrative expenses.
(5) Forfeiture. Forfeitures will remain assets of the trust and, at the
Township's discretion, shall be applied to the Township's costs
(contribution and/or expenses) or reallocated to the participant
accounts in the proportion that an individual participant's account
balance (excluding rollover account balances) bears to the total of
all participant accounts.
(6) Accounting and allocations.
(a) The Administrator shall establish and maintain an account in
the name of each participant to which the Administrator shall
credit all amounts allocated to each such participant as
hereinafter set forth.
(b) The Township shall provide the Administrator with all
information required by the Administrator to make a proper
allocation of the Township's contribution for each plan year.
(7) Investment direction by participants.
(a) Rights of participants. To the extent that the Plan
Administrator has established investment categories for
§ 23-11.4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.4
17:45
participant investment direction, each participant shall have
the right and responsibility to designate the investment
category or categories in which the defined contribution
pension is to invest amounts allocated to such participant's
account from contributions made by the Township.
(b) Changes in investment direction. Any designation of
investment categories by a participant shall be made in the
manner prescribed by the Administrator and shall be made at
such reasonable times as shall be determined by the
Administrator.
(c) Available investment categories. There shall be offered such
investment categories as shall be determined in accordance
with uniform nondiscriminatory rules prescribed by the
Administrator from time to time.
(d) Limitations on division of investments. Any participant may
elect as to the allocation among investment categories for the
investment of future contributions in such percentages and at
such time as shall be determined in accordance with uniform
nondiscriminatory rules prescribed by the Administrator.
(e) Failure to elect investment categories. In the absence of
written designation of investment category preference, the
Administrator shall invest all funds received on account of any
participant in the investment category selected by the
Administrator. Any designation of investment category by any
participant shall, on its effective date, cancel any prior
designation by the participant with respect to investment of
future contributions.
(f) Annuity contract or trust. Notwithstanding any instruction
from any participant, the terms of any applicable annuity or
trust agreement shall control investment of fund assets.
(g) Participants shall be directly responsible for investment of
100% of their investment choices and associated fees.
Participant will have direct access to their accounts.
(8) Vesting: full and immediate vested interests. All participants shall
at all times be fully vested in their respective Township and
participant contributions and rollover amounts.
D. Retirement benefits. Payout of proceeds of each participant's account
shall be in accordance with federal law and the requirements of the
defined contribution pension documents, as may be adopted and
amended from time to time by the Township.
E. Death benefits.
§ 23-11.4 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.4
17:46
(1) Death prior to retirement. If a participant dies prior to the
commencement of pension benefits, his/her designated beneficiary
shall be entitled to the participant's account determined pursuant
to this article and the defined contribution pension documents, as
valued at the time of death. If no such beneficiary survives, the
amount will be paid to the participant's estate.
(2) Death after retirement. If a participant dies after distribution has
commenced, the remaining portion of such interest will continue to
be distributed in accordance with the method of distribution
elected pursuant to § 23-11.4F of this chapter.
F. Method of distribution of benefits. Participants' distribution of benefits
shall be subject to the state and federal laws of the 401(a) plan;
however, all retirement distribution will be self-directed by the retired
participant.
G. Termination of employment.
(1) Distribution. As of a participant's termination of employment, he or
she may continue to maintain the 401(a) account with no further
Township contributions or roll over the plan to another qualified
retirement plan. The last Township payment into the plan will not
reflect contributions on additional PTO buyback or severance
payments paid at the time of termination of employment or
retirement.
(2) Reemployment rights. If the terminated participant is rehired by
the Township and reenrolls in the plan within 12 consecutive
months of termination, he or she shall continue to participate in the
plan as if such termination had not occurred, provided that the
Township shall not make contributions for the period in which the
participant is not employed by the Township.
H. Management of fund.
(1) It is the duty of the Administrator to pay the benefits to participants
and their beneficiaries.
(2) The Administrator shall make an annual determination of the fair
market value of the fund as of the anniversary date and as of such
additional dates as the Board may direct. The fair market value of
the fund shall be reported to the members at least annually.
I. Powers and duties of Board.
(1) The plan shall be administered by the Board or a designee of the
Board. The Board or its designee shall make and adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient administration of the plan.
(2) The Board or its designated Administrator shall keep all data,
records and documents pertaining to the administration of the plan
and shall execute all documents necessary to carry out the
§ 23-11.4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.4
17:47
provisions of the plan, and shall provide all such data, records
and documents to any professional whose services are employed
pursuant to this pension.
(3) The Board or its designated Administrator shall construe the
defined contribution pension, shall determine any questions of fact
arising under the pension and shall make all decisions required of it
under the plan and its construction thereof; any decisions and
actions taken thereon in good faith shall be final and conclusive. It
may correct any defect or supply any omission or reconcile any
inconsistency in such manner to such extent as it shall deem
expedient to carry the plan into effect, and it shall be the sole judge
of such expediency. The Board shall act uniformly with respect to
matters coming before it concerning employees and participants in
similar circumstances.
(4) The participants of the Board, and each of them, shall be free of all
liability for any act or omission except by willful misconduct or
gross negligence, and each of them shall be fully indemnified by the
Township against all judgments not involving findings of their
respective personal or collective willful misconduct or gross
negligence and against all costs, including counsel fees incurred in
defense of actions brought against them.
(5) The Board or its designated Administrator shall make available to
participants, retired participants and terminated participants and
to their beneficiaries, for examination during business hours, such
records as pertain to the person examining.
(6) To enable the Board or its Administrator to perform its functions,
the Township shall supply full and timely information to it on all
matters relating to the pay of all participants, their retirement,
death, termination of employment and such other pertinent facts as
the Board may require.
(7) The Board shall enact such rules and regulations for the conduct of
its business and for the administration of the defined contribution
pension as it may consider desirable, provided the same shall not
be in conflict with any of the provisions of the defined contribution
pension. All actions of the Board shall be taken at meetings at
which at least two participants shall be present, or by written
resolution and any resolutions concurred upon by not less than two
of its participants shall be the action of the entire Board. Written
minutes shall be kept of the meetings and actions of the Board.
(8) The Chair and Manager, acting on behalf of the Board, shall have
the power to execute all documents necessary to carry out the
actions of the Board, and any person, partnership, corporation or
government agency shall accept such documents over such
signature or signatures as if executed by the Board.
J. Provisions relating to Township.
§ 23-11.4 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.4
17:48
(1) It is the expectation of the Township that it will continue this
defined contribution pension indefinitely and will from time to time
contribute to the fund such amounts as may be needed to provide
the benefits set forth in this chapter, but continuance of the defined
contribution pension is not assumed as an obligation of the
Township, and the right is reserved by the Township at any time to
reduce, suspend or discontinue its contributions hereunder.
(2) The Township assumes no obligation or responsibility with respect
to the operation of the defined contribution pension and does not
guarantee the payment of the benefits provided for participants of
the defined contribution pension. The Township shall have no
liability with respect to the administration of the fund, and
payments made under the provisions of any ordinance establishing,
amending, or maintaining the defined contribution pension shall
not be a charge on any other fund in the treasury of the Township
or under its control.
(3) Nothing contained in the defined contribution pension shall be held
or construed as a contract or guarantee of employment or to create
any liability upon the Township to retain any person in its service.
The Township reserves the full right to discontinue the service of
any person without any liability, except for salary or wages that
may be due and unpaid, whenever in its judgment its best interests
so require, and such discontinuance shall be without regard to this
defined contribution pension.
K. Termination or amendment of plan.
(1) The Township may amend, curtail or terminate this defined
contribution pension at any time; provided, however, that no
amendment affecting the Administrator or Trustee shall be made
without its consent (other than an amendment having the effect of
termination of the defined contribution pension); nor shall any
amendment be made which will in any manner divert any part of
the fund to any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of
participants or their beneficiaries (except upon termination, such
diversion may be made after all of the fixed and contingent
liabilities to participants and their beneficiaries have been met);
nor shall any amendment be made at any time which will in any
manner divest any benefit then vested in a participant.
(2) In the event of termination of this defined contribution pension, the
Board shall allocate the assets then remaining in the fund, to the
extent that such assets are sufficient, to participants and retired
participants in an amount equal to their respective participant
account balance, reduced in the cases of retired participants by any
prior distributions made to them.
§ 23-11.4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.4
17:49
(3) After allocation of the funds, the Board shall determine whether to
operate the fund as the source of whatever payments the money so
allocated will provide.
L. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) No benefit under this defined contribution pension shall be subject
in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment, pledge or encumbrance, nor to seizure, attachment or
other legal process for the debts of any participants or participant's
beneficiaries.
(2) Any person dealing with the Trustee may rely upon a copy of this
defined contribution pension plan and any amendments thereto
certified to be a true and correct copy by the Administrator or
Trustee.
(3) Anything heretofore contained in the defined contribution pension
plan to the contrary notwithstanding, it is the intention of the
Township that any action herein provided to be taken by the
Administrator or Trustee shall be taken only in accordance with
written instructions of the Board, given in such detail as to
preclude the exercise by the Trustee of discretion in the
performance thereof.
(4) Under no circumstances, whether upon amendment or termination
of this defined contribution pension or otherwise, shall any part of
the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than the
exclusive benefit of participants or their beneficiaries until all of
the actuarial obligations to such participants or participant's
beneficiaries have been met.
(5) If the Board deems any person incapable of receiving benefits to
which he/she is entitled by reason of minority, illness, infirmity, or
other incapacity, it may direct the Administrator or Trustee to make
payment directly for the benefit of such person to the guardian or
trustee of such person, whose receipt shall be a complete
acquittance therefor. Such payment shall, to the extent therefor,
discharge all liability of the Township, the Trustee and the fund.
(6) Should any provision of this defined contribution pension be
determined to be void by any court, the defined contribution
pension will continue to operate and, to the extent necessary, will
be deemed not to include the provision determined to be void.
(7) Headings and captions provided herein are for convenience only
and shall not be deemed part of the defined contribution pension
plan.
(8) This defined contribution pension shall be construed and applied
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania where not in
conflict with federal laws, which shall prevail.
§ 23-11.4 WARWICK CODE § 23-11.4
17:50
(9) All ordinances or resolutions, or portions thereof, inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 23-11.4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-11.4
17:51

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 3-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; amended in its entirety
1-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-1]
§ 23-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases as used in the article shall
have the following meaning, unless a different meaning is clearly
required by the context:
AGE — Age at the nearest birthday.
ATTENDING COLLEGE — Eligible children who are registered at an
accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum
course load of seven credit hours per semester.
BENEFICIARY — Any person, estate, or trust entitled to receive any
payments on the death of a participant.
COMPENSATION — The basic monthly compensation paid to an
employee, including bonuses, overtime pay and other forms of
additional compensation averaged over his/her actual service before
his/her actual retirement date, but not over any period prior to the
time during which benefits are calculated in § 23-15 of this article.
Bonuses, overtime pay and other forms of additional compensation
shall be included in the computation of average compensation for the
purpose of determining the retirement or disability benefit. Overtime
pay, bonuses, and other forms of additional compensation earned in
periods of time other than the period of time during which benefits
are calculated, but paid in the period of time during which pension
benefits are calculated, or paid immediately after retirement shall not
be included in the computation of average compensation for retirement
or disability benefits.
DROP ACCOUNT — A separate account created to accept DROP
participants' monthly pension checks during the period that an
employee is participating in the DROP program.
DROP PROGRAM — Deferred Retirement Option Program.
EMPLOYEE — A person actively engaged by the Township as a police
officer on a regular full-time permanent basis.
ENTRY DATE — January 1 and each anniversary thereof.
FUND — The Warwick Township Police Pension Fund as amended from
time to time.
FUND/TRUST FUND — All cash, investments, and other properties held
and owned by the Trustee hereunder.
INSURED — A person on whose life a policy has been issued under the
plan.
§ 23-12 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-12
17:53
§ 23-13. Age and service requirements.
INSURER — A legal reserve life insurance company which may issue a
policy under this plan.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — A member may elect in writing to defer
his/her retirement date. His/her late retirement date shall be the first
day of any calendar month following his/her normal retirement date on
which he actually retires from active service.
MEMBER — An employee eligible to participate in the benefits
provided hereunder whose pension has not yet commenced.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the calendar month
coincident with or next following attainment of age 55 and completion
of 25 years of service with the Township.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who is eligible and who has completed
the requirements for participation as provided for under this plan.
POLICY — A life insurance and/or annuity contract issued by an insurer.
VALUATION DATE — January 1 of each year.
B. Word usage.
(1) Plurals and genders. Whenever appropriate, words used herein in
the singular may include the plural, or the plural may be read as
the singular, and masculine may include the feminine.
(2) Delegation of authority by Township. Whenever the Township
under the terms of this Agreement is permitted or required to do or
perform any act or matter or thing it shall be done and performed
by its Board of Supervisors or its designate Trustees.
A. All police employees and probationary police employees shall be
members of the police employee pension and retirement plan. Each
police employee may retire or be retired from the Department of Police
of the Township on the first day of the month which next follows the day
on which the police employee attains the age 55 years and has
accumulated 25 years of service.
B. Any police employee employed by the Department of the Police of the
Township, who has been a regularly appointed police employee of the
Department of the Police of the Township for a period of at least six
months and who thereafter shall enter into the military service of the
United States shall have credited to his/her employment record for
pension or retirement benefits all of the time spent by him/her in such
military service, if such person returns or has heretofore returned to
his/her employment within six months after his/her separation from the
military service of the United States.
C. Any police employee shall be eligible to receive credit for intervening
military service as provided in Subsection B above, provided that he/she
§ 23-12 WARWICK CODE § 23-13
17:54
§ 23-14. Pension Board.
The Board of Supervisors agrees to the formation of a Police Pension Fund
Board to be comprised of a representative from the Police Benevolent
Association who is a police employee, a representative from the Board of
Supervisors, the Township Manager, and a resident of Warwick Township
knowledgeable in the funding and operation of pension plans. In the
absence of a Township Manager, his/her position shall remain vacant.
§ 23-15. Disbursement.
is not entitled to receive, eligible to receive now or in the future or
is receiving retirement benefits for such service under a retirement
system administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other
governmental agency with the exception of a member eligible to receive
or receiving military retirement pay earned by a combination of active
duty and non-active duty with a reserve or national guard component
of the armed forces, which retirement pay is payable only upon the
attainment of a specified age and period of service under 10 U.S.C.
Chapter 67 (relating to retired pay for nonregular service).
A. The police employee so retiring will be entitled to receive from the
police pension and retirement fund a monthly pension commencing as
of the first day of the month coincident with or next following his/her
actual retirement and ending with the payment made as outlined in
§ 23-19, Survivor benefits.
B. The amount payable shall be 50% of the police employee's average
monthly compensation for the final 36 months of service as a police
employee. Should there be early retirement or disability eligibility, the
payment will be in proportion to the age and years of service
requirement with the benefits cut back and reduced in accordance with
the same portion to that payable at the normal retirement date. The
payments will be made on a monthly basis.
C. Effective January 1, 1993, payments from the plan shall be subject to a
cost-of-living adjustment (COLA). This adjustment shall be equal to the
change in the Consumer Price Index, provided that the COLA not
exceed 30% of the total initial benefit and not exceed 75% of the final
average salary of the police employee.
D. Effective January 1, 1991, the social security offset will be reduced to
0%.
E. Should the police employee continue his/her employment as a police
officer for the Township beyond his/her normal eligible retirement date,
that police employee will remain a member of the plan until he/she
actually retires or otherwise ceases to be a police employee of the
Township. The police employee must continue to contribute to the plan
as required. However, the 36 months prior to the normal or eligible
§ 23-13 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-15
17:55
§ 23-16. Funding.
The contributions made to the pension plan and the retirement fund so as to
effect and assure that it remains and continues to be actuarially sound shall
be as follows:
§ 23-17. Disability retirement.
retirement date will not be considered in computing the retirement
benefit.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 23-15E above, if the police
employee participates in the DROP program, the police employee is
considered retired for pension purposes but remains an active police
officer.
A. Each police employee and probationary police employee shall
contribute monthly the sum of 5%, the maximum contribution of the
police employee and probationary police employee's compensation, if,
and to the extent, actuarially required.
B. Out of this fund the Township is authorized and empowered to pay any
premium cost incurred to it so as to maintain any disability insurance
plan deemed suitable to fund the police pension and retirement fund, or
to pay a disabled police employee or police probationary employee. The
Township is further authorized and empowered to pay any premium
cost incurred to maintain any other insurance permitted by law and
suitable to fund other benefits provided under terms of the plan. If
actuarially required the Township is authorized to make the deduction
from each police employee and police probationary employee's
paycheck.
C. The Township shall contribute to the police pension and retirement
fund in order to maintain and provide the benefit contemplated by the
police pension and retirement fund. The Township contribution shall be
the amount established by the actuary to maintain the police pension
and retirement fund actuarially sound.
A. The monthly pension benefit that will be payable to a police employee
hired prior to January 1, 2013, who sustains a permanent disability,
giving rise to his/her eligibility for a service-related disability benefit,
shall be equal to 75% of the police employee's final average
compensation, as is hereinabove defined, which is earned and paid in
the final 36 months of active duty. The monthly pension benefit that will
be payable to a police employee hired on or after January 1, 2013, who
sustains a permanent disability, giving rise to his/her eligibility for a
service-related disability benefit, shall be equal to the greater of 50% of
the police employee's final average compensation, as hereinabove
defined, or 50% of the police employee's salary at the time of disability.
§ 23-15 WARWICK CODE § 23-17
17:56
§ 23-18. Termination of participation.
Upon reaching the date which would have been his/her superannuation
retirement date if he/she had continued to be employed as a full-time police
officer, he/she shall be paid a partial superannuation retirement allowance
determined by applying the percentage his/her years of service bears to the
years of service which he/she would have rendered had he/she continued
to work until his/her superannuation retirement date to the gross pension,
using, however, the monthly average salary during the thirty-six-month
period prior to his/her termination of employment.
§ 23-19. Survivor benefits.
Upon the death of the police employee or probationary employee, whether
prior to or after the retirement of the police employee or probationary
police employee, as provided above, the following benefits will be payable
by the plan or from the retirement fund:
B. There is no minimum period of service required for a police employee to
be eligible for a service-related disability pension benefit.
C. A police employee will be deemed to be permanently disabled under
and pursuant to this article when he/she is permanently disabled to the
extent that he/she is unable to perform the usual and normal functions
and duties of a police officer as determined by the Board of Supervisors
as a direct result of an injury or condition that has occurred in the
course of the police employee's employment with the Township. The
restrictions imposed upon the police employee by reason of such
service-related injury or condition shall not be temporary in nature and
shall not arise by reason of a non-service-connected illness, condition or
injury. The restrictions imposed upon the police employee must
preclude the officer from performing his/her functions and duties
associated with the occupation of a police officer, as certified by a
physician licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, selected and designated to evaluate the police employee
by the Township.
A. The surviving spouse, or if no spouse survives or if the surviving spouse
subsequently dies, then the child or children under the age of 18 years
or if attending college, under or attaining the age of 23 years, of the
police employee or the probationary police employee will be paid a
monthly pension commencing as of the first day of the month next
following the date on which the police employee or probationary police
employee's death occurred and terminating as of the first day of the
month in which the surviving spouse dies. That sum no less than 1/2 or
50% of the monthly pension benefit which was then being paid to the
retired police employee or probationary police employee had he/she
qualified for the benefits as provided under the pension plan as of the
date on which his/her death occurred.
§ 23-17 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-19
17:57
B. If the police employee or the probationary police employee should die
without leaving a spouse to survive him/her, or if the surviving spouse
subsequently dies, then in that event there will be paid a monthly
pension to the guardian of the estate of each surviving child of the
police employee or probationary police employee, commencing as of
the first day of the month which next follows that date on which the
police employee or probationary police employee's death occurs, or his/
her spouse dies, and terminating on the first day of the month in which
the child either dies or attains the age of 18 years, or, if attending
college, under or attaining the age of 23 years, whichever event first
occurs. The monthly benefit shall be proportionately allocated to each
remaining child and monthly pension benefit that was then being paid
to the police employee or probationary police employee, he/she been
qualified to receive benefits, as provided under the pension plan and as
determined as of the date on which the police employee or probationary
employee's death occurred; provided, however, that the aggregate
payment of all monthly benefit that was being paid or which would have
been payable to the police employee or probationary employee's
surviving spouse, if one would have survived or qualified.
C. As each child ceases to be eligible for the pension benefit provided
herein, that child's share will become payable to the remaining children
who do qualify hereunder. It is understood that the monthly benefit
formally paid to the guardian of the estate for a dependent child who
either dies or has attained the age of 18 years, or if attending college
the age of 23 years, will then be divided among the remaining surviving
children who are then eligible for such benefits in order that the
monthly benefit of the remaining dependent children will increase
equally, provided that no such increased benefit may exceed the
monthly pension which would be payable hereunder. The aggregate
monthly dependent child benefit shall not exceed the monthly spousal
benefit that either had been paid to the spouse or would have been
payable.
D. The surviving spouse of a member of the police force who dies before
his/her pension has vested or if no spouse survives or if he or she
survives and subsequently dies, the child or children under the age of
18 years, or, if attending college, under or attaining the age of 23 years,
of the member of the police force shall be entitled to receive repayment
of all money which the member invested in the pension fund plus
interest or other increases in value of the member's investments in the
pension fund, unless the member has designated another beneficiary
for this purpose.
E. In the case of payment of pensions to families of members killed in
service, the amount and commencement of the payments shall be paid
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to the terms and
conditions of Act 51.12
12.Editor's Note: Act 51 of 2009. See 53 P.S. § 891.
§ 23-19 WARWICK CODE § 23-19
17:58
§ 23-20. Minimum benefit.
If a police employee or probationary police employee is not survived by
a spouse or children and the death benefits payable pursuant to the
provisions hereof leave remaining additional contributions made by the
police employee or probationary police employee in the plan or retirement
fund that have not been distributed prior to the police employee's or
probationary police employee's death, the aggregate of all contributions
made by the police employee or probationary police employee prior to his/
her death with the interest thereon computed at the rate of 4% per annum,
compounded annually from the plan year of deposit to the excess of such
contribution with interest at the police employee or probationary police
employees his/her spouse or children as of the date of his/her death or the
cessation of the spouse's or children's benefits, whichever is last to occur.
§ 23-21. Designated beneficiary.
The Township shall provide and keep on file forms for the police employee
to designate his/her beneficiary for this pension plan.
§ 23-22. Vesting and severance of employment.
F. Further, if, at the time of the police employee's or probationary police
employee's death, the spouse of the police employee or probationary
police employee is "with child," this child thereafter born to the spouse
will be considered a dependent child from the date of his/her birth, and
such child will be eligible for inclusion in the monthly benefit hereunder
provided.
A. If the police employee or probationary employee terminates his/her
employment with the Township, or otherwise ceases to be a member of
the Department of the Police of the Township, whether by reason of his/
her transfer to another Department of Police or employer, resignation,
discharge, firing or for any other reason prior to vesting as is
hereinafter provided, and unless an authorized leave of absence is duly
approved by the Supervisors, the police employee or probationary
police employee will be entitled to a refund of all contributions
computed at the rate of 4% per annum, compounded annually and
calculated with regard to the police employee's or probationary police
employee's contribution in which manner as to disregard fractional
pension plan years during which the police employee's or the
probationary police employee's contributions may have been held in the
police pension and retirement fund.
B. A police employee who has been employed by the Township and has 12
years of continuous service as a police employee with the Township
shall be vested under this pension plan. Should a police employee
terminate his/her employment with the Township or otherwise cease to
be a member of the Department of Police of the Township following the
completion of the requirements for retirement, that is, before
§ 23-19 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-22
17:59
§ 23-23. Administration of fund; powers and duties of Trustees.
completing the superannuation retirement age and service
requirements, or of satisfying the disability provisions hereunder before
set forth, that police employee may not withdraw his/her contribution
and interest accrual thereon without the expressed written consent of
the Board of Supervisors. A police employee will then be eligible to
receive benefits under the plan and from the retirement fund upon
the date at which the employee shall have satisfied superannuation
age and service requirements. The benefits paid hereunder will be a
partial superannuation retirement allowance determined by applying
the percentage his/her year of service bears to the years of service
which he/she would have rendered, had the police employee continued
to work until his/her superannuation retirement date to the gross
pension, using the monthly average salary as a police employee of
the Township during his/her termination of employment. The benefits
hereunder are those as authorized by the amendment of December 7,
1979, Act No. 1979-99, P.S. § 711.13
A. Administration. The police pension fund shall be under the direction of
the governing body of this municipality or such committee or persons as
the governing body of this municipality may from time to time designate
by resolution, who shall act as Trustees of the pension fund, and such
Trustees shall have full responsibility for the administration of the
program established hereunder and shall hold, invest, reinvest and
distribute all funds or other property received pursuant hereto in trust
for the purposes of this article. The Trustees may receive at any time
and from time to time gifts, grants, devises or bequests to the pension
fund of any money or property, real, personal, or mixed, to be held by
them in trust for the benefit of this fund in accordance with the
provisions hereof. The Trustee shall have full power and authority by a
majority action of its members either directly or through their
designated representative, to all acts, execute, acknowledge and
deliver all instruments and exercise for the sole benefit of the
participants hereunder, any and all powers and discretions necessary to
implement and effectuate the purposes of this article, including for
purposes of illustration, but not limited to any and all of the following:
(1) To hold, invest and reinvest all funds received pursuant to this
article, in such legal investments as may be authorized as legal
investments under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(2) To enter into contracts of deposit agreements on behalf of this
municipality with one or more insurance companies, in order to
provide the pension and other benefits herein set forth, and to pay
the premiums and deposits required by the purchase of said
contracts;
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 771.
§ 23-22 WARWICK CODE § 23-23
17:60
(3) To retain or purchase as an investment any form of annuity or
contracts of similar nature, and to exercise with respect thereto
any right or incident of ownership;
(4) To retain any property which may at any time become an asset of
the fund, as long as said Trustee may deem inadvisable; and
(5) To make distribution of the monies in the fund, in accordance with
the terms of this article;
(6) To make, execute and deliver, as Trustees, with provision for no
individual liability all instruments in writing necessary for the
exercise of any of their powers;
(7) To employ a bank or trust company as their agent, to act as
custodian and/or manage part or parts, or the whole of the
investments of the Trust; nothing herein contained shall be
construed as requiring the Trustees to employ any bank or trust
company as custodian or agent; and the Trustees shall not be liable
for any loss resulting from the acts or omissions of such agent or
for acting upon the advice of such agent or for failing to act in the
absence of any such advice;
(8) To register securities in the name of a nominee or nominees. The
Trustees may invest and reinvest the assets of this Trust in such a
manner and at such times as the Trustees may deem advisable and
proper. It is the intention of the employer that the Trustees shall
have absolute discretion in the matter of the selection of securities
or other property in which the trust assets shall be invested from
time to time. Securities or other property, as used herein, shall be
deemed to include, specifically, stocks, either common or
preferred, mutual funds, annuity contracts or other fixed or
variable, notes, bonds, debentures, mortgages, junior mortgages
and/or other securities of any kind whatsoever, ground rents, real
and/or leasehold property, although any of the above may not be
legal investments for trust funds under the laws applicable thereto,
and even though such securities or other property may not be
commonly considered as appropriate investments for trust funds.
The Trustees shall be under no obligation to diversify.
B. A Trustee may be a participant under the fund, but no discrimination,
rights or privileges shall result from this relationship. In any matter
pertaining to his/her own particular participation, the Trustees shall be
disqualified to act upon the particular matter. This matter shall be
resolved by the remaining Trustees.
C. Any Trustee may be removed by the Board of Supervisors upon 30 days'
written notice to such Trustee. Any Trustee may resign from the fund
upon giving 30 days' written notice. There may, at any given time, be
one Trustee or any number of Trustees. When a vacancy occurs, the
Board shall forthwith appoint a successor Trustee. Any person or entity
so appointed shall become a Trustee upon the filing of his/her
§ 23-23 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-23
17:61
§ 23-24. Encumbrances prior to receipt of benefit void.
No benefit payable at any time under the Trust, prior to receipt thereof by
the participant, shall be subject in any manual to alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment or pledge; nor to attachment or encumbrance of any kind,
nor shall any retirement benefit, until actually paid to the participant,
be in any manner liable for or subject to the debts or liability of said
participant entitled to any retirement benefit. Any attempt to alienate, sell,
transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise encumber any such benefit, prior to
receipt thereof by the participant, in violation of the restrictions set forth
in the preceding sentence shall be void. If a participant shall attempt to or
shall alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise encumber his/her
benefits payable under the Trust or any part hereof, or, if by reason of his/
her bankruptcy or other event happening at any time, such benefits should
devolve upon anyone else or could not be enjoyed by him, then the Trustees,
in their discretion, may terminate his/her interest in any such benefits and
hold or apply it to or for the benefit of such person, his/her spouse, children
or other dependents, or any of them, in such a matter as the Trustees may
deem proper.
§ 23-25. Forfeiture of unclaimed benefits.
In the event that benefits payable hereunder are unclaimed for six years,
and the whereabouts of any person entitled to such benefits are not known
to the Trustee, such benefits will be forfeited.
§ 23-26. Severability of fund provisions.
In case any provision of this fund shall be held illegal or void, such illegality
or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Trust but shall
be fully severable, and the fund shall be construed and enforced as if said
illegal or invalid provisions had not been inserted herein.
§ 23-27. DROP program.
acceptance in writing. If he/she is removed or resigns, a Trustee shall,
immediately upon the request of the Board or any other Trustee,
execute all documents necessary to transfer the fund assets to any
successor Trustee or Trustees. Any successor Trustee or Trustees shall
have and exercise all the powers and authority, discretionary and
otherwise, herein conferred upon the original Trustees, shall be bound
by the obligations and duties herein imposed upon the original
Trustees, and shall be entitled to all the privileges, exculpation,
indemnity and immunities hereby granted to the original Trustees.
D. Is it intended that this fund not be administered under the supervision
of any court, but the Trustees shall not be prevented from requesting a
court or appropriate jurisdiction to supervise this fund.
A. Eligibility. Effective immediately, members of the Warwick Township
Police Department who have not retired prior to the implementation of
§ 23-23 WARWICK CODE § 23-27
17:62
the DROP program may enter into DROP on or after their normal
retirement date.
B. Written election. A member of the Police Department electing to
participate in the DROP must complete and execute a DROP Option
Form prepared by Warwick Township, which shall evidence the
member's participation in the DROP. The form must be signed by the
member, notarized and submitted to the Township at least 30 days prior
to the date on which the member wishes the DROP option to be
effective. The DROP option notice shall include an irrevocable notice to
the Township, by the member, that the member shall resign from
employment with the Warwick Township Police Department effective on
a specific date (the "resignation date"). In no event shall the resignation
date be shorter than 12 months or longer than 60 months from the
execution of the DROP option form. An officer shall cease to work as a
Township police officer on the officer's resignation date, unless the
Township terminates or honorably discharges the officer prior to the
resignation date. In addition, all retirement and requisite pension
documents required by the Township must be filed and presented to the
Township administration for approval of retirement and payment of
pension. Once a retirement application has been approved by the Board
of Supervisors and/or the Trustee, it is irrevocable.
C. Limitation of pension accrual. After the effective date of the DROP
option, the member shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of
continuous service for pension purposes.
D. Benefit calculation. For all pension fund purposes, continuous service of
a member participating in the DROP shall remain as it existed on the
effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. Service
thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or
determination of any benefits payable by the Warwick Township Police
Pension Plan. Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits
payable by the pension fund. The pension benefit payable to the
members shall increase only as a result of a cost of living increase as
provided for in § 23-15C.
E. Payments to the DROP account. The monthly retirement benefits that
would have been payable had the police officer elected to cease
employment and receive a normal retirement benefit shall, upon the
police officer commencing participation in DROP, be paid into the
separate account established to receive the participant's monthly
pension payments. This account shall be designated the DROP account.
An individual officer's DROP account shall be a self-directed investment
vehicle, with the officer having exclusive control over the investment of
his or her DROP account monies. The Township accepts no
responsibility and makes no guarantee for the performance of any
investments made by the officer, nor shall the Township guarantee or be
required to guarantee that an officer's DROP account generate a
specific amount of earnings or income or any earning or income at all.
§ 23-27 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-27
17:63
Any investment losses occurring in an officer's DROP account shall be
solely the responsibility of the officer, and the Township assumes no
liability or responsibility for same.
F. Accrual of nonpension benefits. After an officer elects to participate in
the DROP program, all other contractual benefits shall continue to
accrue, with the exception of those provisions relating to the Police
Pension Plan and the buyback of accrued, but unused, sick or vacation
time. Prior to participating in the DROP program, an officer may
request payment for any accrued but unused sick or vacation time for
which the Township would contractually be obligated to buy back from
the officer upon retirement. An officer may utilize leave time during the
DROP period, but the Township shall not be contractually obligated to
buy back any such unused leave time at the end of the DROP period.
G. Payout. Upon the resignation date set forth in the member's DROP
option notice or such date as the Township separates the member from
employment, the retirement benefits payable to the member or
member's beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid to the member or
beneficiary and shall no longer be paid to the member's DROP account.
These benefits shall be paid to the member no later than 30 days
following the resignation or termination date and shall be paid to the
member in a single lump sum payment or at the member's option, in
any fashion permitted by law.
H. Disability during DROP. If a member becomes temporarily disabled
during his participation in DROP, the member shall receive disability
pay in the same amount as disabled police officers who are not
participating in DROP. In no event shall a member on temporary
disability have the ability to draw from his DROP account. However,
notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, if an officer is
disabled and has not returned to work as of the date of his required
resignation or per the CBA, then such resignation shall take precedence
over all other provisions herein, and said officer shall be required to
resign. Nothing contained in the plan shall be construed as conferring
any legal rights upon any police employee or other person to a
continuation of employment, nor shall participation in the DROP
program supersede or limit in any way the right of the Township to
honorably discharge a police employee based upon an inability to
perform his or her full duties as a police officer.
I. Death. If a DROP member dies before the DROP account balances are
paid, the participant member's legal beneficiary shall have the same
rights as the member to withdraw the account balance.
J. Forfeiture of benefits. Notwithstanding an officer's participation in the
DROP plan, an officer who is convicted or pleads guilty to engaging in
criminal misconduct which constitutes a "crime, related to public office
or public employment," as that phrase is defined in Pennsylvania's
Pension Forfeiture Act, 43 P.S. §§ 1311 through 1314, shall forfeit his
right to receive a pension, including any amounts currently deposited in
§ 23-27 WARWICK CODE § 23-27
17:64
the DROP account. In such a case, the member shall only be entitled
to receive the contributions, if any, made by the member to the fund,
without interest.
K. Account manager. The DROP participant shall be solely responsible for
the administration of his or her individual DROP account. The Township
shall not be responsible for any investment loss incurred in the plan or
for the failure of an investment to earn a specific or expected return or
to earn as much as any other opportunity, whether or not such other
investment opportunity was offered or available to participants in the
plan.
L. Cost of management for DROP program. Any costs or fees associated
with the management of the DROP accounts shall be paid directly from
the individual DROP accounts. Under no circumstances shall any such
costs or fees be paid by the Township or by the pension plan itself.
M. Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP program shall be consistent
with the provision covering deferred retirement option plans set forth
in any applicable collective bargaining agreement and shall be binding
upon all future DROP participants and upon all DROP participants who
have balances in their deferred retirement option accounts. The DROP
plan may only be amended by a written instrument, not by any oral
agreement or past practice.
N. Construal of provisions. An officer's election to participate in the DROP
program shall in no way be construed as a limitation on the Township's
right to suspend or terminate an officer for just cause or to grant the
officer an honorable discharge based upon a physical or mental inability
to perform his or her duties.
O. Severability. The provisions of DROP shall be severable, and if any or all
of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the
validity of any remaining provisions of DROP shall not be affected
thereby. In the event that the DROP provision is declared invalid or
illegal by a court of jurisdiction or through an administrative
determination of the Office of the Auditor General, the Police
Benevolent Association shall have the right to bargain in accordance
with Act 111 over deletion of this benefit. It is expressly understood that
this shall not involve bargaining over a replacement provision.
P. If the Office of the Auditor General, at any time, finds the DROP plan to
be invalid, it shall either be revised to conform to the requirements of
the Auditor General or, if that is not possible, it (DROP program) shall
be terminated. In the event of such a termination, all members shall be
considered retired/terminated from employment on the date they
became members of the DROP program, and all funds contained in the
DROP accounts shall be paid to the member in accordance with the
provisions contained herein.
§ 23-27 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 23-28
17:65
§ 23-28. Construal of provisions.
The fund agreement shall be construed according to the laws of the State of
Pennsylvania, where it is made and where it shall be enforced.
§ 23-29. Severability; repealer; when effective.
A. If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this article
shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part
thereof.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. The article, upon enactment, replaces and supersedes all previous
versions. This article shall be effective five days after enactment.
§ 23-28 WARWICK CODE § 23-29
17:66
Chapter 25
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 25-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, hereby signifies its intention and desire to create and to
organize the Planning Commission under the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of July 31, 1968, reenacted and
amended by Act 170 of December 21, 1988.14
§ 25-2. Membership; appointment; terms; vacancy; removal;
compensation.
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom
shall be residents of Warwick Township and six15 of whom shall not be
officers or employees of Warwick Township. [Amended 1-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-2; 11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
B. The terms of office of the members shall be four years or until a
successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the
members first appointed shall be so fixed that no more than three
members shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
year. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify
the Board of Supervisors concerning vacancies on the Planning
Commission.
C. In the event that a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors for the unexpired term.
D. Any member of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors taken after the member has received 15 days'
advance written notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be
only for the unexpired term.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 23-29 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 25-2
17:67
§ 25-3. Conduct of business.
§ 25-4. Powers and duties.
E. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation, but they may be reimbursed for necessary and
reasonable expenses. Elected or appointed officers or employees of
Warwick Township shall not, by reason of membership on the Planning
Commission, forfeit the right to exercise the powers, perform the duties
or receive the compensations of the municipal offices held by them
during membership on the Planning Commission.
A. The Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice
Chairman, and it may create and fill such other offices as it may
determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed
themselves.
B. The Planning Commission may make and alter bylaws and rules and
regulations to govern its procedures, consistent with the ordinances of
Warwick Township and the laws of Pennsylvania.
C. The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its
activities to the Board of Supervisors. Interim reports may be so made
as often as may be necessary or as requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. The Planning Commission shall at the request of the Board of
Supervisors have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of Warwick
Township as set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code16 and
present it for the consideration of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the Board
of Supervisors.
(3) Perform such other duties which are imposed upon it by law as the
planning agency for Warwick Township.
B. The Planning Commission, at the request of the Board of Supervisors,
may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a Zoning
Ordinance and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 25-2 WARWICK CODE § 25-4
17:68
on proposed amendments to it as authorized by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations as
authorized by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(4) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a Building Code
and a Housing Code and make recommendations concerning
proposed amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(6) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors an environmental
study.
(7) Submit to the Board of Supervisors a recommended capital
improvements program.
(8) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a water survey,
which shall be consistent with the state water plan and any
applicable water resources plan adopted by a river basin
commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
(9) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(10) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(11) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(12) Present testimony before any board.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of Warwick
Township such available information as relates to the work of the
Planning Commission.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent of the owner.
(15) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a study regarding
the feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources
in specific areas within Warwick Township.
(16) Review the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,17 the Official Map, provisions for planned
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning, and Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 25-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 25-4
17:69
§ 25-5. Administrative and technical assistance.
Chapter 29
WATER AND SEWER RESOURCE PANEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183. Water conservation — See Ch. 187.
§ 29-1. Panel established; membership; terms.
A Water and Sewer Resource Panel is hereby established, which shall
consist of the persons then serving as members of the Warwick Township
Water and Sewer Authority, who shall serve on said Panel so long as they
continue to serve as members of said Authority.
§ 29-2. Reimbursement of expenses.
Members of the Water and Sewer Resource Panel shall serve without
compensation; provided, however, that the Board may authorize
reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the
performance of a Panel member's duties.
§ 29-3. Duties and responsibilities.
The duties and responsibilities of the Water and Sewer Resource Panel shall
be as follows:
residential development and such other ordinances and regulations
governing the development of land in Warwick Township no less
frequently than it reviews the Warwick Township Comprehensive
Plan.
A. The Board of Supervisors may employ administrative and technical
services as consultants on particular matters or as regular employees of
Warwick Township to aid the Planning Commission in carrying out its
powers and duties.
B. The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the Board of
Supervisors, accept and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance
made available by Bucks County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
the United States government or any of their agencies or from private
sources. The Board of Supervisors may enter into agreements or
contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of such funds or
assistance in accordance with the governmental procedures of Warwick
Township.
§ 25-4 WARWICK CODE § 29-3
29:70
§ 29-4. Panel to be advisory.
The Water and Sewer Resource Panel shall be only an advisory panel of
the Board. The Panel shall have no authority to set official policies for the
Township nor to legally bind the Township in any manner whatsoever.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 41
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 41-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person, partnership,
corporation or other business entity for profit which engages in the activity
of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing, monitoring or responding to burglar, holdup or fire alarm
systems, or which causes these activities to take place.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility or for alerting others about the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility or for alerting others
about the existence of any other condition requiring response of police,
fire or ambulance personnel and which emits and/or transmits an audible
A. To serve as a resource and advisory panel for the Board in matters
relating to the provision of water and sewer facilities for the Township.
B. To collect information regarding the availability of water resources
within the Township.
C. To collect information regarding various methods of on-site sewage
disposal.
D. To collect information regarding various methods of off-site sewage
disposal.
E. To review information regarding the relationship between provision of
pure water and safe disposal of sanitary sewage.
F. To review whether water facilities and/or sewage disposal systems to be
constructed in conjunction with land development should be required to
be dedicated to the Township and to report regarding the same to the
Board.
G. To perform such other duties in connection with water and sewer
facilities as the Board shall from time to time request.
§ 29-3 WATER AND SEWER RESOURCE PANEL § 41-1
29:71
or visual signal or message when activated. Alarm system includes but is
not limited to direct-dial telephone devices, automatic protection devices,
audible alarms and subscriber alarms.
DIRECT-DIAL ALARM — A device that, when activated, causes a recorded
message to be transmitted, via telephone, to any emergency service,
including but not limited to fire companies, ambulance, rescue squad and/
or police departments serving any Warwick Township residence or business,
stating that emergency response is necessary.
EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER — That primary phone number advertised
to the public for requesting emergency services.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal necessitating response by the emergency
agency where an emergency situation does not exist. An alarm that has
been activated by an external source that is beyond the reasonable control
of the subscriber shall not be considered false.
POLICE — The Warwick Township Police Department.
§ 41-2. (Reserved)
§ 41-3. Device specifications; fees.
§ 41-4. Confidentiality; written notice of false alarms; written
warning of penalties or prosecution; violations and penalties.
A. Audible alarms.
(1) Audible alarms must be silenced within 15 minutes after a
designated responsible person is notified by the police to do so.
(2) The alarm system shall be equipped with a timing device that will
automatically silence the audible alarm within 15 minutes after it is
activated.
B. The direct-dial alarms shall not be connected to the emergency agency
emergency phone number. A secondary phone number may be provided
by the responding agency for direct-dial alarms only. Direct-dial alarms
must be equipped with a device that will prevent more than three
repeated transmissions of an alarm for the same emergency.
C. All persons installing a commercial or business fire alarm shall file an
application for installation of such device, with an application fee in
accordance to the Township Fee Schedule,18 prior to the installation of
the device. Such installation shall be inspected by a representative of
Warwick Township prior to being placed into service.
A. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the exclusive use of the police and fire
departments.
18.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 41-1 WARWICK CODE § 41-4
29:72
Chapter 45
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permits and licenses — See Ch. 138.
§ 45-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical or electrical
device which provides amusement or entertainment which may be operated
or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin or token or by any other
B. Any police officer investigating an alarm activation will leave a written
notice of alarm investigation including the time and date of the
violation.
C. Upon receipt of the second false alarm the Warwick Township Police
Department will send notice of the false alarm to the registered user.
The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the property,
stating the time, date and number of violations received to date.
D. Upon receipt of the third false alarm activated within a twelve-month
period, the Warwick Township Police Department shall send, by first
class mail, notice to the owner of the property indicating the time, date
and number of violations received to date, along with a warning that
subsequent false alarms within a twelve-month period may result in
penalties or prosecution under applicable state law.
E. Upon receipt of the fourth or more false alarm within a twelve-month
period, the Warwick Township Police Department shall send notice to
the owner of the property by certified mail, including a penalty in
accordance with the Township Fee Schedule.19
F. In the event the owner of the property fails or refuses, after receipt of
the notices set forth in Subsections B through E, to pay the required
fees and take measures to cause the false alarms to cease, or if the
property owner fails to comply with any other provision of this chapter,
the Township may file a citation for violation of this chapter. Any owner,
lessee or user found guilty in a summary procedure before a District
Justice of violating any section of this chapter other than the provision
regulating the number of false alarms shall be fined not less than $300
nor more than $600.
19.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 41-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 45-1
45:73
means. This definition shall include, in addition to devices commonly known
as "coin-operated amusement devices," all pocket pool tables, bumper pool
tables, billiard tables, hockey games, air hockey games, soccer games,
fussball games and all similar devices. This definition shall not include
jukeboxes, telephone devices or machines that sell merchandise.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE — Any place of business
or establishment or any structure containing four or more coin-operated
amusement devices.
OPERATOR — Proprietor, lessee, manager or employee of any coin-operated
amusement device or business.
PREMISES — A building or a part of a building where coin-operated
amusement devices are located under the ownership or control of the
operator.
§ 45-2. License required.
A. No coin-operated amusement device shall be installed, operated or
maintained in any store, shop, tavern, restaurant or other place of
business or in or about any private club or organization or in or about
any structure unless the proprietor of the premises shall have first
obtained a license for that purpose from the Township. No license shall
be required for coin-operated amusements located in residential
structures which are available for private use only.
B. As of the effective date of this chapter, the Township may issue to said
proprietor a license as provided for in Subsection A above, provided
that one machine shall be allowed for the first 200 square feet of floor
area. For the purposes herein, "floor area" shall be defined as the floor
area within a structure intended to be used by patrons, guests,
members, parishioners, clients or customers.
C. The requirements set forth in Subsection B hereof shall not be
applicable to machine(s) which are used in educational facilities for
educational purposes.
D. Any licensee pursuant to Subsection A above who would not be in
conformance with the provisions set forth in Subsection B hereof as of
the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to continue said
nonconformance beyond the effective date of this chapter, provided that
no additional skill amusement machine licenses shall be granted to said
licensee which would increase said nonconformance. However, any
provisions to the contrary herein contained notwithstanding, a license
shall be procured for each coin-operated amusement device as required
herein.
E. Every person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a coin-operated
amusement device license as required by Subsection A hereof shall
annually file a written application to the Township on forms approved
by the Board, together with an application fee as set forth in the
§ 45-1 WARWICK CODE § 45-2
45:74
§ 45-3. Arcade license required for certain uses.
Warwick Township Fee Schedule. 20 The license shall be prominently
displayed on the premises in a conspicuous place near the entrance.
Prior to any additional machines being installed on the premises, a
new license shall be procured. No licensed machine shall be moved to
another premises within the Township without a new license having
first been acquired for that machine.
F. Before a coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued, an
inspection of the premises shall be made by the Building Official, who
shall determine that all the requirements of this chapter have been met.
G. The Township, upon receiving such an application, if presented in due
form and upon being advised by the Building Official that said premises
conforms to the requirements hereof, shall grant such coin-operated
amusement device license to the applicant for a term expiring on the
31st day of December of each year. Each license shall be in such form as
the Board may prescribe and shall contain the name, address, place of
business, number of machines licensed and the date of expiration of
said license and shall be authenticated by the signature of the proper
Township official. All licenses shall be issued to a specific person, firm
or corporation and for a specific location.
H. The provisions of § 45-2 of this chapter and each part thereof are
intended to apply only to places of business or establishments or
structures having fewer than four coin-operated amusement devices
and do not apply to coin-operated amusement device arcades as that
term is defined in this chapter.
A. No coin-operated amusement device shall be established, maintained or
conducted in the Township by any person, firm or corporation without
first obtaining a license to operate such a place from the Township, and
no operator, as defined herein, shall allow or permit the use of four or
more coin-operated amusement devices unless a coin-operated
amusement device arcade license for such use shall have been obtained
from the Township.
B. Every person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a license for a coinoperated
amusement device arcade as required by this chapter shall
annually file a written application to the Township on forms approved
by the Board, together with an application fee as set forth in the
Warwick Township Fee Schedule. 21 In addition to the aforementioned
application fee, said application shall also be accompanied by an
additional fee for each machine as set forth in the Warwick Township
Fee Schedule.
20.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
21.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 45-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 45-3
45:75
§ 45-4. Denial of license.
No coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued:
§ 45-5. General requirements for arcade operation.
C. Each operator or licensee shall, at all times, display the coin-operated
amusement device arcade license granted hereunder in a conspicuous
place near the entrance to the licensed establishment. A licensed
machine shall not be transferred to another premises within the
Township without the obtaining of a new license.
D. Before any license for a coin-operated amusement device arcade and
before any coin-operated amusement device licenses for coin-operated
amusement devices to be located within a coin-operated amusement
device arcade shall be issued, inspection of the premises shall be made
by the Building Official. Before such licenses shall be issued, the
Building Official shall determine that the application has conformed to
all requirements of this chapter.
E. The Township, upon receiving application for licenses for a coinoperated
amusement device arcade and coin-operated amusement
device, if presented in due form and upon being advised by the Building
Official that said premises conform to the requirements hereof, shall
grant such coin-operated amusement device arcade license and coinoperated
amusement device license to the applicant for a term expiring
on the 31st day of December of each year. Each license shall be in such
form as the Board may prescribe and shall contain the name, address,
place of business, number of machines licensed and the date of
expiration of said license and shall be authenticated by the signature of
the proper Township official.
F. All licenses shall be issued to a specific person, firm or corporation and
for a specific location.
A. Where the individual operator, managing agent of a corporation or
active partner has been convicted of a crime involving a controlled
substance, alcohol or minors or a crime involving moral turpitude.
B. For any premises, unless there is compliance with the pertinent
provisions of all Township ordinances, as far as can be determined.
C. For any premises that have living quarters with direct entry to the
premises.
D. Whenever the Board shall find that the denial of such license is
necessary for the protection and conservation of the character and
social and economic stability of the surrounding area and/or is
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township.
§ 45-3 WARWICK CODE § 45-5
45:76
§ 45-6. Renewal and transferability of license.
Any license issued in accordance with this chapter may be renewed for an
additional year on the same terms and subject to the same requirements
as provided herein for an original license. Whenever the holder of said
license desires to effect a change in the place of doing business, he shall
make application for the required licenses for such new place in the same
manner as in the first instance. Furthermore, the application for a renewal
of the existing license shall be subject to the same application fees as an
application for an initial license. No license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person or entity, excepting
the person or entity to which it was issued, be permitted to do business
thereunder, either directly or indirectly.
§ 45-7. Revocation of license.
The Board shall have the right to revoke any license once granted when it
appears to its satisfaction that any operator or licensee has violated this
chapter, any other Township ordinance or statute of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or of the United States involving controlled substances,
alcohol, minors or any offense involving moral turpitude. The revocation of
any license shall not be made without a hearing. At least 10 days' notice
shall first be given to the operator or licensee, setting forth the time and
place of hearing and the reasons for such proposed revocation.
§ 45-8. Time limit for action on application; hearing.
Any application for license not acted upon by the Township within 30 days
from the date of application shall be deemed to be denied. Any applicant
refused the issuance of a license shall have the right to have a hearing
before the Board. No hearing shall be scheduled unless requested, in
writing, by an applicant refused the license within 10 days of the denial of
the license. Upon the request for a hearing, the Township shall give written
notice to the applicant of the time and place of the hearing and the reasons
for the denial of the license.
§ 45-9. Administration and enforcement.
The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and/or enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
A. No operator of a coin-operated amusement device arcade nor any
licensee of a coin-operated amusement device arcade shall open the
licensed premises for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:30
a.m. (local time).
B. There shall be an attendant on duty on the premises at all times that a
licensed premises shall be open for business.
§ 45-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 45-10
45:77
§ 45-10. Fees.
All fees shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.22
§ 45-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation or entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300, plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of said fine, said
person, the members of said partnership or the officers of said corporation
or members of said entity shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the Bucks
County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected for
the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
Chapter 49
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 111.
Noise — See Ch. 123.
Amusement tax — See Ch. 171, Art. II.
§ 49-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this
chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY — An agent, occupant, lessee,
contract purchaser or person other than the owner having possession or
control of property.
PUBLIC GATHERING — All assemblies of people for the purpose of public
amusement reasonably anticipated to number more than 300 for a
continuous period of three hours or more, whether or not an admission fee
is charged. Public gatherings, municipally sponsored, are exempt from the
permitting requirements of this chapter.
SPONSOR — Any person, association, partnership, firm, corporation, joint
venture or any other legal entity whatsoever who initiates, organizes,
promotes, permits, conducts or causes to be advertised a public gathering.
§ 49-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of property or person in charge
of property to initiate, organize, promote, permit, conduct or cause to be
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 45-10 WARWICK CODE § 49-2
49:78
advertised a public gathering unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to
this chapter. A separate permit shall be required for each public gathering
for the period of time designated by the permit.
§ 49-3. Sponsor, property owner and person in charge required to
jointly obtain permit.
No public gathering may be held within the boundaries of the Township
unless the sponsor, the owner of property and the person in charge of the
property upon which the gathering will be conducted jointly apply for and
are granted a permit as provided in this chapter.
§ 49-4. Limitations on permit.
§ 49-5. Application to be submitted prior to public gathering.
Written application for a permit for each public gathering shall be submitted
to the Board at least 60 days prior to the first day upon which the public
gathering is to commence.
§ 49-6. Contents of application.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms specified by the Board and
shall contain the following information:
A. No permit shall be available for an extent of more than 36 hours'
duration unless the application and the permit specifically allow for an
extension of that period.
B. No applicant shall be under 21 years of age.
C. No permit may be transferred or assigned.
D. In case of dispute regarding the number of people reasonably
anticipated to attend a public gathering, the decision of the Board or its
designee shall control.
A. The full legal names, addresses and telephone numbers of all sponsors.
B. The full legal names and addresses of the owner and person in charge
of the property to be utilized for the public gathering.
C. If the sponsor-applicant is a partnership or joint venture, then all
parties thereof shall sign as applicants. If the sponsor-applicant is a
corporation, copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws and
resolutions authorizing the application may be required.
D. The location and address of the property to be utilized for the public
gathering.
E. The program for the public gathering or, if no program is prepared, a
narrative statement as to the purpose for which the public gathering is
to be conducted.
§ 49-2 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 49-6
49:79
§ 49-7. Application fee.
Each application shall be accompanied with a cash fee in an amount as
set forth in the Warwick Township Fee Schedule 23 to cover the cost of
inspection, investigation, issuance and administration of the permit. No part
of the permit application fee shall be refundable.
F. A diagrammatic sketch plan of the proposed site of the public gathering
showing the locations and dimensions of the proposed service roads
and any proposed temporary structures, portable water facilities,
sanitary facilities, sewage disposal facilities, medical service facilities,
distribution of security personnel and provision for food storage, as well
as camping facilities and projected plans for enclosure, if necessary, of
the proposed site.
G. Evidence that all permits and licenses as required by state and county
statutes and rules and regulations enacted thereunder have been
obtained or will be obtained.
H. A statement of the number of persons expected to attend such event
and the duration of such attendance.
I. The specific details relating to food and drink; sanitary facilities;
transportation and parking facilities; security and protection of
surrounding areas, including specific reference to the number of
marshals assisting in the control of traffic and supervision of those
attending; on-site medical facilities and hospital care; janitorial
services; and postgathering trash removal.
J. A certified copy of the bond or verified evidence of other suitable
financial arrangements, as hereinafter required, must be attached to
the application.
K. A statement containing the names and addresses of licensed ticket
printers to be used and the plans for assuring the return of moneys
upon the termination or cancellation of the event, as well as the means
of notifying potential and existing ticket holders of such cancellation,
where the anticipated number of people attending is over 5,000
persons.
L. Examples of proposed advertising of the event, if any.
M. Applicant's statement that they shall abide by the terms and provisions
of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, County of Bucks and the Township.
23.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 49-6 WARWICK CODE § 49-8
49:80
§ 49-8. Action by Board.
The Board or its designee shall either grant or deny the application for
permit at least 20 days prior to the first date upon which the public
gathering is to commence.
§ 49-9. Insurance and bond requirements.
§ 49-10. Conditions of approval.
A. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall furnish to the
Township a comprehensive liability insurance policy insuring the
Township against liability for damage to persons or property, with limits
of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person or
$2,000,000 for bodily injury or death in one event, and with limits of not
less than $500,000 for property damage, sufficient in form to save the
Township harmless from any liability or causes of action which might
arise by reason of granting of the permit and noncancelable without 10
days' prior written notice to the Township.
B. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall deposit with the
Township a surety company bond in a sum determined appropriate by
the Township Board's duly appointed representative and conditioned
that all requirements of the permit will be fully performed by the
applicant, that no damage will be done to any public or private property
and that the applicant will not permit any litter, debris or other refuse to
remain upon any public or private property by reason of granting of the
permit. Such surety bond shall serve as an indemnity to save and
protect the streets, pavements, bridges, road signs and other property
of the Township from any and all damage that may be caused by
vehicles, employees or participants in such event and shall be used, if
necessary, to restore the ground where such event is held to a sanitary
condition and pay all charges and losses to the Township for damages to
streets, pavement, bridges and other property and to reimburse the
Township for any expense necessitated by the event.
A. No permits shall be issued by the Board or its designee unless all of the
conditions cited herein have been satisfactorily concluded at least 21
days prior to the first day upon which a public gathering is to
commence.
B. The conditions mentioned in Subsection A are as follows:
(1) Sanitary facilities. Written approval of the Bucks County Health
Department indicating that the applicants' plan for water supply,
toilet facilities, washing facilities and food preparation and service,
if applicable, the type of food preparation and food facilities to be
provided, conform with applicable state and county laws, rules and
regulations relating to the public health.
§ 49-8 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 49-10
49:81
(2) Public safety. Written statement of the Township Police Chief
indicating that plans have been made to meet the following
conditions:
(a) Applicants have provided for adequate traffic control and
crowd control personnel, i.e., one marshal for every 50 motor
vehicles reasonably anticipated to be at the location and one
marshal for each 150 persons reasonably anticipated to be in
attendance.
(b) A list of those marshals must be presented to the Township
Police Chief with the application. Marshals must be orientated
and instructed by the Police Chief and the sponsor of the public
gathering prior to the commencement of the gathering.
(c) Applicants have completely enclosed the ground where the
public gathering is to be held with snow fencing or other
similar material of equivalent strength not less than four feet in
height.
(d) Adequate lighting must be provided, subject to the approval of
the Board.
(3) Medical services. Written approval by the Bucks County
Department of Health indicating that sufficient medical service has
been provided by the applicant. Each public gathering of 2,000 or
more people shall have a minimum of one ambulance staffed by two
adult individuals trained in first aid techniques in attendance at all
times. Unless otherwise indicated by the Police Chief, each
additional 500 persons in attendance at any one event shall require
an additional ambulance staffed by two adult individuals trained in
first aid techniques.
(4) Parking facilities. Written approval of the Township Police Chief
indicating that parking is available within or adjacent to the
premises upon which the public gathering is to be conducted as
herein provided:
(a) Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one
vehicle for every four persons reasonably anticipated to be in
attendance at the public gathering.
(b) Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided from such
parking area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any
time to or from the parking area; provided, however, that
should buses be used to transport the public to the public
gathering, it shall be shown that public parking, as described
above, is available at any site from which buses are scheduled
to pick up persons to transport them to the public gathering.
§ 49-10 WARWICK CODE § 49-11
49:82
§ 49-11. Structures to be approved by Building Inspector.
All facilities, including any stage, to be specially assembled, constructed or
erected for the public gathering must be in place at least 24 hours before
the commencement of the public gathering, must have a valid building
permit issued by the Township and must be inspected and approved by
the Building Inspector of the Township prior to commencement of the
gathering. All electrical work either permanent or temporary which is
installed under the permit for the gathering shall be inspected and
approved by an independent underwriting agency prior to the Township
inspection.
§ 49-12. All facilities to be approved by the Fire Marshal.
All facilities, whether located indoors or outdoors, shall be in place at least
24 hours prior to the commencement of the public gathering and approved
by the Fire Marshal of the Township.
§ 49-13. Conduct of public gathering.
A. No permittee shall serve alcoholic beverages to any individual under
the age of 21 or to any visibly intoxicated person.
B. The burden of preserving order during the public gathering is upon the
permittees of the public gathering. Any violations of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Bucks or the Township
or of the conditions of the permit granted pursuant to this chapter may
be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the Board or its
designee or by the Bucks County Health Department upon notification
to the person in charge that a violation exists and the failure of the
person in charge to take immediate action to correct the violation. Upon
revocation of any permit, the permittees of the public gathering shall
immediately terminate the assembly and provide for the orderly
dispersal of those in attendance.
C. The Board, its designee or authorized representatives and the
representative of the County of Bucks shall be granted access to the
public gathering at all times for the purpose of inspection and
enforcement of the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter.
D. No musical entertainment, either live or recorded, utilizing sound
amplification equipment shall be operated in a location which is less
than 500 feet from any schoolhouse, church, dwelling unit or any other
place of permanent human habitation, and there will be no programmed
entertainment provided between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
E. If at any time during the conduct of the public gathering the number of
persons in attendance exceeds by 10% the number of persons
represented by the applicants for the permit anticipated to be in
attendance, the Board, its designee, the Township Police Chief or the
County Health Officer shall have the authority to require the applicants
§ 49-11 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 49-13
49:83
§ 49-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts
or causes to be advertised a public gathering without obtaining the permit
required in this chapter or who knowingly conducts, permits or allows a
public gathering with a permit but in violation of the terms and provisions
of this chapter and of the permit granted or who shall counsel, aid or abet
such violation or failure to comply shall, upon a summary conviction before
a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution. Upon default of payment of said fine, said person shall be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the
above, the Township also reserves the option of pursuing any and all other
remedies permitted at law or in equity, whether in advance of the public
gathering or following the public gathering.
Chapter 53
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 53, Building Construction, adopted 6-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-6, as amended, was superseded 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3.
See now Ch. 62, Uniform Construction Codes.]
Chapter 57
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 57-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
to limit further admissions until all conditions and provisions recited in
this chapter are met.
F. Any applicant with more than a ten-percent proprietary interest in the
public gathering and the owner of the property or person in charge of
the property or their designated agents or representatives shall be
required to be in attendance at the public gathering at all times and
shall be responsible for ensuring that no person shall be allowed to
remain on the premises who is violating any state, county or Township
laws, rules or regulations.
G. Public gatherings operating without a permit under this chapter, based
on a reasonable anticipation of less than 350 persons in attendance,
shall limit attendance therein to 349 persons, and printed tickets, if
utilized, cannot number more than 349.
§ 49-13 WARWICK CODE § 57-1
57:84
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended to be used as a place of
business or industry, but shall not include any public building or any
structure built as a place of worship.
DWELLING — A structure used or intended to be used as a residence.
It may be a single-family residence or a multifamily residence. Dwellings
may be "single," "twin," "multiple," "townhouse," "mobile" or "row"
configuration.
§ 57-2. Numbering plan.
The Board shall maintain a numbering plan for the entire Township and
shall assign numbers to all lots, dwellings and buildings in the Township
according to said plan.
§ 57-3. Numbering required; notice.
Any building or dwelling on a lot abutting any street or highway in the
Township shall be numbered by the owner or occupant thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within two weeks of the date
of written notice by the Fire Marshal to any said owner or occupier to do so.
Said written notice shall specify the number of the building or dwelling.
§ 57-4. Display of numbers on dwellings.
The number assigned to any dwelling, as provided pursuant to this chapter,
shall be displayed as follows:
A. The number shall be attached to the dwelling, placed under the light,
near the front door or other easily recognizable area.
B. Numbers (Arabic) shall be in a significantly contrasting color with the
background upon which they are mounted.
C. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
D. The number shall be clearly visible from the street. Numbers may not
be hidden by obstructions, screen, storm doors or windows, shrubbery
or trees.
E. Arabic numerals only shall be used. (Numbers that are spelled out are
not acceptable.)
F. Number must be displayed horizontally.
G. Numbers assigned to new homes shall be mounted in a similar and
consistent location.
H. Numbers shall be permanently attached to the dwelling.
I. Numbers (and their mounting medium) shall be made of durable
materials.
§ 57-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 57-4
57:85
§ 57-5. Display of numbers on buildings.
The number assigned to any building, as provided pursuant to this chapter,
shall be displayed as follows:
§ 57-6. Mailboxes.
When mailboxes are used they shall be installed as follows:
J. Numbers shall be consistently maintained in complete compliance with
this chapter.
A. The number shall be placed near the front door.
B. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height. They may be
larger in order to comply with Subsection D below.
C. Numbers shall be in a significantly contrasting color with the
background upon which they are mounted.
D. The number shall be clearly visible from the street or main entrance.
Numbers may not be hidden by obstructions, windows, shrubbery or
trees.
E. Arabic numerals only shall be used. (Numbers that are spelled out are
not acceptable.)
F. Numbers must be displayed horizontally.
G. When more than one tenant occupies a building, all of the identifying
numbers for that building shall be displayed so they can be seen from
the street or main entrance. A sign with the number and corresponding
company name may be used for this purpose.
H. Numbers must be permanently attached to the building.
I. Numbers and their mounting medium shall be made of durable
materials.
J. Numbers shall be displayed near the front and rear entrances of every
building which has more than one tenant.
K. Numbers shall be consistently maintained in complete compliance with
this section.
A. Numbers on mailboxes shall be in addition to numbers attached to
dwellings and buildings.
B. The number must appear on each side of the mailbox.
C. The number shall be in a significantly contrasting color to the color of
the box.
D. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
§ 57-4 WARWICK CODE § 57-6
57:86
§ 57-7. Numbering of dwellings or buildings set back from street.
Whenever any dwelling or building is set back more than 50 feet from the
street line:
§ 57-8. Responsibility to number.
On or after the passage and approval of this section of the chapter, it
shall be the duty of each and every builder, owner, trustee, lessee, agent
and occupant of each and every dwelling, building or other structure in
Warwick Township to cause the same to be numbered in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 57-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine not to exceed more than $300 and/or imprisonment for a term not
more than 30 days.
Chapter 60
CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO PROGRAMMING
E. If there is any question as to the location of the mailbox with respect to
the correct street address, the name of the street shall appear on both
sides of the mailbox.
A. The number shall be placed near the driveway entrance or common
entrance to the land of which the dwelling is erected.
B. The number may be placed on a pole, mailbox or post in a manner that
can be seen from both directions of travel on the street.
§ 57-6 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 57-9
60:87

ARTICLE I
Cable Communications
[Adopted 5-4-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 60-1. Purpose.
A. The Township of Warwick finds that the development of cable television
and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit
and impact upon the people of Warwick. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the
Township further finds that the public convenience, safety and general
welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which
should be vested in the Township or such persons as the Township shall
designate. It is the intent of this article and subsequent amendments to
provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public
interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued
pursuant to this article shall be deemed to include this finding as an
integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the Township's residents, but can provide variety of broadband,
interactive communications services to institutions and individuals.
Many of these services involve Township agencies and other public
institutions, by providing governmental, educational or health care
communications.
C. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
(1) Communications services should be provided to the maximum
number of Township residents.
(2) The system should be capable of accommodating both the present
and reasonably foreseeable future cable communications needs of
the Township.
(3) The system should be improved and upgraded during the franchise
term so that the new facilities necessary for the operation of this
system shall be integrated to the maximum extent possible with
existing facilities.
(4) The cable communications system authorized by this article shall
be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community,
and shall provide a wide diversity of information sources and
services to the public.
§ 60-1 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-2
60:89
§ 60-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Warwick Cable
Communication Regulatory Ordinance," and it shall become a part of the
ordinances of the Township.
§ 60-3. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and
words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICES — A separately available
basic service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other
tier of service. Such basic service tier shall, at a minimum, consist of
the following: all signals carried in fulfillment of Cable Act, Sections 614
and 615; any public, educational, and governmental access programming
required in this article or the franchise; any signal of any television
broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber,
except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier
beyond the local service area of such station. Additional signals may be
added to the basic tier by the grantee.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Warwick.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (also referred to as "system") —
A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to
provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does
not include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless
such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provision of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
§ 60-2 WARWICK CODE § 60-3
60:90
CHANNEL — A six-megahertz (MHZ) frequency band, which is capable of
carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or
other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals. One channel of
high definition television will utilize more than six MHZ.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such noncommercial
video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users on an
individual application basis. These may include, but are not limited to, oneway
video, two-way video, audio or digital signals among institutions.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT or CABLE ACT — The Communications Act of
1934; the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as they may be amended or succeeded
from time to time.
COMPLAINT — A verbal or written indication from a subscriber within
the Township of a problem that generates a work order by the grantee or
complaint to the Township that is communicated to the grantee with any
aspect of cable service.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber,
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
DEDICATED INSTITUTIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS — Cable
communications channels dedicated to noncommercial use by the
Township, county, commonwealth or federal governmental agencies, and
public and nonprofit, private educational institutions.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel which can only be received by the
person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
television set, radio or other terminal.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
noncommercial educational access use.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted by separate agreement
pursuant to this article to construct, operate and maintain a cable
§ 60-3 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-3
60:91
communications system along the public ways within all or a specified area
in the Township. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall
not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the Township as required by
other ordinances and laws of the Township.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire Township, or portions thereof, for which
a franchise is granted under the authority of this article. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of
the Township, including all territory thereafter annexed to the Township.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or
organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by
the Township, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the Township, of the
franchisee's gross revenues from the operation of the cable system in
exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this article and the franchise
agreement.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated
or dedicated for noncommercial government access use.
GRANTOR — The Township of Warwick as represented by the Township
Board of Supervisors acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenue derived directly or indirectly by the
grantee from the operation of the cable communications system within
the Township. Revenues derived from the operation of the cable system
received by any affiliate, subsidiary or any person in which the grantee
has a financial interest shall be included in the grantee's gross revenues in
any case where those revenues were derived by the affiliate, subsidiary or
person in which the grantee has a financial interest to avoid or reduce the
grantee's franchise fee obligation.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the
grantee.
MONITORING — Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is not a party to the communication, whether
the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose
whatsoever.
NARROWCASTING — The ability to distribute cable programming to a
particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers.
NONCOMMERCIAL — Access channel use in a manner similar to public
broadcasting service station programming and underwriting
acknowledgments.
§ 60-3 WARWICK CODE § 60-3
60:92
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
PLANT MILE — A linear mile of cable as measured on the street or
easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial organizations
which is made available for use without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis
in accordance with the rules and regulations specified in the franchise.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel,
parkways, utility easements or other public right-of-way now or hereafter
held by the Township which shall entitle the Township and the grantee to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's
cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the
"public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the
Township that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain
only such rights to use property in the Township as the Township may have
the undisputed right and power to give.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Written notice addressed to the grantee at its
principal office within the Township or such other office as the grantee
has designated to the Township as the address to which notice shall be
transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less
than 10 calendar days prior to that day in which the party giving such
notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In
computing said 10 calendar days, holidays recognized by the Township shall
be excluded.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Township as otherwise defined by
applicable law.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession.
SALE — Includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit, private educational institution
including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities.
SERVICE AREA — The entire geographic area within the franchise territory.
SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The cable communications system
constructed for use within the Township including, without limitation, the
headend, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters,
health and property security systems, equipment or facilities located within
the corporate limits of the Township designed, constructed or wired for
the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial
cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio and visual, radio,
§ 60-3 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-3
60:93
television and electronic signals to and from subscribers in the Township
and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits
of the Township intended for the use of the system; provided, however,
such system facility excludes buildings, contracts, facilities, and equipment
where primary use is for providing service to other system facilities located
outside the Township limits.
TRANSFER — The disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift,
assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 25% or
more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system,
or 30% cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to
a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or
person or group of persons acting in concert unless otherwise exempted
herein.
TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications,
which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
UPSTREAM SIGNAL — A signal originating from a terminal to the cable
system headend including video, audio or digital signals for either programs
or other uses such as security alert services, etc.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
§ 60-4. Grant of franchise.
A. Grant. In the event that the Township shall grant to the grantee a
nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a
cable communications system within the Township, said franchise shall
constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a
cable communications system as regulated by the provisions of this
article and the franchise. The franchise shall include by reference those
provisions of the grantee's application for franchise that are finally
negotiated and accepted by the Township and grantee.
B. Event of conflict. The franchise shall be granted under the terms and
conditions contained herein, consistent with the Township's charter
and/or other applicable statutory requirements. In the event of conflict
between the terms and conditions of this article, the franchise, or the
terms and conditions on which the Township can grant a franchise, the
charter and/or statutory requirements shall control.
C. General Township ordinances. Any franchise granted by the Township is
hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect
and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed
to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the
Township regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction.
§ 60-3 WARWICK CODE § 60-5
60:94
§ 60-5. Franchise area.
The franchise area shall be the entire Township, or portions thereof, for
which a franchise is granted.
§ 60-6. Use of public rights-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the Township, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along
the public streets and ways within the Township such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary
to the operation of the cable communications systems, provided, however,
that the grantee complies with all design, construction, safety, and
performance provisions contained in this article, the franchise agreement,
and other applicable local ordinances.
§ 60-7. Use of Township facilities.
In the event that a grantee chooses to utilize Township-owned conduit or
other facilities for any portion of its cable communications system, the
consideration for the use of Township conduit or other facilities shall be at
charges to be agreed upon between the parties.
§ 60-8. Use of grantee facilities.
No poles or pedestals shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval
of the Township with regard to location, height, type and any other
pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall
be a vested right and such poles shall be removed or modified by the
grantee at its own expense whenever the Township determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The grantee shall utilize
existing poles and conduits, where possible. The Township shall have the
right, during the life of the franchise, to install and maintain upon the poles
owned by the grantee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably
interfere with the cable system operations of the grantee. The Township
shall reimburse the grantee for any make-ready costs. The use of the
grantee's poles shall be at a fair and reasonable rate.
§ 60-9. Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the Township or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
§ 60-10. Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be stated in
the franchise.
§ 60-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-11
60:95
§ 60-11. Franchise nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be nonexclusive. The
Township specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional
franchises for a cable communication system as it deems appropriate, and/
or build, operate, and own such cable communication system or systems
as it deems appropriate. Subject to applicable law and regulation, any
additional cable communications system franchises granted by the
Township shall, to the extent practicable, seek to create a level regulatory
playing field and shall contain similar terms and conditions, including,
without limitation, provisions of public benefit with similar cost, taking
into account the size and population of the franchised areas. A grantee is
required to indemnify the Township and to hold the Township harmless from
all claims against it by third parties arising out of its compliance with this
provision to the extent that such claims are not barred by Section 635A
of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
(Limitation of Franchise Authority Liability), or by any other provision of
law.
§ 60-12. Performance within time allotted.
Whenever the agreement shall set forth any time for an act to be performed
by or on behalf of the grantee or the Township, such time shall be deemed
of the essence and any failure of the grantee or the Township to perform
within the time allotted shall be sufficient ground for the other party to
invoke an appropriate penalty including possible revocation of the
franchise, subject to force majeure.
§ 60-13. Conflict of provisions.
In any controversy or dispute under this article, the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
§ 60-14. Transfer of ownership or control.
A. Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be
sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but not
limited to transfer by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation,
receivership or other means, nor shall the control of the grantee be
changed, without the prior consent of the Township. The Township
reserves the right to impose certain conditions on the transferee as a
condition of transfer approval to ensure that the franchisee is able to
meet ordinance and franchise requirements and existing operating
practices.
B. Transfer threshold. The grantee shall promptly notify the Township of
any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any
other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein
is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control
in whatever manner exercised. A transfer of ownership requiring
approval shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee, directly or
§ 60-11 WARWICK CODE § 60-14
60:96
indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or
otherwise, of 25% or more at one time of the ownership or controlling
interest in the system, or 30% cumulatively over the term of the
franchise of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting
in concert. Except that no consent shall be required for any sale,
transfer, or assignment of ownership or control to an entity under
common control with the grantee, provided that prior to such transfer,
the grantee provides to the Township verifiable information to establish
that such transferee under common control has the financial, legal and
technical ability to fully perform all obligations of the franchise.
C. Township approval. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of
the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and
until the Township shall have consented thereto, which consent will not
be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it
shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the
Township may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical and
other public interest qualifications of the prospective controlling party,
and the grantee shall provide the Township with all required
information relevant to said inquiry. Failure to provide all information
requested by the Township as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for
denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control.
D. Assumption of control. The Township agrees that any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the Township that it or its
designees satisfactory to the Township will take control and operate the
cable television system. Further, said financial institution shall also
submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and
compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution
shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding 18
months, unless extended by the Township at its discretion and during
said period of time it shall have the right to petition for transfer of the
franchise to another grantee. If the Township finds that such transfer,
after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other
public interest qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the
Township will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such
franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the Township to such
transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.
E. No waiver of Township property rights. The consent or approval of the
Township to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or
release of the rights of the Township in and to the streets, and any
transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and
conditions of this article and the franchise.
F. Transfer time periods. The Township will not approve any transfer or
assignment of the franchise prior to completion of construction of the
§ 60-14 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-14
60:97
§ 60-15. Franchise renewal.
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this article,
the Township may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the grantee
in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. The grantee shall own
the cable communication system, but shall have no property right in the
public rights of way upon the completion of the franchise term including any
renewals and extensions thereof.
§ 60-16. Police powers.
§ 60-17. Franchise fees.
proposed system unless appropriate guarantees which are acceptable
to the Township are made by the transferee.
G. Disclosure of purchase price. The Township reserves the right to
require the grantee and transferee to disclose the purchase price of any
transfer or assignment of the cable system.
H. Signatory requirement. Any approval by the Township of transfer of
ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective
controlling party becoming a signatory to the franchise.
I. Time frame for Township review. The Township shall have 120 days to
act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that contains
or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance
with FCC regulations and by the Township. If the Township fails to
render a final decision on the request within 120 days, such request
shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the Township
agree to an extension of time.
A. Police powers. In accepting the franchise, the grantee acknowledges
that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the
Township to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the
safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the Township
pursuant to such power.
B. Conflicts. Any conflict between the provisions of this article or the
franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the
Township's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except
that any such exercise that is not of general application in the
jurisdiction or applies exclusively to the grantee or cable
communications systems which contains provisions inconsistent with
this article or the franchise shall prevail only if, upon such exercise, the
Township finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health,
safety, property or general welfare and such exercise is mandated by
law.
§ 60-14 WARWICK CODE § 60-17
60:98
A. Because the Township finds that the streets of the county,
commonwealth, and Township to be used by the grantee in the
operation of its system within the boundaries of the franchise area are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the county,
commonwealth, and Township at great expense to its taxpayers; the
grant to the grantee to the said streets is a valuable property right
without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial
capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and the administration of
this article and the franchise imposes upon the Township additional
regulatory responsibility and expense, a grantee of any franchise
hereunder shall pay to the Township a franchise fee in an amount as
designated in the franchise, but in no event less than 5% of the gross
annual revenues, or the maximum amount permitted under applicable
federal, commonwealth, or local law, if such maximum is greater than
5%. The annual franchise fee payable shall be in addition to any other
fee and shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise.
Annually, the Township shall be furnished a statement of said payment
by a certified public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of annual
gross revenues, a breakdown by type of revenue, and the above charges
and computations for the period covered by the payment.
B. Franchise fee in addition to other tax or payment. The Township
believes that payment of the franchise fee made by the grantee to the
Township shall not be considered in the nature of a tax, but shall be in
addition to any and all taxes which are now or may be lawfully required
hereafter to be paid by any federal, commonwealth, or local law. This
payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the
governments or other taxing jurisdiction by the grantee.
C. Acceptance by the Township. No acceptance of any payment by the
Township shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the Township may have for further or
additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the
performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
D. Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates
specified herein, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an
interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal
to the commercial prime interest rate of the Township primary
depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed.
E. Payments to be made quarterly. The franchise fee and any other cost or
damage assessed against the grantee shall be payable quarterly to the
Township of Warwick. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate
statement verified by a financial officer of the grantee, of all gross
revenues within the franchise area and the number of subscribers per
service during the period for which said quarterly payment is made, and
said payment shall be made to the Township no later than 45 days
following the expiration of each calendar quarter ending March 1, June
§ 60-17 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-17
60:99
§ 60-18. Forfeiture or revocation.
30, and September 30, and no later than the 90 days after the calendar
quarter ending December 31.
F. The Township's right of inspection. The Township shall have the right to
inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this article.
Audits shall be at the expense of the Township unless the audit reveals
an underpayment of more than 5% in the amount of the franchise fee
due to the Township, in which event the cost of the audit shall be borne
by the grantee. Any additional amount due the Township as a result of
the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the
grantee by the Township which notice shall include a copy of the audit
report.
A. Grounds for revocation. The Township reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges
associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of
which shall represent a default and breach under the article and the
franchise grant:
(1) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this article, the franchise, or under such
documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into
by and between the Township and the grantee.
(2) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance
bond as required herein.
(3) If the grantee, after all established regulatory and appellate
procedures have been exhausted, shall violate any orders or rulings
of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative
to this article or the franchise.
(4) If the grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the Township or
cable subscribers.
(5) The grantee's construction schedule is delayed 180 days, beyond
the schedule contained in the franchise or beyond any extended
date set by the Township.
(6) The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts
or is adjudged bankrupt.
(7) Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted
service substantially throughout the franchise area, except when
approval of such interruption is obtained from the Township.
(8) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof.
§ 60-17 WARWICK CODE § 60-18
60:100
(9) If the grantee ceases to provide a substantial portion of ongoing
cable services for any reason within the control of the grantee over
the cable communications system.
B. Effect of circumstances beyond control of the grantee. The grantee
shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any
provision of this article in any case, in which performance of any such
provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault
shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control is committed by
a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a
controlling interest whether held directly or indirectly.
C. Effect of pending litigation. Pending litigation or any appeal to any
regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall not
excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this
article or the franchise. Failure of the grantee to perform such
obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in
forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this section.
D. Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The Township shall make written demand that the grantee comply
with any such requirement, limitation, term condition, rule or
regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the
failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of
30 days following such written demand, the Township shall place
its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular Board of
Supervisors meeting agenda. The Township shall cause to be
served upon such grantee at least seven days prior to the date of
such Board of Supervisors meeting, a written notice of this intent to
request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting,
notice of which shall be published by the Township Manager or his
designee, at least once, seven days before such meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall hear any persons interested therein,
and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any failure,
refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
(3) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as reasonably determined by the Township, the Board of
Supervisors shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and
manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
(4) If the Board of Supervisors shall determine such failure, refusal, or
neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the Board of
Supervisors shall, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the
grantee shall be terminated unless there is compliance by the
grantee within 90 days.
§ 60-18 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-18
60:101
§ 60-19. Receivership and foreclosure.
E. Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires and is not
renewed or extended, is revoked or otherwise terminated, the Township
may, in its sole discretion, do any of the following:
(1) Purchase the system under the procedures set forth in § 60-23 of
this article.
(2) Effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another party.
(3) Order the removal of all or a portion of the system facilities as
required by the Township within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Township or require the original grantee to
maintain and operate its system for a period of six months or until
such further time as is mutually agreed upon.
F. Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good a condition or better as that prevailing prior to the grantee's
removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical
or telephone cable wires or attachments. The Township shall inspect
and approve the condition of the public ways and public places and
cables, wires, attachments, and poles after removal. The liability,
indemnity, insurance and performance bond as provided herein shall
continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this
paragraph, this article and the franchise.
G. Restoration by Township; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by §§ 60-6 and
60-7 and/or Subsection F above, or any other work required by
Township law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to
the satisfaction of the Township, the Township may cause such work to
be done and the grantee shall reimburse the Township the cost thereof
within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the
Township may recover such costs through the performance bond
provided by the grantee. The Township shall be permitted to seek legal
and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
H. Extended operation. Upon either the expiration and nonrenewal or
revocation of a franchise, the Township may require the grantee to
continue to operate the system for a period of six months from the date
of such expiration or revocation, or until such time as is mutually
agreed upon. The grantee shall continue to operate the cable
communications system under the terms and conditions of this article
and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any
and all of the services that may be provided at the time. The Township
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this section.
§ 60-18 WARWICK CODE § 60-19
60:102
§ 60-20. Equal opportunity policy.
Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by all operators of cable
television systems to all qualified persons, and no person shall be
discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age,
national origin, sex, or physical handicap. The grantee shall comply with all
equal opportunity provisions enacted by federal, commonwealth and local
authorities, as well as all such provisions contained in this article and the
franchise.
§ 60-21. Notices.
All notices from grantee to the Township pursuant to this article and the
franchise shall be to the Township Manager or his/her designee. The
A. Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall, at
the option of the Township, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take
over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this article and the franchise granted pursuant
hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise or have commenced
expeditiously and in good faith to do so in the reasonable opinion of
the Board of Supervisors; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise herein granted.
B. Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any
part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the Township may
serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder
at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of
the grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after
service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Township shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in
the manner this article provides; and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Township to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions
of the franchise.
§ 60-19 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-21
60:103
grantee shall maintain with the Township, throughout the term of the
franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall
also maintain a locally accessible office as specified in this article and the
franchise, and telephone number for the conduct of matters related to the
franchise during normal business hours. The grantee shall be required to
advise the Township of such address(es) and telephone numbers and any
changes thereof.
§ 60-22. Failure of Township to enforce; no waiver of terms.
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this article or the franchise by any failure of the Township
upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with
any such terms or conditions.
§ 60-23. Rights reserved to grantor.
A. Right to purchase of the system by the Township upon termination or
expiration of the franchise.
(1) Right to purchase. In the event the grantee forfeits and the
Township terminates the franchise for cause, pursuant to
provisions of this article and the franchise, or the franchise is not
renewed at or following the normal expiration of the franchise
term, the Township shall have the right, directly or as an
intermediary, to purchase the franchised cable communications
system or effect the ownership of the system to another person.
Any such acquisition or transfer shall be as specified in the Cable
Act. The Township shall notify the grantee in writing within 30 days
following nonrenewal or termination of its intent to acquire the
system on its behalf or effectuate the ownership of the system to
another person. Purchase price shall be based upon the value of the
system determined pursuant to this section.
(2) Arbitration. In the event the Township and grantee are unable to
agree upon the value of the cable communications system, either
party may require by written notice to the other that the value of
cable communications system be submitted to arbitration in the
following manner:
(a) The Township and the grantee shall each within 15 days after
such written notice select an arbitrator who shall be a
disinterested person with reasonable knowledge and
experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated. The two
arbitrators thus selected shall immediately thereafter select a
third arbitrator who shall likewise be a disinterested person
having reasonable knowledge and experience relative to the
subject to be arbitrated.
(b) Within 30 days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon 10
days' written notice to the parties, the panel of arbitrators shall
§ 60-21 WARWICK CODE § 60-23
60:104
commence a hearing on the issue of valuation and shall receive
all relevant information from the parties.
(c) The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the
request of either party. All hearing proceedings, debate and
deliberations shall be open to the public and at such times and
places as contained in the notice or as thereafter publicly
stated, except that if two arbitrators agree, debate and
deliberations may be held in closed session.
(d) The value of the system as determined by the arbitration panel
shall be determined pursuant to Subsection A(1) above.
(e) Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the panel of
arbitrators shall prepare findings and decision agreed upon by
a majority of the panel which shall be filed with the Township
and served by mail upon the grantee. The decision of the panel
regarding the value of the system shall be final and binding
upon the parties. Should there be no majority decision, the
proceedings shall become null and void and shall be started
anew, unless the parties extend by mutual agreement the time
which the panel of arbitrators has to make a decision.
(f) Either party may seek judicial relief in the following
circumstances:
[1] A party fails to select an arbitrator;
[2] The arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator;
[3] One or more arbitrators is unqualified;
[4] Designated time limits have been exceeded;
[5] The panel has not proceeded expeditiously;
[6] The decision was procured by corruption, fraud or undue
means;
[7] There was evident partiality on the part of one or more of
the arbitrators;
[8] The arbitration panel exceeded its authority hereunder;
[9] Based upon the record, the panel abused its discretion.
(g) In the event a court of competent jurisdiction determines that
judicial relief is appropriate to the circumstances set forth
above, the court in its discretion may order the arbitration
procedure repeated and issue findings, orders and directions.
(h) The expenses of the arbitrators and those expenses incurred by
the panel as a whole shall be borne equally by the parties.
§ 60-23 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-23
60:105
§ 60-24. Regulatory authority.
(3) Notification. The purchase price shall be the value of the system as
determined by the arbitration panel.
B. Right of inspection of records. Upon reasonable advance notice, the
Township shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal
business hours all books, records, reports, maps, plans, financial
statements, and other like materials of the grantee relating to the
operation of the cable communications system and the enforcement of
this article and the franchise within the Township, including but not
limited to system records where information is not available on a
franchise area basis. The grantee shall provide such information in such
form as may be required by the Township for said records.
C. Right of inspection of construction. The Township shall have the right to
inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise and upon prior notice to the grantee, to
make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms of this article and other pertinent provisions of the law. The
grantee shall be afforded the opportunity to be present at and observe
such testing and shall be provided with the results of any such testing
undertaken by the Township.
D. Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times, the grantee
shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
Township, of system facilities, together with any appurtenant property
of the grantee situated within or without the Township.
E. Right to require removal of property. Upon denial of renewal of this
article or the franchise, or upon its revocation or expiration and
nonrenewal, as provided for herein, the Township shall have the right to
require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the
cable communications system required by public necessity from all
streets and public ways within the Township within six months of
receipt of a written notice from the Township.
F. Expense reimbursement to Township. Unless otherwise provided in the
franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay the Township a sum of
money which will, when added to application fees received, reimburse
all costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with preparation of
this article, the initial franchise agreements, including, but not limited
to, consultant fees, attorneys' fees, publication fees, travel expenses
and all other direct costs; provided, however, that the Township shall
submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be
made within 30 days after the Township furnishes the grantee with a
written statement of such initial franchise expenses.
A. Ongoing regulation. The Township shall exercise appropriate
regulatory authority under the provisions of this article and applicable
law. This authority shall be vested in the Township Board of Supervisors
§ 60-23 WARWICK CODE § 60-24
60:106
§ 60-25. Supervision of franchise.
and administered through the Township Manager or his designee in
order to provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article and any franchise granted hereunder, and
to carry out the Township's responsibilities with regard to cable
communications.
B. Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this article to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all
laws and regulations of the local, commonwealth and federal
government. In the event that any actions of the commonwealth or
federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent
jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the
power or authority of the Township under this article or the franchise,
or if in compliance with any local, commonwealth, or federal law or
regulation is in conflict with the terms of this article, the franchise, or
any law or regulation of the Township, then the Township, at its option,
may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions
which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or
statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in good faith
with the Township in the development of alternate provisions which
shall fairly restore the Township to the maximum level of authority and
power permitted by law. The Township shall have the right to modify
any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to
carry out the full intent and purpose of this article and the franchise.
C. Authority. The Township reserves the right to exercise the maximum
plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to
regulate the cable communications system, the franchise and the
grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities
at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the Township,
the Township may without the approval of the grantee engage in any
such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not
contemplated by this article or the franchise.
A. The Township shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
(1) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and
any franchise granted hereunder.
(2) Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant
to the provisions of this article, the franchise, and other applicable
law.
(3) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
(4) Performance evaluation.
(5) Rate regulation, if applicable.
§ 60-24 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-25
60:107
§ 60-26. Rates and charges.
B. The Township also reserves the right to perform the following
functions:
(1) Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the
operation of government channels.
(2) Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the use
of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.
(3) Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of
cable services.
(4) Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other Township, state or regional telecommunications networks.
(5) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy
for the Township, and determine the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community.
(6) Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.
(7) Monitor the grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such
complaints.
(8) Receive applications for rate increases if applicable and provide
staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
(9) Monitor the grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(10) Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(11) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed to insure compliance with this article and the franchise.
(12) Assure continuity in service.
(13) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
article.
A. Schedule filings. The grantee shall file with the Township schedules
which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any
kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. No rates or charges
shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed. The
grantee shall notify subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to the
implementation of any change in services offered, rates charges, or
terms and conditions related thereto.
§ 60-25 WARWICK CODE § 60-26
60:108
§ 60-27. Performance evaluation.
B. Nondiscriminatory rates. The grantee shall establish rates that are
nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which
must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise
area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the
grantee from offering discounts to commercial and multiple-family
dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; promotional discounts; or
reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services.
The grantee's charges and rates for all services shall be itemized on
subscribers' monthly bills.
C. Township regulation. To the extent that federal or commonwealth law
or regulation may now, or as the same may hereafter be amended to,
authorize the Township to regulate the rates for any particular service
tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by
the grantee, the Township shall have the right to exercise rate
regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from
exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion
of the Township.
A. Evaluation sessions. The Township and the grantee may, at the
discretion of the Township, hold scheduled performance evaluation
sessions every three years. All such evaluation sessions may be open to
the public.
B. Special sessions. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time
during the term of the franchise at the request of the Township.
C. Public hearings. All evaluation sessions may be open to the public and
announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with
public notice, as provided in § 60-50. The grantee shall notify
subscribers of any such public meetings by announcement on the
designated local government channel on the system between the hours
of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days preceding each
session.
D. Topics for review. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or
special evaluation session may include but not be limited to system
performance and construction, grantee compliance with this article and
the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber
privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate
structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services,
applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line
extensions.
E. Cooperation by grantee. During the review and evaluation by the
Township, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the Township and shall
provide such information and documents as the Township may need to
reasonably perform its review.
§ 60-26 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-28
60:109
§ 60-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which permits the violation of this
article shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a fine of $600 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township. A separate
offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is
found to exist or for each section of the article which is found to have been
violated. In addition to civil actions before a District Justice, the Township
may enforce this article in an action in equity brought in the Bucks County
Court of Common Pleas.
§ 60-29. Construction and performance bonds.
A. Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee
shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise and
any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file
with the Township, a corporate surety bond in an amount specified in
the franchise to guarantee the faithful performance of the grantee of all
its obligations provided under this article and the franchise. Failure to
timely obtain, file and maintain said bond shall constitute a substantial
violation within the meaning of this section.
B. Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
(1) There shall be recoverable by the Township jointly and severally
from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated
damages due to the Township and any and all damages, losses,
costs, and expenses suffered or incurred by the Township resulting
from the failure of the grantee to: faithfully comply with the
provisions of this article and the franchise; comply with all orders,
permits and directives of any Township agency or body having
jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the Township;
or pay any claims, liens or taxes due the Township which arise by
reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the
cable system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include but not
be limited to attorney's fees and other associated expenses.
C. Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the
Township may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be
reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to
the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or denied upon
application by the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's
subsequent applications or to the Township's right to require the full
bond at any time thereafter. However, no application shall be made by
the grantee within one year of any prior application.
D. Construction bond. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of
any franchise granted hereunder agrees that it will maintain, through
the rebuild or construction of the cable television system as required by
§ 60-28 WARWICK CODE § 60-29
60:110
this article or the franchise, a faithful construction bond in an amount
specified in the franchise conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the grantee in the construction or rebuild of a cable television system
complying with related provisions of this article and the franchise, and
upon the further condition that if the grantee shall fail to comply with
any law, ordinance or regulation governing the construction or rebuild
of the cable television system, there shall be recoverable jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of the bond any damages or loss
suffered by the Township as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of repair, construction, removal
or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus attorneys' fees and
costs, up to the full amount of the bond.
E. Use of performance bond and construction bond. Prior to drawing upon
the performance bond or the construction bond for the purposes
described in this section, the Township shall give the grantee written
notice of its intent to draw on the bond. Said notice shall detail the basis
for drawing on the bond and, if the grantee has not already been
provided with a written notice of violation and an opportunity to correct
the violation, the notice provided under this subsection shall provide
the grantee with a minimum of 30 days to remedy the matter. If the
matter is not remedied within the cure period specified in the
applicable notice, the grantee shall have 10 days from the receipt of
such written notice to make a full and complete payment. If the grantee
does not make the payment within 10 days, the Township may withdraw
the amount thereof, with interest, from the performance bond. Nothing
herein shall preclude the Township from taking action in emergency
situations without the thirty-day period specified above.
F. Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the performance
bond or construction bond, the Township shall send to the grantee, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the
amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
G. Replenishment of performance bond and construction bond. No later
than 30 days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of
a withdrawal pursuant to Subsection E above, the grantee shall
replenish the performance bond and/or construction bond in an amount
equal to the amount so withdrawn.
H. Nonrenewal, alteration, or cancellation of performance bond and
construction bond. The performance bond and construction bond
required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township and shall
require 30 days' written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or
cancellation to both the Township and the grantee. The grantee shall, in
the event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for,
and file with the Township written evidence of the issuance of
replacement bond or policies within 30 days following receipt by the
Township or the grantee of any notice of cancellation.
§ 60-29 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-29
60:111
§ 60-30. Liability and insurance.
I. Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation, the amount of the
performance bond provided for herein is subject to reasonable
adjustment as provided in the franchise.
A. Certificate of insurance. Prior to commencement of construction, but in
no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and
thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and
any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the
Township certificates of insurance, approved by the Township, for all
types of insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said
certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation
of this article.
B. Filing. Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with
this section shall be filed and maintained with the Township Manager
during the term of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time
to reflect changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation
consistent with Subsection H below. The grantee shall immediately
advise the Township of any litigation that may develop that would affect
this insurance.
C. No liability limit. Neither the provisions of this section or any damages
recovered by the Township hereunder shall be construed to or limit the
liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for
damages.
D. Endorsement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this article
or the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable,
endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may
not be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to
renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt
by the Township Manager, by registered mail, of a written notice of
such intention to cancel or not to renew.”
E. Hold-harmless clause. All contractual liability insurance policies
maintained pursuant to this article or the franchise shall include the
provision of the following hold-harmless clause:
§ 60-29 WARWICK CODE § 60-30
60:112
“The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the
Township, its officials, agents, servants, and employees, and each of
them against and hold it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits,
claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court costs
and reasonable attorney's fees, for or on account of any injury to any
person, or any death at any time resulting from such injury, or any
damage to any property, which may arise or which may be alleged
to have arisen out of or in connection with the work covered by the
franchise and performed or caused to be performed by the grantee, its
employees, agents and contractors or their successors. The foregoing
indemnity shall apply except if such injury, death or damage is caused
directly by the negligence or other fault of the Township, its agents,
servants, or employees or any other person indemnified hereunder.”
F. Commonwealth institution. All insurance policies provided under the
provisions of this article or the franchise shall be written by companies
authorized to do business in the commonwealth, and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Insurance.
G. Named insured. At any time during the term of the franchise, the
Township may request, and the grantee shall comply with such request,
to name the Township as an additional named insured for all insurance
policies written under the provisions of this article or the franchise.
H. Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing
liability limits, all of the coverages, limits, and amounts of the insurance
provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of
every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next threeyear
period, upon the determination of the Township.
I. General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability
insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of:
(1) One million dollars for property damage per occurrence;
(2) Two million dollars for property damage aggregate;
(3) Five million dollars for personal bodily injury or death to any one
person; and
(4) Ten million dollars bodily injury or death aggregate per single
accident or occurrence.
J. Policy inclusions. Such general liability insurance must include
coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form, premisesoperations,
explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard,
products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad
form property damage, and personal injury.
§ 60-30 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-30
60:113
§ 60-31. Indemnification.
K. Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile
liability insurance for owned, nonowned, or rented vehicles in the
minimum amount of:
(1) One million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence;
(2) Five hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury and consequent
death to any one person; and
(3) Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage per
occurrence.
L. Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term
of the franchise, workers' compensation and employer's liability, valid
in the commonwealth, in the minimum amount of:
(1) Statutory limit for workers' compensation; and
(2) One hundred thousand dollars for employer's liability.
M. No limitation on liability. None of the provisions of this article or any
insurance policy required herein, or any damages recovered by the
Township hereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful
performance by or limit the liability of the grantee under this article or
the franchise for damages either to the limits of such policies or
otherwise.
A. Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the grantee
shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its officers, public officials, boards and
commissions, agents, and employees from and against any and all
lawsuits, claims (including without limitation workers' compensation
claims against the Township or others), causes of action, actions,
liability, and judgments for injury or damages (including but not limited
to expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by
the Township in connection therewith but excluding claims, suits,
actions, liabilities, judgments or damages that are the direct result of
negligence or deliberate acts or omission of the Township, its officers,
employees, agents, boards or commissions):
(1) To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts
or omissions of the grantee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees, to which the grantee's negligence shall in any way
contribute, and regardless of whether the Township's negligence or
§ 60-30 WARWICK CODE § 60-31
60:114
§ 60-32. Authority to construct.
the negligence of any other party shall have contributed to such
claim, cause of action, judgment, injury, or damage.
(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service
mark or patent, or any other right of any person, firm or
corporation, but excluding claims arising out of or related to
Township or educational access programming.
(3) Arising out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, commonwealth, or local statute, ordinances or
regulation applicable to the grantee in its business hereunder.
B. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The
Township shall give the grantee reasonable notice of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
provisions of this section. The grantee will provide the defense of any
claims brought against the Township under this section of the franchise
by selecting counsel of the grantee's choice to defend the claim, subject
to the reasonable consent of the Township, which will not unreasonably
be withheld. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the Township
from cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense of
any litigation by its own counsel at its own costs and expense, provided
however, that the grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or
compromise any claim or action arising hereunder and the grantee
shall have the sole authority to decide the appropriateness and the
amount of any such settlement. Recovery by the Township of any sum
by reason of the liquidated damages required by the franchise shall be
deducted from any recovery which the Township might have against the
grantee arising out of the same transaction under the terms of this
section.
A. Authorization to commence construction and application procedures.
Within 30 days after acceptance by the grantee of a franchise, the
grantee shall apply for any needed contracts for pole use. Pole space
and other facilities obtained from the Township, utilities, and other
lawful uses of the public way shall be at the cost and expense of the
grantee. Within 30 days after completion of the make-ready survey
identifying the routes of the system facility, the grantee shall apply for
all additional licenses from the commonwealth, Township, or other
necessary parties, such as the railroads for crossing under or over their
property. In any event, all necessary applications for permits, licenses,
certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so
that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay
with the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise.
B. Power to contract. Upon grant of the franchise and in order to
construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the Township, the
§ 60-31 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-32
60:115
§ 60-33. Construction and technical standards.
grantee shall obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate Township,
commonwealth, county, and federal officials necessary to cross or
otherwise use highways or roads under their respective jurisdiction;
obtain permission, when required, from the Federal Aviation
Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever
other permits a Township, county, commonwealth or federal agency
may require.
A. Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee
shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its system in a
manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and detailed
technical standards submitted by the grantee as part of its application,
which standards are incorporated by reference herein. The grantee,
through the system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are
free from any significant distortion and interference. The system shall
be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for twenty-fourhours-
a-day continuous operation. The system shall produce, for
reception on subscribers' receivers which are in good working order,
either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color
capable) which are free from any significant interference or distortion
which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality.
B. State of the art. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and
maintain its system in accordance with the then-current standards of
the art of cable communications, such standards to include but not be
limited to the following:
(1) The system will be constructed to permit a minimum of 750 MHZ
operation.
(2) The grantee shall maintain its system facilities in a manner which
will continue to enable it to add new services and associated
equipment as specified in the franchise agreement.
C. Township approval of construction plans. Prior to the erection of any
towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or rebuild of the cable
communications system under this article, the grantee shall first submit
to the Township and other designated parties for approval a concise
description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed,
including engineering drawings, if required, together with a map and
plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection
or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any
rebuilds or upgrading of the cable communications system shall be
commenced by any person until approval, therefore, has been received
from the Township. Approval of each phase of new construction or
rebuild design plans shall be deemed granted for any submission made
to the Township unless expressly disapproved within 60 days. All other
§ 60-32 WARWICK CODE § 60-33
60:116
approvals, such as permits, will be provided within the time frames
specified by relevant law and regulation.
D. Contractor qualifications. Any contractor proposed for work of
construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of system
equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the commonwealth
and all local ordinances.
E. Minimum interference. The grantee's system and associated equipment
erected by the grantee within the Township shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and
other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole
or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the grantee shall be
placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such
public way.
F. Township maps. The Township does not guarantee the accuracy of any
maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing
substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location
shall be verified by excavation.
G. Quality of construction. Construction, installation, operation, and
maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in
an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current
technological standards and the manufacturer's specifications. All
cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
considerations.
H. Construction standards. The grantee shall at all times comply with
National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); Bell
System Code of Pole Line Construction; applicable FCC or other
federal, commonwealth and local regulations; and standards as set
forth in the franchise.
I. Noninterference. In any event, the system shall not endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or
other areas where the grantee may have equipment located.
J. Antennas. Any antenna structure used in the cable communications
system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of
antenna structure standards as required by federal and commonwealth
law or regulation.
K. OSHA. All worker facilities, conditions, and procedures that are used
during construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the
cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
§ 60-33 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-33
60:117
§ 60-34. System construction schedule.
The franchise shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 60-35. Extension of service.
The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling units or commercial
entities requesting service and in any additional areas annexed to the
Township within six months of such request, subject to any line extension
requirements specified in the franchise agreement.
§ 60-36. Use of streets.
L. RF leakage. RF leakage shall not exceed FCC permitted maximum
levels as evidenced by annual cumulative leakage index measurements.
FCC Rules and Regulations shall govern. The system shall cause no
measurable interference in TV signal reception to any operating
receiver not connected to and serviced by the system.
M. Standby power. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of
providing standby power for a minimum of eight hours for the headend
and two hours for transportation and trunk amplifiers.
A. Underground installation. All installations shall be underground in
those areas of the Township where public utilities providing both
telephone and electric service are underground at the time of
installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities
are aboveground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its
service aboveground, provided that at such time as those facilities are
required to be placed underground by the Township or are placed
underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services underground
without additional cost to the Township or to the individual subscriber
so served within the Township. Where not otherwise required to be
placed underground by this article or the franchise, the grantee's
system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent
property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location
shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable
passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit.
B. Permits. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall
in each case file plans with the appropriate Township agencies,
complete use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all
construction permits and receive written approval of the Township
before proceeding, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld
or delayed.
C. Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property
and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines,
equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and
maintained so that such facilities shall:
§ 60-33 WARWICK CODE § 60-36
60:118
(1) Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of
persons;
(2) Not interfere with any improvements the Township, county or
commonwealth may deem proper to make;
(3) Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys,
bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except
to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or
repair;
(4) Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during
actual construction or repair; and
(5) Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or
telephone facilities or other utilities located within the Township.
D. Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost
and expense and in a manner approved by the Township, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any
street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as, or better than,
before said work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely
manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the
Township. Weather permitting, restoration shall be undertaken within
no more than 10 business days after the damage is incurred and the
grantee shall use its best efforts to complete the restoration as soon as
possible thereafter.
E. Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the
period of the franchise, the Township, county or commonwealth shall
lawfully elect to alter, or change, the grade of any street, alley or other
public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper
authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
F. Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Township,
temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee
shall be given not less than 15 working days' advance notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes.
G. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing Township ordinances, to trim any trees upon and
overhanging public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at the
option of the Township, such trimming may be done by it, or under its
supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee.
§ 60-36 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-36
60:119
§ 60-37. Erection, removal and common use of poles; approval
required.
No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the
Township with regard to location, height, types and any other pertinent
aspect and consideration given by the Township to the availability of
existing poles and local aesthetics. However, no location of any pole or wireholding
structure of the grantee shall give rise to a vested interest and such
poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own
expense whenever the Township determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby.
§ 60-38. Construction reporting requirements.
§ 60-39. Tests and performance monitoring.
H. Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be the responsibility of the grantee.
I. Private property. The grantee shall be subject to all laws, ordinances or
regulations regarding private property in the course of constructing,
installing, operating or maintaining the cable communications system
in the Township of Warwick. The grantee shall promptly repair or
replace all private property, both real and personal, damaged or
destroyed as a result of the construction, installation, operating or
maintenance of the cable communications system at its sole cost and
expense.
A. Progress reports. Within 30 days of the granting of a franchise to
construct a new system pursuant to this article, the grantee shall
provide the Township with a written progress report detailing work
completed to date and a schedule for complete on of construction. Such
report shall include a description of the progress in applying for any
necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other
information the Township Manager may deem necessary. The content
and format of the report will be determined by the Township Manager
and may be modified at his/her discretion. The time frame established
above shall not apply to the upgrade or rebuild of an existing system.
B. Time frame for reports. Written progress reports as described in
Subsection A above shall be submitted to the Township on a bimonthly
basis throughout the new construction or rebuild process. The
Township Manager may require more frequent reporting if he/she
determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's progress.
C. Subscriber information. Prior to the commencement of any significant
system construction, the grantee shall produce an informational
document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under
construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place.
The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Manager prior to its distribution.
§ 60-36 WARWICK CODE § 60-39
60:120
§ 60-40. Services to subscribers and users.
A. Completion tests. Not later than 60 days after any new or substantially
rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to
subscribers; and thereafter on the annual anniversary of the effective
date of the franchise the grantee shall conduct technical performance
tests to demonstrate full compliance with all technical standards
contained in this article and the franchise, and the technical standards
and guidelines of the FCC.
B. Methodology. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the
supervision of a qualified engineer or technician with proper training
and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the
Township, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test
procedures, and the qualification of the engineer responsible for the
tests.
C. Test points. System monitor test points shall be established at or near
the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near
trunk line extremities. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test
points as shall be required by the FCC and/or the franchise.
D. FCC tests. In addition to the performance test reports required herein,
a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be
submitted to the Township within 60 days of completion.
E. Township required tests. Whenever there have been similar complaints
made or when there exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of
the Township, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee's
system, the Township shall have the right and authority to compel the
grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of its system
with respect to the specified complaints. To the extent permitted by law
or regulation, the Township may require additional tests, full or partial
repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific
subscriber's terminal. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the
Township no later than 30 days after the Township formally notifies the
grantee and shall include the following information: the nature of the
complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system
component was tested; the equipment used, and procedures employed
in said testing; the results of such tests; and methods by which said
complaints were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall be supervised
by a qualified engineer or technician, who shall sign all records of the
special tests and forward same to the Township with a report
interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions
should be taken. If requested by the Township, and at the Township's
expense, the grantee shall allow an independent engineer to conduct
such tests. The grantee shall reimburse the Township for the expense of
the tests if such tests indicate that the cable communications system
does not substantially comply with relevant laws and regulations.
§ 60-39 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-40
60:121
A. Programming. Concurrently with the activation of the cable
communications system in the Township, the grantee shall provide all
services to subscribers as described herein and in the franchise.
(1) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire to
change the selection of programs or services offered on any of the
tiers, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services
provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services
offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained
in the franchise, and shall be reported to the Township at least 30
days prior to the proposed implementation, and when practicable,
45 days prior notice to the Township. The grantee shall notify all
subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to implementing any
change in the selection of programs or services offered on any
tiers, or prior to adding or deleting any channels or changing the
channel number for any station. The grantee shall use its best
efforts to ensure diversity of programming.
(2) A basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout the
term of this article and the franchise.
(3) At a minimum, the grantee shall provide and maintain, within the
time frame specified in the franchise, the following access channels
whose purposes are outlined below:
(a) "Government access channel," which shall be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial local governmental use
and shall be managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively
by the Township.
(b) "Educational access channel," which shall be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial use by local public and
private school authorities, and shall be managed, scheduled
and programmed exclusively by them.
(c) A "public access channel," which will be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial use by members of the
general public on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
managed and scheduled by the grantee.
(4) The grantee shall make available leased access channels for
commercial use as required by federal law.
(5) The grantee shall fully provide, at a minimum, services, facilities
and equipment for public, educational and government access as
indicated in the franchise.
B. Emergency override. The grantee shall provide, service and maintain
public emergency transmission facilities to the Township, as described
in the franchise.
§ 60-40 WARWICK CODE § 60-41
60:122
§ 60-41. Installations, connections and other grantee services.
A. Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a service
not exceeding 150 feet from a feeder cable or pedestal attachment to
the customer's residence. Service in excess of 150 feet and concealed
wiring shall be charged at such cost as exceeds normal installation
costs. The desire of the Subscriber as to the point of entry into the
residence or commercial establishment and as to the location of
pedestals shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building
interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due
care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the
subscriber's property caused by said installation. Weather permitting,
such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 days after
the damage is incurred and the grantee shall use its best efforts to
undertake and complete such restoration as soon as possible thereafter.
B. On-time guarantee. Excluding circumstances beyond its control, the
grantee shall guarantee that service and installation appointments will
be performed promptly. To this end, and except as provided above, the
grantee shall not charge a subscriber for an installation where the
grantee is late for the installation appointment. Furthermore, in the
event the grantee is late for a service appointment, the grantee shall
provide the affected customer with a $20 bill credit. Where the grantee
schedules appointment windows, the grantee shall be considered late
for an appointment if it does not arrive at the customer's home within
the scheduled window.
C. Antennas and antenna switches. Except in cases where safety is
threatened after notification to the affected party and the safety
problem is not corrected, the grantee shall not, as a condition to
providing cable communications service, require any subscriber or
potential subscriber, to remove any existing antenna structures for the
receipt of over-the-air television signals. The grantee shall install, upon
the request of the subscriber, an RF or antenna switch where required
for the provision of services provided by the grantee. If the grantee
finds safety a problem, the affected subscriber shall be notified,
provided with an opportunity to correct the problem, and have service
resumed after correction has occurred.
D. Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to the potential subscriber,
as part of its promotional literature, information concerning the
availability of a lockout device for use by a subscriber. The grantee
reserves the right to require a reasonable deposit for the use of this
device, as set forth in the rate schedule. The lockout device described
herein shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it beginning
on the first day that any cable service is provided.
E. Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous
obligations owed.
§ 60-41 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-41
60:123
§ 60-42. Service calls and complaint procedures.
F. Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable
service disconnected without charge. Such disconnection shall be made
as soon as practicable and in no case later than 15 days following notice
to grantee of same. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to
the customer within 45 days from the date of termination of service.
A. Business office. The grantee shall establish, operate and maintain
within 10 miles of the Township a business office, teleproduction
facility, and maintenance and repair facility for the purpose of receiving
inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the
construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the system
and for the payment of subscribers' service charges, and providing
facilities for the production of programming.
B. Telephone service. The grantee shall have a locally listed or toll-free
telephone number to receive subscriber service calls 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. The grantee shall provide a sufficient number of
telephone lines and telephone staff members to enable subscribers to
reach the grantee as specified in the FCC regulations. The grantee's
number shall be published and made available to subscribers and the
general public. The grantee shall in addition provide a private
telephone number to the Township and utility companies to enable the
Township of the utility companies to reach the grantee in case of
emergency on a twenty-four-hour, seven-days-a-week basis for sameday
response.
C. Response time. The grantee shall respond to and resolve subscribers'
complaints or requests for service in connection with repairs and
maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities. The grantee shall
respond as quickly as possible to such complaints and requests, but
shall in any case respond within the time frames set forth in the
franchise. Complaints or requests which may pose a potential health
and safety hazard will be responded to immediately. In connection with
billing complaints, the grantee shall respond within seven business
days.
D. Grantee rules. The grantee shall prepare and file with the Township
copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling
of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate
means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the
procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name,
address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or
agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and
furnish information concerning the Town office responsible for the
administration of the franchise, including, but not limited to, the
address and telephone number of said office.
E. Complaint records. The grantee shall keep full records in connection
with all inquiries, or complaints and requests in connection with the
§ 60-41 WARWICK CODE § 60-42
60:124
§ 60-43. Continuity of service mandatory.
system that result in the generation of a work order or are referred
by the Township, or that are referred to the grantee's customer
satisfaction department for resolution. Such records shall identify the
person contacting the grantee, and the person responding on behalf of
the grantee, the subject matter of the contact, the date and time it was
received, the resolution of the matter in question or the action taken
by the grantee in connection with the contact, and the date and time
thereof, and such other information as may be deemed pertinent by the
grantee. These records shall be made available for periodic inspection
by the Township.
F. Equipment service. The grantee shall service or replace, without
charge above the normal lease cost, all equipment which it owns and
leases to the subscriber, provided, however, that the grantee may
charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any equipment
damaged due to negligence of such subscriber. This provision shall not
apply to any equipment covered by a separate service/maintenance
contract.
G. Investigation and remedial action. For recurrent complaints regarding
service deficiencies (other than total or partial loss of service, such as
"ghosting," weak audio signal, distortion, and the like), the Township
Manager may require the grantee to investigate and report to hint/her
the causes and cures thereof, and the Township Manager may also
conduct his/her own investigation. Thereafter, the Township Manager
may order specified remedial action to be taken within reasonably
feasible time limits. If such action is not taken, or is ineffective, or if
within 30 days the grantee files with the Board of Supervisors a notice
of objection to the order, the Board of Supervisors may conduct a
hearing and may, if the evidence warrants a finding of fault on the part
of the grantee, take appropriate action pursuant to the terms of this
article.
A. Subscription rights. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive
continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other
obligations to the grantee are honored.
B. Cooperation. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify or
sell the system, or the Township gives notice of intent to terminate or
fails to renew its franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the
Township or new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of
service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled
to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and
shall be entitled to reasonable costs for the services when it no longer
operates the system.
C. Failure to provide continuity. In the event the grantee fails to operate
the system for 30 consecutive days without prior approval of the
Township or without just cause, the Township may, at its option, operate
§ 60-42 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-43
60:125
§ 60-44. Protection of subscriber privacy.
§ 60-45. Rights of individuals.
the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee
restores service under conditions acceptable to the Township or a
permanent operator is selected. If the Township is required to fulfill this
obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the Township for
all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system
received by the Township that are the result of the grantee's failure to
perform.
A. Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. The grantee shall at all
times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this article and
other applicable federal, commonwealth, and local laws.
B. Notice of privacy provisions. At the time of entering into an agreement
to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber, and at
least once a year thereafter, the grantee shall provide notice in the form
of a separate written statement to subscriber which clearly and
conspicuously informs the subscriber of the privacy rights of the
subscriber and the limitations placed upon the grantee with regard to
the collection, retention, inspection and dissemination of any personally
identifiable information.
C. Correction policy. Each subscriber shall be provided access to all
personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is
collected and maintained by the grantee. Such information shall be
made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a
convenient place designated by the grantee. A cable subscriber shall be
provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such
information.
A. Nondiscrimination required. The grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or
general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age,
sex, or physical or mental handicaps, provided the subscriber shall pay
all applicable fees for the service desired. The grantee shall comply at
all times with all other applicable federal, commonwealth and local laws
and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this
article by reference.
B. Fairness of accessibility. The entire system of the grantee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and
equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and
other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other
entities having a legitimate use for the network; and no one shall be
arbitrarily excluded from its use; allocation of use of said facilities shall
be made according to the rules or decisions of the grantee and any
regulatory agencies affecting the same.
§ 60-43 WARWICK CODE § 60-45
60:126
§ 60-46. Books and records available to grantor.
§ 60-47. Reports required.
The grantee shall file with the Township:
C. Information accessibility. Each individual shall have the right to
information concerning the provisions of this article and the rules and
regulations formulated pursuant to it by the Board of Supervisors, the
grantee, agent or entity created hereunder or pursuant to this article.
A. Records. The Township or its officially designated representatives shall
have the right to inspect all pertinent or relevant records, books, plans,
customer service logs, and financial statements maintained by the
grantee which relate to the operation of the cable system, enforcement
of this article and the franchise, and directly to computation of gross
annual revenues, and construction and location of facilities within the
Township, at the grantee's place of business upon reasonable notice
and during normal business hours. Access to the aforementioned
records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that said records
contain "proprietary" information. The Township and its officially
designated representatives agree to treat any information disclosed
and reports, maps and other documents submitted to or inspected by
the Township or its designated representatives as confidential and only
to disclose it to employees, agents or representatives thereof that have
a need to know or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The grantee
shall make available adequate financial records within the Township to
permit the auditing of the grantee's gross revenues. The Township shall
notify the grantee in a timely manner if a request is made for
information which the grantee has clearly marked as "confidential."
Such notification shall specify the period of time the grantee has to
submit to the Township, any comments on the request, and may, at its
own expense, resist the request. The Township, in any event, shall not
be liable for any disclosure required by law.
B. Review. The grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of
the Township to examine and copy or transcribe any and all maps and
other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control
concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the
grantee. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the Township, or
upon reasonable request made available in the Township, and if the
Township shall determine that an examination of such maps or records
is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of their duties,
then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in
making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.
A. Regulatory communications. Upon request from the Township, any
reports required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
including but not limited to any annual proof of performance tests and
results, equal employment opportunity (EEO) reports, required
§ 60-45 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-47
60:127
financial information, and all petitions, applications and
communications of all types submitted by the grantee to the FCC,
the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal
or commonwealth regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction
over any matter affecting operation of the grantee's system, will be
made available to the Township.
B. Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of
plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be
submitted to the Township. After completion of initial construction or
any rebuild, maps designating the location of the cable plant shall be
filed with the Township. Thereafter, any revisions to the system shall be
reflected in updated maps provided to the Township in a timely manner
after such changes are made.
C. Construction reports. During the progress of any initial, rebuild, or
other major construction undertaken during the term of the franchise,
reports shall be sent to the Township on a bimonthly basis until
construction is complete, as specified in this franchise.
D. Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results shall be
supplied to the Township when sections of the system are rebuilt and
annually as required in § 60-39B and E of this article.
E. Test required by Township. Technical tests required by the Township as
specified in § 60-39E of this article and the franchise shall be submitted
within 30 days of notification.
F. Change in service. Written notification of any change in programming
or service shall be provided to the Township 30 days prior to
implementation, and, when practicable, prior notice shall be given 45
days in advance.
G. Grantee rules. The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or
application forms of regular subscriber service policy regarding the
processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect
and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted
as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed
with the Township and conspicuously posted in the grantee's local
office. All such terms and conditions, including schedule of charges,
must have been filed with the Township prior to their becoming
effective. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in
conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable commonwealth and
federal laws, rules or regulations.
H. Proof of bonds and insurance. The grantee shall submit to the Township
the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and written
evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies of insurance
required by this article, or certified copies thereof, and written notice of
payment of required premium.
§ 60-47 WARWICK CODE § 60-47
60:128
I. Financial and ownership reports. The following financial reports for the
franchise area shall be submitted to the Township as provided for
below:
(1) An annual ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time
during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in
the franchise of 5% or more to be provided where any changes in
ownership have occurred from those previously reported.
(2) A fully audited and certified financial report from the previous
calendar year, including year-end balance sheet; income statement
showing subscriber revenue from each category of service and
every source of nonsubscriber revenue, line item operating
expenses, depreciation expense, interest expense and taxes paid;
statement of sources and applications of funds; and depreciation
schedule to be provided every three years, if requested. The fullyaudited
and certified information will be provided on a Township
basis for gross revenue. Required financial information may be
provided on a consolidated basis for expenses, depreciation, and
sources and applications of funds.
(3) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures including the
cost of construction and of equipment to be provided every three
years, if requested. Such information may be provided on a
consolidated basis where franchisee specific information is not
available.
(4) An annual list of any changes to the officers and members of the
Board of the grantee and of any parent corporation.
(5) An annual report of the grantee and any parent corporation.
J. Operational reports. The following system and operational reports shall
be submitted to the Township upon written request by the Township
Manager or his designee:
(1) A report on the system's technical tests and measurements as set
forth herein and in the franchise.
(2) A report on programs and services offered by the grantee,
including public, educational, government, and leased access.
(3) An annual summary of the previous year's activities including, but
not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of service offered
including number of pay units sold, new services offered, and the
amount collected annually from other users of the system and the
character and extent of the service rendered thereto.
(4) An annual summary of complaints received and handled in addition
to any reports required in the franchise.
(5) An annual projection of system and service plans for the future.
§ 60-47 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-47
60:129
§ 60-48. Records required.
§ 60-49. Captions.
The captions to sections throughout this article are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this article.
Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this article.
§ 60-50. Franchise applications.
K. Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
Township at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property,
as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of
any of the rights, functions or duties of the Township in connection with
this article or the franchise, upon written request of the Township
Manager or his designee.
A. Mandatory records. The grantee shall at all times maintain:
(1) A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experience for the preceding period prior to
a performance review or a maximum of three years, whichever is
less.
(2) A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps
showing the location of all cable communication system equipment
installed or in use in the Township, exclusive of subscriber service
drops.
B. Other records. The Township may impose reasonable requests for
additional information, records and documents from time to time.
A. Invitation of any applications for a franchise, public notice of "request
for proposals." The Township may invite applications for a cable
television franchise by means of a public notice advertising the
availability of its "request for proposals." The public notice shall
contain, but need not be limited to:
(1) A description of the franchise area which is sought.
(2) A statement that a formal "request for proposals" is available to
prospective applicants from a Township official whose name,
address, and telephone number are specified.
(3) A statement that applications for the franchise must be submitted
in writing in the form and manner specified in the "request for
proposals" no later than a day certain.
(4) A statement that all applications will be made available for public
inspection during normal business hours at a specified location.
§ 60-47 WARWICK CODE § 60-50
60:130
B. Request for proposals. Prior to inviting any applications for any
television franchise, the Township shall prepare a "request for
proposals" that shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
(1) A description of the cable television system and services desired by
the Township including any system specifications established by
the Township.
(2) A statement specifying the form that all applications shall follow.
(3) A statement indicating the amount of the application fee (if any) to
be submitted with the application, and the manner in which such
fee is to be submitted.
(4) A statement that all applications must contain the information
required by the "request for proposal."
(5) The closing date for the submission of applications.
(6) The name, address, and telephone number of the Township
official(s) who may be contacted for further information.
C. Requirement for public hearing on reasonable notice. The Township
shall conduct a public hearing prior to awarding or denying any cable
television franchise. The hearing shall be preceded by reasonable
notice to each of the franchise applicants and to the public, and shall be
conducted by the Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with
the following procedures:
(1) There shall be an agenda for the hearing which shall specify the
proposal(s) to be considered at the hearing.
(2) Every person who has applied for a cable television franchise shall
appear at the hearing either in person or by authorized
representative. The application of any applicant not so appearing
shall not be further considered, except for good cause shown.
(3) All persons shall be given opportunity to participate in the hearing,
but nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the presiding
officer to establish reasonable time limits and otherwise limit
repetitive statements or questions.
(4) The notice of hearing shall:
(a) Conform to all relevant commonwealth and local laws and
ordinances.
(b) Describe the agenda to be considered at the public hearing.
(c) Indicate that copies of all franchise applications are available
for public inspection during normal business hours at a place
to be specified in the notice.
§ 60-50 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-50
60:131
§ 60-51. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance of or doing of any act,
duty matter, payment, or thing is required hereunder and a period of time or
duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein,
the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last
day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. When the last day of
the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall not be
counted in the computation.
D. Township discretion. The Township, at its discretion, may reject any
application for a franchise. In awarding a franchise, the Township shall
allow the applicant's cable system a reasonable period of time to
become capable of providing cable service to all households in the
franchise area; may require adequate assurance that the cable operator
will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access
channel capacity, facilities, or financial support; and may require
adequate assurance that the cable operator has the financial, technical,
or legal qualifications to provide cable service.
§ 60-50 WARWICK CODE § 60-51
60:132
ARTICLE II
Cable Television and Video Programming
[Adopted 8-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 60-52. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Video Programming Tax
Ordinance."
§ 60-53. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in
this section:
CABLE TELEVISION OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who
provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or
more affiliates owns an interest in such cable system or who otherwise
controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management
and operation of a cable system. The term does not include a provider of
wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service.
DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE TRANSMISSION — The transmission,
distribution or broadcasting of video programming or services by satellite
directly to subscribers' premises without the use of ground receiving or
distribution equipment, except at the site of the subscribers or in the uplink
process to the satellite.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Shall have the same meaning as it has in any
franchise agreement in effect at any time between the Township and a
cable television operator. If no such agreement is in effect, then this term
shall mean the amount charged for or received by video programmers
from sales of video programming, and related charges for bad check and
late payment charges, installation, connection, additional outlets, repair
services, digital audio services, radio services, programming guides and
equipment rental services, the amount charged for or received by common
carriers from sales of access to video programming, and related charges
for bad check and late payment charges, installation, connection, additional
outlets, repair services, digital audio services, radio services, programming
guides and equipment rental services, and the amount charged for or
received by persons from sales of access to video programming by any
means of transmission, other than wireless or direct-to-home satellite
transmission, directly to subscribers with service addresses in the
municipality. Gross receipts shall not include:
Amounts charged for or received by persons from sales of telephone
access or service that entitles the subscriber to the privilege of
interactive telephonic quality telecommunications with substantially all
persons having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a
part of a particular system or in a specified area;
A.
Any revenues received by persons providing access to video
programming from video programmers for the transport of video
B.
§ 60-52 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-53
60:133
SUBSCRIBER — The ultimate consumer of the video programming provided
by video programmers over any means of transmission, other than wireless
or direct-to-home satellite transmission. The term does not include a video
programmer that purchases video dial tone transport service to provide
video programming over a video dial tone system.
VIDEO DIAL TONE SERVICE — A common carrier service for the transport
of video programming to subscribers.
VIDEO PROGRAMMER — An individual, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, corporation, governmental entity, limited liability
company or any other entity that provides video programming to
subscribers.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Video or information programming, whether in
digital or analog format, that is provided by a cable operator or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by a cable television
operator and upon which such cable television operator pays a franchise
fee. "Video programming" does not include online, interactive information
programming to a subscriber's premises or access to the video dial tone
network;
The tax imposed under this act if the tax is shown as a separate line
charge to subscribers;
C.
Any other taxes, fees or surcharges on services furnished by persons
providing access to video programming or video programmers which
are imposed on subscribers by the commonwealth, the County of Bucks,
or the Township pursuant to statute, ordinance, resolution or regulation
and which are collected on behalf of the governmental unit by the
provider of the services;
D.
Any portion of a debt related to the sale of video programming or the
sale of access to a video network, the gross charges for which are
not otherwise deductible or excludable, that have become worthless
or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax
standards. If the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently
paid, the video programmer or person shall report and pay the tax on
that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made;
E.
Amounts received from retail sales of tangible personal property that
provides access to video programming;
F.
Amounts charged for or received by persons from sales of video
programming which is delivered to subscribers through a satellite
master antenna television (SMATV) system; or
G.
Amounts received by a common carrier from persons for related
charges for bad check and late payment charges, installation,
connection, additional outlets, repair services, digital audio services,
radio services, programming guides and equipment rental services that
are resold by such persons to the ultimate consumer.
H.
§ 60-53 WARWICK CODE § 60-53
60:134
services to the extent that access to such services is accomplished via a
dial-up or private telephone line or via wireless or direct-to-home satellite
transmission.
WIRELESS TRANSMISSION — The distribution of video programming
using radio communications, including, but not limited to, terrestrial-based
radio systems.
§ 60-54. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed a tax at the rate hereinafter set forth on the
gross receipts of any video programmer derived from the sale of video
programming to customers who receive that programming within Warwick
Township.
§ 60-55. Rate of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be the same percentage of gross
receipts as the franchise fee is of gross receipts under any present or future
cable television franchise agreement to which the Township is a party,
provided, however, that the rate of tax shall not exceed 5% of gross receipts.
If there is no cable television franchise agreement in effect at any time, the
rate of tax during that time shall be 5% of gross receipts.
§ 60-56. Due date of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable at the Warwick
Township Building, 2581 Old York Road, Jamison, Pennsylvania 18929, on
the last day of April, July, October, and January, and shall consist of the tax
due on account of the gross receipts of a taxpayer for the three months
preceding the month of payment.
§ 60-57. Penalty for late payment.
A penalty of 10% of the amount due shall be added to any tax paid after its
due date.
§ 60-58. Tax credits.
A. Credit for interstate transactions. Any person subject to the tax
imposed under this act shall be entitled to a credit against the tax
imposed by this act equal in amount to any similar tax on gross receipts,
other than a generally applicable sale or use tax or corporate income
tax, that the person has paid to another state or government entity
thereof under a lawful requirement of such state or government entity
on sales by the person of the same video programming or sales of
access to such video programming to subscribers located within the
Township.
B. Credit for taxes paid under franchise or similar fees. Any person subject
to the tax imposed under this act shall be entitled to a credit against the
§ 60-53 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 60-58
60:135
§ 60-59. Municipality audit.
Any person providing video programming hereunder may be audited by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of Act 37 of 1995.
tax imposed by this act equal in amount to any fees on gross receipts
that the person has paid under any franchise fee or similar fee
authorized or permitted by federal or commonwealth law or imposed by
ordinance of the Township, or agreed to pursuant to a written franchise
agreement between the person and the Township, with respect to any
revenues received by a person or video programmer from subscribers
for access to the person's video network or for video programming or
from video programmers for the transport of video programming to a
subscriber's premises or for access to a video network.
§ 60-58 WARWICK CODE § 60-59
60:136
Chapter 61
CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — Ch. 62.
Fees — Ch. 81.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Sidewalk maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 61-1. Definitions.
§ 61-2. Certificate required; inspections.
No structure, building, dwelling unit, nor any part thereof shall be used
or occupied, nor shall a change of ownership occur, nor shall a change
of residential or nonresidential tenant occur, until a use and occupancy
certificate has been issued by Warwick Township. The Township shall, after
application for such certificate has been made by the owner, the agent of the
owner, or the prospective tenant of the premises to be occupied, on a form
provided for such purpose by the Township, inspect the structure, building,
or dwelling unit no later than 30 days prior to settlement or occupation of
the premises, assuming that the complete use and occupancy application
was submitted and received by the Township no later than 45 days prior to
settlement or occupation of the premises, pursuant to the following:
A. The words and terms used herein shall have the meanings given to
them in the current edition of the Uniform Construction Code of
Pennsylvania, as most recently adopted by ordinance by the
Supervisors of Warwick Township.24
B. "Township building codes" is defined to mean the current edition of the
Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania, as adopted by ordinance
by the Supervisors of Warwick Township.
A. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all applicable
section(s) of the Township building codes, Township ordinances, rules
and regulations.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall apply
for and secure from the Township all necessary permits for all previous
improvements or work for which a building or zoning permit was
required but not secured.
C. No use and occupancy certificate shall be issued until all information,
as requested within the application, has been received in writing and
reviewed and approved by the Township.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 60-59 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 61-2
60:137
D. Property use shall be in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance or shall
be a registered legal nonconformity.25
E. Address numbers must be clearly visible from the street (at least three
inches in height). All houses and buildings that are over 50 feet from the
road must have their address number posted at the curb.
F. All sidewalks, walkways, driveways and similar areas shall be
maintained in good condition. Sidewalk maintenance shall be compliant
with Chapter 159, Article III, of the Warwick Township Code of
Ordinances.
G. The exterior of the structure shall have no visible openings which would
allow weather or vermin to breach the interior.
H. Guardrails must be present at all balconies and/or decks which are
greater than 30 inches above grade or floor level.
I. Handrails and/or guard rails must be present at all stairways where
more than two stairs are located.
J. If present, sump pumps must discharge to the exterior of the building.
No sump pump may discharge to the surface of a property within 15
feet of a road or street without the written approval of the Township. No
sump pumps may discharge into the sanitary sewer system. No sump
pumps may discharge into the stormwater system without the written
approval of the Township.
K. Working exhaust fans shall be present in all bathrooms and/or toilet
rooms which do not have an operable window.
L. If present, garbage disposals shall be in working condition.
M. All plumbing fixtures (sinks, toilets, etc.) shall be in working condition.
N. There shall be no unfilled openings within the electric circuit breaker
box.
O. There shall be no exposed or uncapped electric wires or uncovered
outlet or switch boxes.
P. All new and existing structures, buildings, or dwelling units shall
contain a properly maintained and functioning smoke detector present
on each level, in each bedroom, in the basement and in each basement
room separated by a door. A heat detector or smoke detector shall be in
the garage. The smoke-detection system shall meet the requirements of
the applicable Township building codes. When actuated, the audible
alarm of the smoke-detection system shall meet the requirements of the
applicable Township building codes referencing decibel levels for
smoke-detection systems. All detectors shall be interconnected so that
when one detector senses smoke or heat, all devices activate
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 61-2 WARWICK CODE § 61-2
60:138
§ 61-3. Certificate contents; responsibility for obtaining.
The application for a use and occupancy permit shall state all uses, principal
and accessory, to which the structure, building, or dwelling unit is devoted.
No structure, building, dwelling unit, nor any part thereof shall be used
or occupied, nor shall a change of ownership occur, nor shall a change
of residential or nonresidential tenant occur, until a use and occupancy
certificate has been issued by Warwick Township in accordance with this
chapter. It shall be the responsibility of any person or corporation who shall
change the use of, sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any structure,
building, or residential dwelling unit, or change the tenant of a residential
or nonresidential structure or building, to apply for and obtain the use
and occupancy certificate required by this chapter prior to the transfer of
ownership rights or any use or occupancy or change of use or occupancy
of such premises; provided, however, that the failure on the part of such
simultaneously. All smoke detectors must have a battery backup
feature. Detectors in new construction must be hardwired. In existing
units, detectors may be hardwired, wireless or a combination of both
types.
Q. All systems, devices and equipment to detect fire or smoke, actuate an
alarm or suppress or control a fire shall be properly maintained.
R. Fire-rated doors shall be present in garages where a door leads into a
conditioned space.
S. Where present, five-eighths-inch, Type X drywall shall be installed
along the wall between the garage and the living space.
T. Existing fire-suppression systems (sprinklers) are to be inspected and
certified by a certified sprinkler inspector.
U. All fireplaces must have a screen, whether they are in use or not, unless
the flue has been permanently sealed.
V. All bedroom windows must open easily and stay open without additional
support(s).
W. All dryer exhaust ducts must be of metallic, noncombustible material,
attached with tape or compression bands (no screws). Dryer exhaust
vents must have cleanouts as required by Section 1502 of the currently
adopted edition of the International Residential Code.
X. The front door must utilize a thumb-latch lock.
Y. On-lot or private septic systems must be in working condition. Failing
systems shall be required to connect with the public sewer where
available. Where public sewer service is not available, the property
owner shall meet with the Township and the Warwick Township Water
and Sewer Authority to ascertain the most appropriate method of
resolving the sewer issue.
§ 61-2 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 61-3
60:139
seller, transferor, or owner to obtain such certificate shall not excuse the
purchaser, transferee, or residential or nonresidential tenant from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 61-4. Revocation.
Any use and occupancy certificate issued hereunder may be revoked in
the event that the structure, building, or dwelling unit is determined to
be unsafe, uninhabitable, or that a condition exists that is in violation of
any ordinance of the Township, or that the actual use is in violation of
any ordinance of the Township. In the event that the use and occupancy
certificate is issued subject to conditions, such certificate may be revoked
if the conditions remain unsatisfied within the time limit provided for at the
time of issuance of the certificate.
§ 61-5. Fees.
The applicant for a use and occupancy certificate shall pay, at the time
of application, a fee to the Township in an amount established by a fee
schedule which has been adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.
Such fee shall be nonrefundable in the event that the Township shall not
issue a use and occupancy certificate after the required inspection.26
§ 61-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, or association who or which shall occupy or use
any structure, building, or dwelling unit without obtaining a use and
occupancy certificate or who or which continues to occupy or use any
structure, building, or dwelling unit following revocation of a previously
issued use and occupancy certificate shall be in violation of this chapter
and shall be subject to the payment of fines and penalties of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000, in addition to the cost of prosecution
and collection, and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days, as provided by law. Each and every day that occupancy
or use of any structure, building, or dwelling unit shall continue without the
certificate required by this chapter, after notice to cease and desists such
occupancy or use shall have been given, shall constitute a separate offense
and be punishable as such.
26.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 61-3 WARWICK CODE § 61-6
60:140
Chapter 62
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 57.
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
61.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 69.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 117.
Plumbing — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 62-1. Election to enforce Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, hereby elects to
administrator and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 4 7210.101 through § 7210.1103, as
amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 62-2. Adoption of building code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained within Title 34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building
code for Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-3. Administration and enforcement provisions.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Warwick Township shall
be undertaken, as determined by the Board of Supervisors for Warwick
Township. Bucks County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the regulations
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
§ 62-4. Building Code Board of Appeals.
A. Creation of Appeals Board. A Building Code Board of Appeals
(hereinafter "Appeals Board" is hereby established in conformity with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of
1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 through § 7210.1103; Section 501.(c), and
Title 34 Pa. Code, Section 403.121. The Appeals Board shall hear and
rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of
time.
B. Appointment of members.The Appeals Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Board of Supervisors as follows: one
member shall be appointed to serve a five-year term; one member shall
serve a four-year term; one member shall serve a three-year term; one
§ 61-6 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-4
60:141
§ 62-5. Effect on ordinances.
member shall serve a two-year term; and one member shall serve a oneyear
term. After the initial appointments, each new member shall serve
for five years or until a successor has been appointed.
C. Qualifications of members. The members of the Appeals Board shall, in
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, be qualified by training and
experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
Training and experience may consist of licensure as an architect or
engineer, experience in the construction industry, or training or
experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. No member of the Board of
Supervisors or any code inspector employed by the Township may serve
on the Appeals Board. If the Board of Supervisors is unable to find a
sufficient number of qualified individuals who reside within the
Township, it may appoint a qualified person who resides outside of the
Township to fill a position.
D. Alternate members. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint two
alternate members who shall be called by the Appeals Board
Chairperson to hear appeals in the event of the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the
qualifications required for Board membership, and shall be appointed
for five years or until a successor has been appointed.
E. Intergovernmental cooperation. The Board of Supervisors is hereby
authorized to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
with one or more municipalities to create an Appeals Board.
F. Chairperson and Secretary. The Appeals Board shall annually select one
of its members to serve as chairperson and secretary. The Secretary
shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the
Township Manager.
G. Disqualification of member. A member of the Appeals Board shall not
hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or
financial interest.
H. Operation of Board of Appeals. The procedure for conduct of hearing
and notices of hearings shall be established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and shall be consistent with Pennsylvania law and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
A. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by Warwick Township on or before July 1,
1999, and which are equal to or exceed the requirements of the code
shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the provisions of
these ordinances fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of
the code, as amended from time to time.
B. These ordinance provisions, which are hereby saved from repeal
include, but are not limited to:
§ 62-4 WARWICK CODE § 62-5
60:142
(1) Ordinance No. 97-5, adopted on June 16, 1997, establishing
requirements for certificates of use and occupancy and codified at
Warwick Township Code Chapter 53 and Chapter 61;
(2) Ordinance No. 97-6 adopted on June 16, 1997, enacting the 1997
BOCA National Building Code; the CABO One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code, 1997 Edition (Warwick Township Code, Chapter
53); the 1997 BOCA National Plumbing Code (Warwick Township
Code Chapter 141); the 1997 BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
(Warwick Township Code Chapter 89); the 1997 NFIPA National
Electric Code (Warwick Township Code Chapter 69); the 1997
National Mechanical Code (Warwick Township Code Chapter 117);
and the 1997 Property Maintenance Code (Warwick Township Code
Chapter 57) to the extent the regulations set forth in any of the
codes adopted by Ordinance No. 97-6 are stricter than the UCC
Building Code;
(3) All provisions of Ordinance No. 97-6, as codified and the codes
adopted thereunder which equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the code, noting specifically:
(a) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 1 Administration,
Section 108.0 Permits, Subsection 108.1 Action on Application.
Delete the words "within a reasonable time" and the following:
"within 30 days."
(b) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 1 Administration,
Section 118.0 Certificate of Occupancy is hereby deleted in its
entirety and Ordinance Number 97-527 is inserted.
(c) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 3 Use or
Occupancy, Section 310.0 Residential Use Groups, Subsection
310.5 Use Group R-3 structures. Delete the words "fire
separation assembly" and insert the following; "masonry fire
separation assembly having a minimum thickness of eight
inches extending to a minimum of 32 inches above the roof
deck."
(d) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of The BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Certificates of Use and Occupancy.
§ 62-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-5
60:143
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 3 Use or
Occupancy, Section 310.0 Residential Use Groups, Subsection
310.5 Use Group R-3 structures, Exception Number 1. Delete
the words "fire partitions" and insert the following: "fire
separation assemblies."
(e) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 3 Use or
Occupancy, Section 310.0 Residential Use Groups, Subsection
310.5 Use Group R-3 structures, Exception Number 2. Delete
the words "fire partition" and insert the following: "fire
separation assembly."
(f) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 3 Use or
Occupancy, Section 310.0 Residential Use Groups, Subsection
310.5 Use Group R-3 structures. Insert the following new
section: "310.5.2 Dwelling Offsets: Multiple single-family
dwellings shall have an offset between adjacent units of not
less than two feet. Exceptions: The exterior walls of multiple
single-family dwellings shall have a fire resistance rating of
one hour for a distance of four feet on either side of the
common wall or they shall be provided with a masonry wing
wall which extends past the face of the dwelling units, where
they share a common wall, for a distance of not less than two
feet."
(g) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 3 Use or
Occupancy, Section 313.0 Mixed use groups, Subsection
313.1.1 Nonseparated use groups. Delete the words "A fire
separation assembly is not required between use groups
except as required by other sections of this code." and insert
the following: "A fire separation assembly is required between
all mixed use groups within structures in addition to any other
requirements stated within any other section of this code."
(h) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 4 Special Use or
Occupancy, Section 407.0 Private Garages, Subsection 407.4
Attached to rooms: Delete the words "1/2 inch gypsum board"
§ 62-5 WARWICK CODE § 62-5
60:144
and insert the following; "5/8 inch Type X fire rated gypsum
board."
(i) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 5 General Building
Limitations, Section 506.0 Area Modifications, Subsection
506.2 Street frontage increase. Add the following: "This
increase shall be permitted only when there exists a fire lane
having a minimum width of 20 feet which surrounds the entire
building or facility."
(j) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 6 Types of
Construction, Table 602 Fire Resistance Ratings of Structure
Elements. Amend line 4 "Fire Partitions" to provide a minimum
of one-hour fire resistance rating for all types of construction.
(k) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 6 Types of
Construction, Table 602 Fire resistance Ratings of Structure
Elements. Amend line 5 "Dwelling unit and guest room
separations" to provide a minimum of two-hour fire resistance
rating for all types of construction.
(l) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 7 Fire Resistant
Materials and Construction, Section 707.0 Fire walls and Party
Walls, Subsection 707.4 Combustible framing is hereby deleted
in its entirety and the following shall be inserted: "707.4
Combustible framing: There shall be no combustible framing
allowed within any firewall."
(m) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 902.0 Definitions, Subsection 902.1 General.
Between "Alarm verification" and "Automatic" insert the
following: "Area: All areas identified within this chapter shall
be calculated from the outermost edges of the exterior walls."
(n) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
§ 62-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-5
60:145
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904,0 Fire Suppression Systems, Subsection
904.4 Use Group E. Delete the words "20,000 square feet
(1860 m2)" and insert the following: "5,000 square feet (465
m2)."
(o) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression Systems, Subsection
904.6 Use Group I. Delete the words "An automatic fire
suppression system shall not be required for Use Group I-2
child-care facilities located at the level of exit discharge, which
accommodate 100 children or less and in which each child-care
room has an exit door directly to the exterior."
(p) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression Systems, Subsection
904.8 Use Group R-1. Delete the words "Exception: Where all
guestrooms are not more than three stories above the lowest
level of exit discharge to the exits serving the guestrooms.
Each guestroom shall have at least one door opening directly
to an exterior exit access which leads directly to the exits."
(q) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression Systems, Subsection
904.9 Use Group R-2. Delete the words: "Exception: Buildings
which do not exceed two stories, including basements which
are not considered as a story above grade, and with a
maximum of 12 dwelling units per fire area. Each dwelling unit
shall have at least one door opening to an exterior exit access
that leads directly to the exits required to serve that dwelling
unit."
(r) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996 Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression Systems, Subsection
904.7 Use Groups M, S-1 and F-1. Within Number 1 delete the
words "12,000 square feet (1116 m2)" and insert the following:
"5,000 square feet (465 m2)."
§ 62-5 WARWICK CODE § 62-5
60:146
(s) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression Systems. Insert the
following new section: "904.7.1 Use Groups S-2 and F-2:
Throughout all buildings with a Use Group S-2 or F-2 an
automatic fire suppression system shall be provided where the
fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2)."
(t) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 906.0 Fire Sprinkler System, Subsection
906.5 Sprinkler alarms. Insert the following: "Within all
residential use groups that are provided with an approved
sprinkler system the system shall include a flow switch, which
is hard wired to the approved smoke detection system for the
structure, which sounds the smoke detection system when
activated."
(u) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 907.0 Limited Area Sprinkler System,
Subsection 907.6.3. Delete Exceptions Number 1 and 2 in their
entirety.
(v) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 918.0 Fire Alarm Systems, Subsection
918.4.2. Use Group B shall be deleted in its entirety and the
following shall be inserted: “918.4.2 Use Group B: A fire alarm
system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies in
Use Group B."
(w) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 918.0 Fire Alarm Systems. Insert the
following new section; "918.4.7 Use Group F1, F2, S1, S2: A
fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all
occupancies in Use Group F1, F2, S1, S2."
(x) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
§ 62-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-5
60:147
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 919.0 Automatic Fire Detection Systems,
Subsection 919.5 Sprinklered Building Exception is hereby
deleted in its entirety.
(y) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 920.0 Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors, Subsection 920.3 Where Required. Add the
following: “In addition to the smoke detectors indicated within
this section, a heat detector shall be installed in each garage
area located under or attached to all buildings and/or
structures within the following Use Groups: R1, R2, R3, R4, I1,
12 and I3. This heat detector shall be hardwired and
interconnected to the required smoke detectors."
(z) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 920.0 Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors, Subsection 920.3.2 Use Groups R2 and R3,
Exception Number 2, shall be deleted in its entirety.
(aa) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 920.0 Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors, Subsection 920.3.2 Use Groups R2 and R3. Delete
the words "Use Groups R2 and R3" and insert the following:
"Use Groups R2, R3 and R4."
(bb) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 920.0 Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors, Subsection 920.5 Battery backup. Delete the words
"Use Groups R2, R3 and I1" and insert the following: "Use
Groups R2, R3, R4 and I1."
(cc) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 920.0 Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors, Subsection 920.5 Battery backup. Delete the words
§ 62-5 WARWICK CODE § 62-5
60:148
"Battery backup shall not be required for smoke detectors
in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 906.2.1 or
906.2.3."
(dd) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire Protection
Systems, Section 924.0 Supervision, Subsection 924.1 Fire
suppression systems. Between Use Group E and H, insert Use
Group F.
(ee) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 10 Means of
Egress, Section 1014.0 Stairways, Subsection 1014.6 Treads
and risers. Within Exception Number 8, delete the words "the
maximum riser height shall be 7 3/4 inches (197 mm) and the
minimum tread depth shall be 10 inches (254 mm)" and insert
the following: "the maximum riser height shall be 8 1/4 inches
(210 mm) and the minimum tread depth shall be 9 inches (229
mm)."
(ff) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 16 Structural
Loads, Section 1606.0 Live Loads, Table 1606. Residential:
Attics [Uniform Live Load (psf)] delete "20" and insert "30."
Residential: One- and Two-Family Dwelling, Sleeping Rooms
[Uniform Live Load (psf)] delete "30" and insert "40."
(gg) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 16 Structural
Loads, Section 1606.0 Live Loads, Subsection 1606.2.2
Residential attics and joists. Delete the words "10 psf" and
insert the following: "20 psf."
(hh) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Coded 1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 16 Structural
Loads, Section 1606.0 Live Loads, Subsection 1606.23
Residential attics and trusses. Delete the words "10 psf" and
insert the following: "20 psf."
§ 62-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-5
60:149
(ii) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 23 Wood, Section
2303.0 Performance Requirements. Insert the following new
section: "2303.1.2 Minimum lumber grade: The minimum
lumber grade for any structural member shall be number two
as certified by the Western Wood Association."
(jj) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 23 Wood, Section
2307.0 Wood Structural Panels, Subsection 2307.31 Floor and
roof sheathing. Add the following: "Notwithstanding anything
else within this article, plywood sheathing over supports
spaced at 16 inches on center shall not be less than 1/2 inch in
thickness."
(kk) (Reserved)28
(ll) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the following
portion of the BOCA National Building Coded/1996, Thirteenth
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 32 Construction in
the Public Right-of-Way, Section 3202.0 Street Encroachments,
Subsection 3202.3 Above grade. Add the following: "A person
shall not erect, install, remove, rehang or maintain over public
property any sign for which a permit is required under the
provisions of this code until an approved bond has been filed in
the sum of $100,000 as herein required or until an insurance
policy has been filed for public liability in the amount of
$100,000 per accident and for property damage in the amount
of $100,000 as herein required."
(mm) Ordinance 97-6, adopted June 16, 1997, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 34 Existing
Structures, Section 3408.0 Compliance Alternatives,
Subsection 3408.2 Applicability. Delete the words "(Date to be
inserted by the Jurisdiction. Note: It is recommended that this
date coincide with the effective date of Building Codes within
the Jurisdiction.)" and insert the following: "The date of the
adoption of this chapter"
(nn) Ordinance 99-2, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
28.Editor’s Note: Former § 62-5B(3)(kk), concerning the use of particleboard for siding and
sheathing, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-8.
§ 62-5 WARWICK CODE § 62-5
60:150
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 4 Special Use
and Occupancy, Section 407.0. Private Garages, Subsection
407.4 Attached to rooms: Delete the words; "Private garages
attached side-by-side to rooms in occupancies in Use Groups
R-1, R-2, R-3 or I-1 shall be completely separated from the
interior spaces and the attic area by means of 1/2 inch gypsum
board" and insert the following: "Private garages in
occupancies in Use Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 or I-1 shall have all
wall and ceiling surfaces, against both interior and the exterior
of the surface, within the garage area provided with 5/8 inch
Type X fire-rated gypsum board."
(oo) Ordinance 99-2, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 9 Fire
Protection Systems, Section 904.0 Fire Suppression System.
Insert the following new section: "904.12 Use Group R-3 and
R-4: An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided
throughout all buildings, except detached accessory
structures, with an occupancy in Use Groups R-3 and R-4 in
accordance with Sections 906.2.1, 906.2.2 or 906.2.3."
(pp) Ordinance 99-02, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc. Chapter 7, Fire-
Resistant Materials and Construction, Section 713.0 Floor/
Ceiling and Roof/Ceiling Assemblies. Insert the following new
section: "713.6 Preengineered Wood Floor Trusses: All
preengineered wood floor trusses (i.e., open-web wood floor
trusses) shall be protected by one-half-inch gypsum board,
minimum, in all locations within all use groups. [Amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
(qq) Ordinance 99-2, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 14 Exterior
Wall Coverings, Section 1405 Veneers, Subsection 14053.6
Building Paper. Delete the words "Where veneers of brick, clay
tile, concrete or natural or artificial stone are used" and insert
the following: "All exterior wall coverings shall be provided
with."
(rr) Ordinance 99-2, adopted March 1, 1999, amended the
following portion of the BOCA National Building Code/1996,
Thirteenth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc.: Chapter 21 Masonry,
Section 2113.0 Fireplaces and Chimney Flues. Insert the
§ 62-5 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-5
60:151
§ 62-6. Changes to code.
This code may be changed and/or modified by the governing body of
Warwick Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 through § 7210.1103, Section 503.
§ 62-7. Fee schedule.
A fee schedule assessable by Warwick Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the governing body of Warwick Township by resolution from
time to time.
§ 62-8. Changes to amendable sections of Labor and Industry
Regulations.
In accordance with Section 403.102, (1) of Title 34, Part XIV, Chapter 403,
the following regulations set forth in the Pennsylvania Code are amended as
set forth below:
following new section: "2113.5 Preengineered Fireplace Unit:
Where a fireplace unit is not provided with a masonry flue (i.e.,
B-Vent or other approved vent) the living space adjacent to the
flue shall be provided with 5/8 inch type X fire-rated gypsum
board applied to the chimney side. Where a fireplace unit is
placed over a combustible flooring material the fireplace unit
and the associated hearth shall be separated from the floor
with a minimum 1/2 inch noncombustible layer of material (i.e.,
tile backer board or other approved material).
C. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by Warwick Township that are in effect as of
the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements are less than
the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform
with the comparable provisions of the code.
D. All other ordinances, resolutions, regulations and policies of Warwick
Township not governed by the code shall remain if full force and effect.
A. Section 403.43(g). Delete the words "5 years" and replace with the
words "three years."
B. Section 403.43(h): The permit holder shall keep a copy of the permit on
the work site until the completion of the construction or the issuance of
a use and occupancy permit, whichever comes later.
C. Section 403.62.(c).(1).(xvii) is deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 403,64.(d). Delete numbers 1through 4 and replace with the
following:
(1) Foundation inspection.
§ 62-5 WARWICK CODE § 62-8
60:152
§ 62-9. Amendments to Act 93. [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-5]
(2) Wall form inspection.
(3) Backfill inspection.
(4) Slab inspection.
(5) Plumbing, mechanical and electrical system inspection.
(6) Frame and masonry inspection.
(7) Wallboard inspection.
(8) Insulation inspection.
E. 34 Pa Code 403.82 is hereby amended to read as follows: A building
code official shall follow the following procedures if an inspection of an
occupied building reveals a violation of the Uniform Construction Code:
(1) A construction code official shall discuss the inspection results with
the permit holder at the completion of the inspection.
(2) The building code official may issue a written notice of violations to
the permit holder. The notice is to contain a description of the
violations and an order requiring correction of the violations within
a reasonable period determined by the building code official. When
a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure or equipment, a
building code official shall act in accordance with § 403.84 (relating
to unsafe building, structure or equipment).
(3) After the compliance date contained in the order, the building code
official shall inspect the building, structure or equipment to
determine whether the violation was corrected. The building code
official shall close the order if the violation was corrected. The
building code official may issue an order to show cause under
§ 403.83 (relating to order to show cause/order to vacate) to the
owner for a violation that was not corrected.
A. In accordance with Section 503.0 of Act 93, Warwick Township may
propose and enact an ordinance that exceeds the minimum
requirements of Act 45, adopts additional code requirements for
alterations associated with residential buildings or adopts stricter code
requirements for the regulation of utility and miscellaneous use
structures.
B. In accordance with this section, Warwick Township shall keep in full
force and effect the following requirements in its Building Code, which
provisions were in effect as of July 1, 1999, and were previously
retained within Ordinance No. 2004-03:
(1) All repairs and alterations to residential buildings and all repairs
and alterations that increase habitable area, with the exception of
§ 62-8 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 62-9
60:153
Chapter 63
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 111.
Noise — See Ch. 123.
Nuisances — See Ch. 127.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 131.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
certain finished basements as described below, shall comply with
the Building Code of Warwick Township adopted on June 7, 2004,
and any successor code adopted by the Township pursuant to Act
45 of 1999. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
(a) R-3 detached single-family dwellings (fully suppressed with a
sprinkler system conforming to NFPA 13D), R-2 townhouses,
R-2 attached single-family dwellings, that were constructed
prior to June 7, 2004, and which meet the following conditions
are exempt from the egress requirements for habitable
basements set forth in the International Residential Code at
Section R310.1, provided that:
[1] No sleeping rooms shall be permitted in the basement;
[2] No structural changes will be made during the remodeling
of the basement area;
[3] Interconnected smoke detectors must be provided
throughout the dwelling, on each floor and in every
bedroom;
[4] If a sprinkler system is present, it must be fully
operational, and sprinkler head coverage shall meet the
NFPA 13D standard for residential sprinkler systems; and
[5] A 10 ABC UL-approved fire extinguisher shall be available
in the basement area within five feet of the egress stairs.
(2) Construction, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair,
removal and demolition of utility and miscellaneous use structures
which are greater than 144 square feet in area shall comply with
the Warwick Township Building Code adopted on June 7, 2004, and
any successor code adopted by the Township pursuant to Act 45 of
1999.
§ 62-9 WARWICK CODE § 63-1
60:154
§ 63-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this
chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
ANIMAL — All nonhuman vertebrate and invertebrate species, whether wild
or domestic, commonly considered to be part of the animal kingdom.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any animal or having
custody of any animal or any person who harbors or permits an animal to
remain on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land or upon property of another person other than the
owner and not being accompanied by and under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said animal.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL —
Any animal of a species prohibited by Title 50 of the Code Federal
Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. It shall include any animal which is wild, fierce,
dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do harm.
A.
Wild animals, however domesticated, shall also include but not be
limited to:
Dog family (Canidae): all, except domesticated dogs, including
wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, etc.
(1)
Cat family (Felidae): all, except commonly accepted domestic cats,
including lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards,
jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.
(2)
Bears (Usidae): all bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears,
black bears, etc.
(3)
Weasels (Mustelidae): all, including weasels, martens, mink,
wolverines, ferrets, badgers, otters, ermines, mongooses, etc.
(4)
(5) Raccoons (Procyonidae): all raccoons and civets.
(6) Primates (Hominidae): all subhuman primates.
(7) Porcupine (Erethizontidae): all porcupines.
(8) Skunks.
(9) Snakes: all venomous and constricting snakes.
(10)Venomous lizards.
(11)Crocodilians: all alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.
(12)Venomous fish and piranha.
B.
§ 63-1 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 63-1
60:155
§ 63-2. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring or possessing any
animal to permit said animal to run at large at any time upon any of the
streets, roads, highways, or public grounds in the Township or upon the
property of another person other than the owner, custodian or keeper of
such animal. Any animal not penned or leashed or attended by or under
the immediate personal control and supervision of its owner or some person
capable of controlling said animal at all times shall be deemed to be running
at large.
§ 63-3. Animal noise.
No person owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any animal shall
permit said animal to bark, bay, cry, squawk or make any other noise
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or make such
noise intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any
other person.
§ 63-4. Seizure and redemption.
It shall be the duty of any Township police officer or of any person duly
appointed as the enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter who
witnesses any animal running at large in violation of this chapter or who
receives information of any animal running at large to seize such animal
and to convey it to the place designated by the Board as a pound. Notice
of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such animal, if identifiable, in
the manner prescribed by law, and such animal may be redeemed by the
owner thereof within the time specified by law upon payment of the costs
incurred by reason of seizure and detention. Rates for seizure and detention
and for other charges shall be those set forth in the Warwick Township Fee
Schedule.29 Any animal seized shall be disposed of pursuant to § 63-5 if the
owner of the animal is unknown.
§ 63-5. Disposition of seized animals.
Any Township police officer or any person duly appointed as the
enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter is hereby authorized to dispose
of any animal which has not been claimed by its owner by delivery of
the animal to a recognized humane society. In the event that it becomes
necessary to destroy any animal, the procedure must be carried out in
a humane manner. No animal may be sold for use in research such as
vivisection.
(13)Venomous invertevrates.
29.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices. See also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 63-1 WARWICK CODE § 63-6
60:156
§ 63-6. Records to be kept.
A record of any animal seized shall be kept which shall show the breed,
date seized, where and by whom seized, date of disposition and nature of
disposition.
§ 63-7. Disposal and removal of animal fecal matter.
§ 63-8. Wild or exotic animals restricted.
A. No owner of any animal or any person having the care, custody and
control of any animal shall permit the same to discharge or deposit any
fecal matter upon the property of another without immediately
removing such matter and disposing of it in a sanitary manner. The term
"property of another" shall include the property of the Township or of
any other political subdivision.
B. No owner or possessor of real property shall permit animal fecal matter
to accumulate on such property for more than 24 hours, and it shall be
the owner's or possessor's responsibility to daily remove such matter to
prevent any such accumulation from becoming a danger to public
health.
A. Minimum standards shall be maintained by all owners and/or
possessors of animals in the Township, as follows:
(1) Feeding. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient wholesome
food and water, free from contamination, and which food and water
shall be of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the
normal daily requirements for the condition and size of each animal
and to assure the proper health of such animal.
(2) Health of animals.
(a) Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be
provided at all times to assure that no animal is overcrowded
or exposed to excessive heat or cold. Proper temperature for
the well-being of each animal shall be maintained at all times.
(b) Adequate exercise shall be provided to assure the good health
of each animal.
(c) No condition shall be maintained or permitted to exist that is
knowingly injurious to the health of any animal.
(3) Sanitation and safety.
(a) There shall be sufficient, clean, dry bedding to meet the needs
of each animal. All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition, and adequate ventilation shall
be maintained.
§ 63-6 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 63-8
60:157
§ 63-9. (Reserved)
§ 63-10. Violations and penalties.
Except as may be otherwise provided in 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., any person
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before a District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,000, plus the charges for the maintenance of said
animal and the costs of prosecution. In default of the payment of said fine,
charges or costs, said person shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment
in the Bucks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected
for the violation of this chapter shall be to and for the use of the Township.
If deemed appropriate by the enforcement official, a warning may be issued
prior to issuance of a summary citation.
§ 63-11. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit or restrict
the authority to destroy animals in accordance with any statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Chapter 69
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 69, Electrical Standards, adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-1 as Part 4:400 of the 1984 Warwick Township Code, as
amended, was superseded 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3. See now Ch.
62, Uniform Construction Codes.]
Chapter 73
(b) Animals shall be maintained in quarters so as to prevent their
escape.
(c) No condition(s) shall be maintained or permitted to exist that is
(are) injurious to the health of any person or in any way
create(s) a public health hazard nuisance.
B. Compliance with minimum standards.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal housing to fail to
comply with any of the minimum standards set forth in this chapter.
(2) The Board's designee shall have the authority to inspect the
premises of any animal housing at a reasonable time and in a
reasonable manner to assure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained,
inspections shall be conducted upon obtaining a lawfully
authorized search warrant.
§ 63-8 WARWICK CODE § 63-11
60:158
EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Agency — See Ch.
10.
§ 63-11 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 63-11
60:159

ARTICLE I
Emergency Management
[Adopted 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 90-2 (Part 8:100 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code).]
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any person or persons, corporations or partnerships or other
entity engaged in the buying, selling, storing, transferring, transporting
and/or manufacturing of properties, merchandise, chemicals, fuels, goods,
moneys, sources and/or other means of compensation for the purpose,
stated or otherwise, of realizing a profit and/or other gains.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION — The staff groups outlined
and comprised of, in the planning and operational flowchart, the Emergency
Management Coordinator or Coordinators, as contained in the Warwick
Township Emergency Operations Plan.
INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT — Any incident that occurs from the storage,
transportation, use and/or manufacturing of any substance potentially
dangerous to the public health and welfare at large that necessitates:
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — County bridges, state highways, Township
streets, any navigable waterway or any other roadway or watercourse
owned by a governmental unit.
§ 73-2. Costs of industrial accidents.
The intervention of the Warwick Township Police Department or any
of the emergency agencies' services which may service Warwick
Township, including but not limited to fire companies or rescue squads
operating in Warwick Township or the Warwick Township Emergency
Management Organization or emergency response agencies employed
by Warwick Township; or
A.
The need for cleanup and/or abatement measures to be performed
by Township employees or anything else resulting in expense to the
Township.
B.
A. The business on whose premises an industrial accident occurs shall
bear all costs that occur as a direct or consequential result of such
industrial accident. In the event that an industrial accident occurs
during transportation on a public thoroughfare or in delivery to an
entity other than a business as defined in § 73-1 hereinabove, the entity
of which or who owns or had custody and/or control of the vehicle and/
or substance involved in the industrial accident shall bear all costs that
occur as a direct or consequential result of such accident. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent such business or entity from recovering
§ 73-1 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 73-2
60:161
§ 73-3. Conflicts with other provisions; higher standards to prevail.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other
requirements of the Code of the Township of Warwick, the most restrictive
or those imposing the highest standards shall govern.
any incurred or subsequent costs from a third party whose negligence
may have caused such industrial accident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of the Warwick Township Emergency Management Organization
or other Township official, to clean up or abate the effect of an
industrial accident, the Warwick Township Emergency Management
Organization may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify
the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The business or entity
described in Subsection A hereinabove shall be liable to the Township
for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this section, costs of an industrial accident shall
include but are not limited to the following;
(1) Expenses incurred by police, fire and/or emergency medical
services.
(2) Actual labor costs of Warwick Township personnel, including
benefits and administrative overhead.
(3) Costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the
industrial accident.
(4) Costs of equipment operations.
(5) Costs of materials obtained directly by the Township.
(6) Costs of the Township solicitor.
(7) Costs of the Township Engineer connected with the industrial
accident.
D. The costs of such industrial accident as set forth in Subsection C
hereinabove shall be determined by the Township Manager or his/her
designee.
E. Such costs for all emergency services rendered shall be paid directly to
the Township within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues an invoice for such charges.
§ 73-2 WARWICK CODE § 73-3
60:162
ARTICLE II
Fees for Emergency Response Services
[Adopted 3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2]
§ 73-4. Purpose.
§ 73-5. Collection of fees.
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Warwick has determined
that the increase in costs to provide adequate fire prevention and
protection services, and to provide other public safety emergency
services, including catastrophes that result from extraordinary and
dangerous occurrences, both natural and man-made, including, but not
limited to, hazardous materials spills, explosions, landslides, acts of
God and fires have seriously impaired the Township of Warwick's ability
to provide all necessary municipal services.
B. The Township of Warwick contributes substantial funds to amortize
some of the cost of the emergency service providers, including, but not
limited to, special response teams and volunteer fire companies, and
the Township of Warwick owns and maintains various emergency
service, fire-fighting and rescue equipment and incurs the cost for
worker's compensation provided to volunteer fire and ambulance
members.
C. The volunteer fire companies and ambulance services serving the
Warwick Township and the Central Bucks Special Response Team
("CBSRT"), which provides special police response services in the
Township, incur significant costs to render those services.
D. In order to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to protect and
preserve public funds and tax dollars, the Township of Warwick hereby
adopts a policy of partial reimbursement of the expenses and costs
incurred in providing such service.
A. Either the Warwick Township Police Chief, on behalf of the CBSRT, the
Chief of the volunteer fire companies, or the administrative chief of any
other service provider authorized by the Township, may request and
collect all fees for fire prevention and safety protection services and for
other emergency services. Such fees may include and encompass all
costs for manpower, equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead
expenses.
B. Within 30 days of the date of providing fire prevention and protection
services or any other public safety and emergency services as
enumerated in this article, the Warwick Township Police Chief or the
chief of the appropriate volunteer fire company or other emergency
service provider shall prepare a claim for fees, which may include the
cost of reimbursing the emergency service provider for materials used
in providing the service. The claim shall be submitted to the Township
for review.
§ 73-4 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 73-6
60:163
§ 73-6. Claims to be approved by Township.
All claims shall be reviewed by the Township Board of Supervisors or
its designee ("Board"). The Board, in its sole discretion, shall determine
whether the claim is reasonable and appropriate for submission to the
person or entity to whom services were provided. In determining whether
the claim should be submitted, the Board shall consider the severity of the
event and the amount of resources expended in providing the service; and
the likelihood of collection of the funds by the Township. The Board may
adjust or reject the claim as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate. The
emergency service provider shall be advised of the disposition of the claim
within 30 days of submission thereof to the Township. Claims not approved
within 30 days of submission shall be deemed denied.
§ 73-7. Limitations of billing.
§ 73-8. Enforcement.
The Township of Warwick or the emergency service provider may enforce
the provisions of this article by civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder, plus attorneys'
fees, and may pay for any other relief that may be appropriate, including
equitable relief.
§ 73-9. Allocation of fees.
The fees set forth in this article shall be delivered to and for the use of
the emergency service provider which was primarily responsible for the
emergency service provided. The emergency service provider in whose
district the incident occurred is entitled to the fee even if said emergency
service provider was assisted by other emergency service providers. In the
event that the incident occurs on realty that is located in more than one
district, then the fee shall be split between the appropriate emergency
service providers. In all cases, the determination of the allocation of the fees
collected shall be determined solely by Warwick Township.
A. Upon approval of the claim by the Township, the emergency service
provider may submit the claim to the person or entity to whom the
service or services were provided. All such claims shall be paid within
60 days of the receipt thereof, and interest shall accumulate thereafter
on any unpaid balance at the rate of 10% per annum until paid.
B. In addition to any fees due, any fine and penalty that results from said
claim shall also be paid, and any fees or expenses that are imposed
upon the Township of Warwick, or emergency service provider by any
local, state or federal agency which related to the same incident or
occurrence for which the services were provided may be included in the
claim or may be billed separately within 30 days of receipt of such local,
state or federal cost or fee. The person or entity to whom services were
provided shall have 30 days from receipt to reimburse the service
provider for said cost or fee.
§ 73-6 WARWICK CODE § 73-10
60:164
§ 73-10. Nonexclusive remedy.
The fees heretofore set forth are not inclusive of all the remedies that
the Township of Warwick or its emergency service providers may pursue.
The Township of Warwick or its emergency service providers, their agents,
officials, employees or members have the right to pursue any other legal
remedy or to recover any other cost against any person regardless of
payment of the prescribed fees.
§ 73-10 CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO § 73-10
60:165
Chapter 77
EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 77-1. Applicability.
The requirements of all zoning districts shall be modified in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter on all land designated as having a slope
of 8% or more, as delineated by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, in the maps and data comprising the
most recent soil survey of Bucks County or that land indicated as having
a slope of 8% or more on a detailed topographical map taken from field
surveys and giving elevations at intervals of 10 feet or less and prepared by
a land surveyor or engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and bearing his seal.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context:
DISTURBANCE OF VEGETATIVE GROUND COVER — The removal,
destruction or damaging of plants, including trees, grasses, shrubs and
flowers, by methods including but not limited to cutting, bulldozing,
plowing, regrading, digging or widespread use of herbicides, unless such
vegetative ground cover is immediately replaced by like materials of a
domestic or cultivated nature, usually found in the vicinity of residential
dwellings.
§ 77-3. General regulations.
A. On all land having a slope of 8% or more but less than 15%, no person
shall disturb the vegetative ground cover or cause disturbance of
vegetative ground cover on more than 40% of said land.30
B. On all land having a slope of 15% or more but less than 25%, no person
shall disturb vegetative ground cover or cause disturbance of
vegetative ground cover on more than 30% of said land.31
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 73-10 WARWICK CODE § 77-3
77:166
§ 77-4. Special conditions.
§ 77-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-2-1988 by Ord. No.
88-6]
Any person, partnership, corporation or entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus the costs of
prosecution. In default of payment of said fine, said person, the partners of
said partnership or the officers and directors of said corporation shall be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period
not exceeding 30 days. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid
over to the Township. Each period of 30 days that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 81
FEES
C. On all land having a slope of 25% or more, no person shall disturb
vegetative ground cover or cause disturbance of vegetative ground
cover on more than 15% of said land.
D. The above regulations apply equally to the disturbance of soil for
agricultural or food production purposes, except that such existing use
prior to adoption of this chapter may be continued.
E. Whenever earth-moving activities or the removal or disturbance of
ground cover is proposed within the steep slope area, an erosion
control plan, meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, must be submitted to and reviewed by the
Municipal Engineer or the Bucks County Soil Conservation District for
compliance with the regulations, prior to the granting of any approval
or permit for the removal of vegetation or for construction of any kind.
A. Where there is land upon which, under the provisions of this chapter,
vegetative ground cover may not be disturbed and where such existing
vegetative ground cover represents an agricultural, food-producing use
which the owner of the land wishes to discontinue, the Board may
require replacement of said agricultural use with permanent, stable
vegetation. Such alterations of vegetative ground cover must be done in
a way that minimizes, as much as possible, soil erosion and stormwater
runoff and is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
B. Where special conditions exist or where enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter would be contrary to the interests of the Township, said
provisions may be moderated or waived by the Board, upon appeal by
the landowner.
§ 77-3 FEES § 81-1
81:167
§ 81-1. Fee schedule established.
The Board may, by resolution adopted at a regular meeting of the Board,
establish a schedule of reasonable and uniform fees to be charged for
applications, permits, licenses, inspections or other services as set forth in
the Warwick Township Code. Said schedule shall be known as the "Warwick
Township Fee Schedule."
§ 81-2. Revision of fee schedule.
The Warwick Township Fee Schedule may be revised or amended from time
to time, in whole or in part, by resolution of the Board adopted at a regular
meeting.
§ 81-3. Fee schedule to be kept on file.
The Warwick Township Fee Schedule shall be kept on file in the Township
office and shall be kept up-to-date by the Township Secretary.
Chapter 85
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 85, Firearms, adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as
Part 6:800 of the 1984 Warwick Township Code, as amended, was
repealed 1-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-1.]
Chapter 89
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 41. Building construction — See Ch. 53.
§ 81-1 WARWICK CODE § 81-3
81:168
ARTICLE I
Fire Detection and Suppression Systems
[Adopted 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 92-4]
§ 89-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows. All other words and phrases shall conform to the current BOCA
Code as adopted by the Township as the Official Building Code.32
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — An engineered system using
carbon dioxide (CO2), foam, wet or dry chemicals, automatic sprinkler
system or some other approved suppression system.
BOCA CODE — The Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., Code, as amended and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors as the Official Township Building Code.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
BUILDING AREA — For application of this article, determined to be the area
included within the surrounding exterior walls.
DEPUTY FIRE MARSHAL — Appointed by the Board of Supervisors to assist
the Fire Marshal in the performance of his/her duties or, in the absence of
the Fire Marshal, shall perform the duties of the Fire Marshal.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A functionally related group of devices that,
when either automatically or manually activated, will sound audio or visual
warning devices on or off the protected premises.
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM — A device or combination of devices which
automatically detects heat, smoke, fire or other products of combustion and
initiates action.
FIRE MARSHAL — The code official appointed by the Board of Supervisors,
known as the "Fire Marshal of Warwick Township."
FIRE ZONE and FIRE LANE — An area, at a minimum width of 15 feet,
immediately adjacent to a building for use by emergency vehicles.
§ 89-2. Requirements for installation.
A. Fire detection, early warning. Automatic smoke and fire detection
systems and alarm systems shall be installed in all buildings classified
in the following BOCA use group classifications (Article 3, Section
301.0). For Use Groups B, F, H, M and S buildings having more than one
tenant per entrance, an indicator panel system with a zone for each
tenant shall be mounted at the entrance. This requirement does not
negate the other requirements of this article. A blue-light alarm system
shall be mounted outside each entrance to indicate which tenant(s) has
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Building Construction.
§ 89-1 FEES § 89-2
81:169
an emergency. The blue-light alarm system and zone indicator system
panel shall be hard-wired into the automatic fire detection systems. Fire
detection systems and fire alarm systems can either be a multiple- or
a single-station indication system which shall be monitored 24 hours
a day by a private monitoring service or tied in via direct-dial phone
to the Bucks County Fire Control Center, Pennsylvania. This provision
shall apply to all new construction or an existing building in its entirety
if there is any increase of net square footage or remodeling to permit
the establishment or continuance of any of the following use groups,
except as provided in Subsection E. No exception will be granted.
(1) Use Group A: assembly. (See Section 302.0.)
(2) Use Group B: business. (See Section 303.0.)
(3) Use Group E: educational. (See Section 304.0.)
(4) Use Group F: factory and industrial. (See Section 305.0.)
(5) Use Group H: high-hazard. (See Section 306.0.)
(6) Use Group I: institutional. (See Section 307.0.)*
(7) Use Group M: mercantile. (See Section 308.0.)
(8) Use Group R: residential. (See Section 309.0.)*
(9) Use Group S: storage. (See Section 310.0.)
*NOTE: The following special requirements shall pertain to residential
uses (Sections 309.1 through 309.5) and institutional uses (Sections
307.1 through 307.4):
Special Conditions
1. Smoke detectors do not have to be interconnected on existing
residential buildings (R3 and R4).
2. Smoke detectors shall be required on every story of a dwelling unit,
including the basement.
3. A rate of rise (heat detector) shall be installed in each garage under
or attached to all new buildings. The heat detector shall be so wired
that if activated, all other detectors throughout the dwelling unit
will activate.
4. Rate of rise (heat detector) does not have to be interconnected to a
garage under or attached to an existing residential building (R3 and
R4). The heat detector shall be wired as a single-station alarm
system to an alarm that will automatically activate an audio sound
early fire-warning system.
B. Fire suppression. In addition to the requirements of fire detection,
automatic fire suppression systems shall be installed and equipped in
all buildings in the following BOCA use group classifications (Article 3,
Section 301.0) except as noted. All fire suppression systems shall have a
§ 89-2 WARWICK CODE § 89-2
81:170
low-level water electrical switch hard-wired into the automatic fire
detection systems. This provision shall apply to all new construction
or an existing building in its entirety if there is any increase of net
square footage to permit the establishment or continuance of any of the
following use groups except as provided in Subsection E:
(1) Use Group A: assembly. (See Section 302.0.)**
(2) Use Group B: business (over five-thousand-square-foot aggregate).
(See Section 303.0.)
(3) Use Group E: educational (over five-thousand-square-foot
aggregate). (See Section 304.0.)
(4) Use Group F: factory and industrial. (See Section 305.0.)**
(5) Use Group H: high-hazard. (See Section 306.0.)
(6) Use Group I: institutional. (See Section 307.0.)
(7) Use Group M: mercantile (over five-thousand-square-foot
aggregate). (See Section 308.0.)
(8) Use Group R: residential. (See Section 309.0.)**
(9) Use Group S: storage (over 5,000 square foot aggregate). (See
Section 310.0.)**
**NOTE: Exceptions to the above:
1. All detached buildings not exceeding a building area of 10,000
square feet and classified as low-hazard storage, Use Group S-2, as
defined in the BOCA Code Section 310 (Table 310.3).
2. Any factory and industrial Use Groups F-1 and F-2 (Section 305.0)
in a building area consisting of less than 5,000 square feet of gross
floor, unless it is rated as a high-hazard, as defined by BOCA.
3. All single-family detached dwelling units, Use Group R-4 (Section
309.0).
4. All single-family attached dwelling units separated by a vertical fire
wall or detached duplex with a minimum distance separation of 15
feet between units, classified as Use Groups R-2 (Section 309.3)
and R-3 (Section 309.4).
5. All churches and other places of religious worship classified as Use
Group A-4 (Section 302.5).
6. Outdoor open assembly areas Use Group A-5 (Section 302.6).
7. All day-care facilities and nurseries which provide care for five or
less persons of any age for less than 24 hours per day.
C. Fire zone or fire lane. The dimensions of a fire zone or fire lane shall be
determined at the discretion of the Fire Marshal. The applicant, subject
§ 89-2 FEES § 89-2
81:171
§ 89-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus the costs
of prosecution. In default of payment of said fine, said person shall be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation exists after written
notification by the Township shall constitute a separate violation of this
article.
to the approval of the Fire Marshal, shall mark fire zones or fire lanes
with signs and/or pavement paintings.
D. No such detection or suppression system shall be installed unless it
complies with the safe standards of the industry (and meets the
National Fire Protection Association standards for installation) and is
permitted by the Fire Marshal, after a permit application is made,
accompanied by plans and specifications showing the location and
elements of the system. Such plans and specifications shall be made
part of the application for a building permit.
E. The requirements of this article may be waived upon application to the
Building Code Board of Appeals showing that the new construction,
reconstruction or any increase of net square footage can be safely made
without installing fire detection or suppression equipment and that no
significant risk of injury or damage from fire is imposed on potential
occupants or users of the structure or on adjacent property or persons,
due to the absence of fire detection or suppression equipment.
F. Additional provisions of the Township ordinances regarding building
and fire codes remain in full effect, except that to the extent they may
be explicitly inconsistent herewith they are hereby repealed.
§ 89-2 WARWICK CODE § 89-3
81:172
ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-6]
§ 89-4. Adoption of standards.
The International Fire Code, 2012 edition (and all successor editions),
as published by the International Code Board is hereby adopted as the
Fire Prevention Code of Warwick Township, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, regulating and safeguarding life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. The
2012 International Fire Code is hereby incorporated into this article by
reference as if fully set forth herein, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 89-5 of this article.
§ 89-5. Additions, deletions and amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Title, amend to read: "These regulations shall be known
as the Fire Prevention Code of Warwick Township, hereinafter referred
to as 'this code.'"
B. In Section 105.6.16 Flammable and combustible liquids, insert the
following paragraph to read as follows:
12. To install, alter, permanently remove, abandon in place or
otherwise dispose of a flammable or combustible liquid tank.
C. In Section 106 Inspections, insert the following paragraph to read as
follows:
106.5 Periodic inspections.
The Fire Code Official shall be authorized to conduct periodic
inspections on properties other than those properties erected under
the provisions of the International Residential Code. Frequency of said
inspections shall be determined by the Fire Code Official based on his/
her determination of the fire risk regarding the use, occupancy and
level of maintenance of life safety systems in the structure.
D. Section 109.4 Violation penalties, amend to read as follows: "Persons
who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or
do work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used
under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a summary offense,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
§ 89-4 FEES § 89-5
81:173
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense."
E. Section 110.1 Unsafe buildings, general, amend to replace the words
"building department" with the words "Building Code Official."
F. Section 111.4 Failure to comply, amend to read as follows: "Any person
who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$250 or more than $1,000."
G. Section 202 General definitions, Fire Code Official, amend to read as
follows: "Wherever the term 'Fire Code Official' is used in the fire code,
it shall be held to mean the Fire Marshal of Warwick Township or his/
her duly authorized representative."
H. In Section 307 Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor
fireplaces, insert the following sections and paragraphs to read as
follows:
307.1.2 Prohibition of burning for disposal purposes.
In accordance with the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Act of July 28, 1988, (P.L. 528, No. 101)
("Pennsylvania Act 101") as amended by Act 140 of 2006 and Warwick
Township Ordinance No. 2010-2, amending Chapter 185 of the
Warwick Township Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to openly
burn any material, including the following, at any time within the
boundaries of the municipality: household trash, books, magazines,
newspapers, cardboard and/or any items that are required to be
recycled in the municipality under Pennsylvania Act 101, including
yard waste, leaves and scrap lumber or any vegetation, plywood,
drywall, plastic products, insulation materials, upholstered furniture,
solid waste and/or construction waste as defined by the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act and 25 PA Code 271.1, garbage, dead
animals, human and animal excrement, human and animal hair, rubber
products, including tires, hydrocarbon products or flammable liquids,
asphalt or tar shingles or roofing materials, bedding, foam rubber,
nylon, rayon, cotton, wool, polyester or other synthetic material,
insulation from copper or other wiring.
§ 89-5 WARWICK CODE § 89-5
81:174
307.1.3 Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor
patio stoves, chimeneas and factory-built metal novelty stoves.
1.
Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor patio stoves,
chimeneas and factory-built metal novelty stoves shall be permitted
upon private property within Warwick Township to be used solely
for their intended purpose and in accordance with the
manufacturers' instructions.
2.
No person shall use outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills,
outdoor patio stoves, chimneys and factory-built metal novelty
stoves for the burning of material as outlined in Section 307.1.2.
3. Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor cooking grills, outdoor patio stoves,
chimneys and factory-built metal novelty stoves shall not be used
indoors or in any enclosed areas that are not properly ventilated.
I. Section 311.2.2 (2) Vacant premises, fire protection, amend to replace
the words "fire chief" with the words "Fire Code Official."
J. Section 501.3 General, construction documents, amend to replace the
words "fire department" with the words "Fire Code Official."
K. In Section 507.5.3 Private fire service mains and water tanks, insert the
following paragraph to read as follows:
4. Private fire hydrants shall be painted all RED in a manner approved
by the fire code official.
L. Section 912.2 Fire Department connections, location, amend to replace
the words "fire chief" with the words "Fire Code Official."
M. Section 912.3.2 Fire Department connections, clear space around
connections, amend to replace the words "fire chief" with the words
"Fire Code Official."
§ 89-5 FEES § 89-5
81:175
Chapter 92
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 61.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 89-5 WARWICK CODE § 89-5
81:176
ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 92-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,33 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township does
hereby enact as follows.
33.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-1 FEES § 92-1
81:177

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 92-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 92-3. Applicability.
§ 92-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 92-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the Township.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the identified floodplain area of Warwick
Township unless a floodplain permit has been obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. A floodplain permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Warwick Township
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
§ 92-2 FEES § 92-5
81:179
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 92-5 WARWICK CODE § 92-5
81:180
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 92-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
§ 92-7. Permit required.
A floodplain permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any identified floodplain area of Warwick
Township.
§ 92-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a floodplain permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any floodplain permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to certify that all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have
been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended),34 the Pennsylvania Dam
Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended),35 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended),36 and the
U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No floodplain
permit shall be issued until this certification has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are deemed necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 92-6 FEES § 92-8
81:181
§ 92-9. Application procedures and requirements.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the floodplain permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the floodplain permit and report such fact to the Board of
Supervisors of Warwick Township for whatever action it considers
necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning Township participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the 2009
International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for a floodplain permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Warwick Township. Such
application shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which the
proposed construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for floodplain
§ 92-8 WARWICK CODE § 92-9
81:182
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed floodplain permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
§ 92-9 FEES § 92-9
81:183
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the 2009
International Residential Code.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood, and the floodway area (see § 92-18A), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 92-24F, Storage, and § 92-25, Development that may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 92-24F and 92-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 92-25
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
§ 92-9 WARWICK CODE § 92-9
81:184
§ 92-10. Review of application by other agencies and individuals.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or land
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., County Conservation District, Planning
Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 92-11. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a floodplain permit by the Floodplain Administrator,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 92-12. Placards.
In addition to the floodplain permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
floodplain permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-13. Start of construction; time limits.
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval. The "actual
start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
§ 92-9 FEES § 92-13
81:185
§ 92-14. Fees.
Applicants for a floodplain permit shall, at the time of making application,
pay to Warwick Township a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors upon enactment of this chapter or
as such schedule may be amended by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 92-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance, Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
Flood Insurance Study in effect at the time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this commonwealth;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Warwick Township of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
§ 92-13 WARWICK CODE § 92-15
81:186
§ 92-16. Appeals.
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. All
remedies shall be considered cumulative.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code37 and
any other applicable local ordinances.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks
County, Pennsylvania, as provided by the laws of this commonwealth,
including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.38
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-15 FEES § 92-16
81:187

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 92-17. Identification.
§ 92-18. Description.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) Any areas of Warwick Township, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March
16, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof, including all
digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
(2) For areas abutting streams and watercourses where the base flood
elevation has not been delineated by a Flood Insurance Study, the
applicant shall submit a floodplain identification study. The study
prepared by a registered professional engineer expert in the
preparation of hydrologic and hydraulic studies shall be used to
delineate the base flood elevations. The floodplain study shall be
subject to the review and approval of Warwick Township. All areas
inundated by the base flood shall be included in the identified
floodplain area.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Warwick Township and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway District identified as floodway in the FIS and the FIRM
which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without any increase in the water surface elevation at any point. This
term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and
FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the Township
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 92-17 FEES § 92-18
81:189
§ 92-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change within the A District or AE District, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, the Township
shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
See § 92-22B for situations where FEMA notification is required.
§ 92-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator, and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE District shall be those areas adjacent to the floodway and
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by
FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
C. The A District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM
included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood
elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from other federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall
be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not
available, the elevation shall be determined by hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a thorough technical review by Warwick Township.
D. For areas adjoining streams, ponds, and lakes not included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA, the applicant shall be required to determine the
elevation and area of the floodplain with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by registered professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality. All areas
inundated by the base flood shall be included in the identified floodplain
area.
§ 92-18 WARWICK CODE § 92-21
81:190
§ 92-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the Township
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The Township shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 92-21 FEES § 92-21
81:191

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 92-22. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When the Township proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway, or alteration or relocation of a stream, including but not
limited to installing culverts and bridges, within identified floodplain A
or AE District (refer to § 92-18B and C), the applicant shall (as per 44
CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, the
Township shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the Township
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (refer to § 92-18), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
§ 92-22 FEES § 92-22
81:193
§ 92-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new residential and
nonresidential structures or substantial improvements to such residential
and nonresidential structures shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
for new construction or substantial improvements to residential and
nonresidential structures in the identified floodplain area in accordance
with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, except for
roads, driveways, trails, and utility crossings where the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
A. Residential structures when permitted pursuant to a variance granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) In the AE District, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In the A District, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or
above the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 92-18 of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures, including nonresidential accessory
structures, when permitted pursuant to a variance granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) In the AE District, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure, including a
nonresidential accessory structure, shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
and
§ 92-22 WARWICK CODE § 92-23
81:194
(c) Is certified by a registered professional/architect that the
design and methods of construction meet requirements of Title
44, Section 603, Subpart A, Requirements for Floodplain
Management Regulations.
(2) In the A District, where no base flood elevations are specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation determined
in accordance with § 92-18 of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, including any nonresidential
accessory structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the
publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992)
or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications
for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which
states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces but does not include basements.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 92-23 FEES § 92-23
81:195
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements shall be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the criteria set forth in Article VII and will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Residential accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal
residential building need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry
but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity;
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet;
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential;
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters;
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation;
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited;
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited; and
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
§ 92-23 WARWICK CODE § 92-23
81:196
§ 92-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be prohibited.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no less than
one foot above the base flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 92-25, Development that may endanger human life, shall
be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
§ 92-23 FEES § 92-24
81:197
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
§ 92-24 WARWICK CODE § 92-24
81:198
§ 92-25. Development that may endanger human life.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R322, Appendix E,
and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances listed below on
the premises; or will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance
of a supply of more than 300 gallons, or other comparable volume, of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances listed below on
the premises; or will involve the production, storage, or use of any
amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions, including
provisions regarding the anchoring of freestanding structures as set
forth in the applicable building codes. The following is a list of materials
and substances that are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
§ 92-24 FEES § 92-25
81:199
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 92-22, 92-23 and 92-24.
D. New or substantially improved structure within any identified
floodplain area.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure, including a
nonresidential accessory structure, of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 92-22,
92-23 and 92-24, including:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992) or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 92-25 WARWICK CODE § 92-26
81:200
§ 92-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals in the A District and
Township-identified flood hazard areas (refer to § 92-18C and D) where
base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations
and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter
of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 92-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 92-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
The storage of recreational vehicles shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited unless permitted pursuant to a variance granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the criteria set forth in
Article VIII of this chapter.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area pursuant to a
variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for installation of the proposed unit(s).
§ 92-26 FEES § 92-28
81:201

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Uses/Activities
§ 92-29. General requirements.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the commencement of the
following activities, or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any
structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities,
shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. Hospitals.
B. Nursing homes.
C. Jails or prisons.
D. Construction of a new manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision.
§ 92-29 FEES § 92-29
81:203

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 92-30. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 92-31 of this chapter
shall apply.
§ 92-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway District that would cause any increase in the base
flood elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 25% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 International Building Code and the
2009 International Residential Code.
D. Within any Floodway District (see § 92-18A), no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 25% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible:
§ 92-30 FEES § 92-31
81:205

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 92-32. Grant authorized.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance from the
provisions of this chapter, provided that all of the findings set forth in
§ 92-33E are made where relevant in a given case.
§ 92-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider requests for variances from
the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the requirements
contained in the National Flood Insurance Program Requirements for
Flood Plain Management Regulations, 44 CFR 60.6, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10910.2, and the express
requirements set forth below:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the base flood elevations.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any of the requirements pertaining
specifically to prohibited uses/activities (Article VI) or to
development that may endanger human life (§ 92-25).
(3) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, Warwick Township shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance from the
provisions of this chapter upon a showing of unnecessary hardship
by the applicant and provided that all of the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
§ 92-32 FEES § 92-33
81:207
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located;
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially and permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare;
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification of the regulation in issue;
(f) That the variance, if authorized, will not result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense; and
(g) That the variance, if authorized, will not create nuisances,
cause fraud on, or victimize the public or conflict with any
other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
B. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by Warwick Township. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 92-33 WARWICK CODE § 92-33
81:208
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 92-34. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 92-35. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
CONSTRUCTION (NEW) — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 16, 2015, the effective date of the floodplain
regulation adopted by Warwick Township, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September
29, 1978, and before March 16, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided that start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
§ 92-34 FEES § 92-35
81:209
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Township.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
Township.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of Warwick Township to administer and enforce this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN AREA (FLOODPLAIN) — A relatively flat or low land area
which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or
nearby stream, river or watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual
and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the Township's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
§ 92-35 WARWICK CODE § 92-35
81:210
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the Township has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the Township. See §§ 92-17
and 92-18 for the specifics on what areas the Township has included in the
identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (EXISTING)
— A manufactured (mobile) home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
(mobile) homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 92-35 FEES § 92-35
81:211
pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by Warwick Township.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (NEW) — A
manufactured (mobile) home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured (mobile) homes
are to be affixed (including, at minimum, the installation of the utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Township.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
29, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 29,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck.
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 92-35 WARWICK CODE § 92-35
81:212
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure of which the cost equals
or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
§ 92-35 FEES § 92-35
81:213
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the Zoning Hearing Board from the terms
of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Township's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Warwick
Township.
§ 92-35 WARWICK CODE § 92-35
81:214
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 92-36. Effective Date.
This chapter shall become effective on March 16, 2015, and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Warwick Township, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 92-36 FEES § 92-36
81:215
Chapter 95
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 103.
Littering — See Ch. 111.
Noise — See Ch. 123.
Nuisances — See Ch. 127.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Recycling — See Ch. 149.
§ 92-36 WARWICK CODE § 92-36
95:216
ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal of Refuse
§ 95-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this
article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
APPROVED DISPOSAL SITE — Waste disposal facilities such as landfills or
trash-to-steam facilities which are licensed by and operated in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
laws and regulations of the state in which the disposal site is located.
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible material.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable
materials.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid
waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted
into the air or is discharged to the waters of this Commonwealth. Disposal
facilities include, but are not limited to, municipal waste landfills and
construction/demolition waste landfills as defined by Act 101,39 Act 97,40
and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
rules and regulations (25 Pa. Code Chapters 7541 and 271).
FARM PROPERTY — A tract of land of at least 10 acres devoted to
agriculture: either to raising crops, livestock, poultry or pasture.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery, tree trimmings,
Christmas trees, and similar vegetative materials, but not including grass
clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — A person who
has written authorization from the PADEP under Act 9042 to collect, haul,
transport and dispose of municipal waste.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: See Pa. Code § 272.201 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa. C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 95-1 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-1
95:217
under Act 9743 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility.
The term does not include any source-separated recyclable materials.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — All properties used for industrial or
commercial purposes in which no persons reside, provided that multipledwelling
residential buildings or projects containing more than four
dwelling units, for the purposes of this article, shall be treated as
nonresidential properties.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste, or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other
than a fuel for the generation of energy.
REFUSE — All solid waste, except body waste, and shall include but not be
limited to garbage, ashes and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Properties used as dwellings, including
buildings having up to four dwelling units in one building, provided that
in the event of multiple-family dwellings, each of said units will be treated
as a separate residential property as it relates to the collection of refuse
therefrom.
RUBBISH — Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or
nonputrescible solid wastes.
§ 95-2. Duties of owners and occupants of property.
A. No person shall permit any refuse to accumulate for a period of longer
than seven days upon property in the Township owned or occupied by
said person.
B. All refuse or recyclables accumulated upon any property in the
Township shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by licensed
collectors, licensed waste haulers, or collectors and haulers of sourceseparated
recyclable materials in accordance with the provisions of this
article, except that such refuse or recyclables may be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by property owners from their own property,
provided that they comply with the provisions of this article pertaining
to refuse containers and vehicles, and provided that they remove their
refuse to a state- or county-approved site.
C. The provisions of § 95-2A and B shall not apply to owners of farm
property or tracts of land containing five acres or more, located in
Zoning District RA as defined by the Township Zoning Ordinance.44
43.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 95-1 WARWICK CODE § 95-2
95:218
§ 95-3. Disposal of refuse.
§ 95-4. Preparation of refuse for disposal.
D. Refuse collected from any residential dwelling in the Township shall be
collected only by a licensed collector or licensed waste hauler. The
owner and/or occupier of said residential dwelling shall be responsible
for the payment of the fee, and payment thereof shall be a matter of
private agreement between the owners or occupiers and the collector
thereof, unless such residential collector service is regulated
administratively by the Township.
E. All trade waste and other refuse accumulated on nonresidential
properties shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by a licensed
collector or licensed waste hauler upon the direction of the owner or
occupier thereof. The fee or payment for said collection, conveyance
and disposal shall be a matter of private agreement between the owners
or occupiers and the collector thereof. However, owners of
nonresidential properties may collect, convey and dispose of privately
generated refuse by their own containers and/or trucks, provided that
they comply with the applicable provisions of this article.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or dispose of any
refuse within the Township, except as provided in this article.
A. It shall be unlawful to dump, destroy, burn or otherwise dispose of
refuse within the Township, except at an approved disposal site. This
prohibition shall not extend to the composting of leaf waste.
B. All refuse shall be deposited and disposed of at an approved disposal
site.
C. All disposal regulations of the approved disposal site shall be adhered
to.
D. All vehicles used for collection shall use, insofar as practical, only state
highways when proceeding to and from the approved disposal sites,
except when using roads or streets in the Township where contracted to
collect.
E. It shall be unlawful to dispose of live ashes, flammable liquids, explosive
substances, toxic chemicals or any other similar hazardous substances
in the Township.
A. Refuse and recyclables shall be prepared as follows:
(1) Garbage shall be placed in suitable bags prior to depositing in
containers.
(2) All refuse shall be containerized or properly bundled so that it may
be handled by one man or woman.
§ 95-2 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-4
95:219
§ 95-5. Collection practices and dropoff locations.
(3) Recyclables other than leaf waste shall be separated and
containerized as required by the collector.
(4) Leaf waste, including leaves, shrubbery, Christmas trees, tree
trimmings and similar vegetative materials shall be separated,
prepared and bundled as directed by the collector.
B. Refuse containers shall be as follows:
(1) Refuse containers shall be made of durable, watertight, rustresistant
material, having close-fitting lids and handles to facilitate
collections.
(2) Refuse containers for residences shall be of not more than 32
gallons in capacity.
(3) Refuse containers for commercial establishments, except
dumpsters, shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity.
C. It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation or residue of liquids,
solids or a combination of such materials on the bottoms or sides of
refuse containers; the interiors of refuse containers shall be kept clean
by thorough rinsing and draining as often as necessary.
A. Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be placed at
ground level and be made readily accessible to the collector.
B. Notwithstanding § 95-5A, householders, commercial establishments or
other persons may, by contract with collectors, be permitted to place
containers at agreed places upon their premises.
C. Collections shall be made from all properties throughout the Township,
including all streets, accepted or otherwise, and including those streets
that are temporarily closed for repairs or construction. In the latter
case, special collection points shall be designated by the Board or its
designee if the condition of the street would prevent access thereto by
the collector's truck.
D. Each licensed collector, waste hauler and collectors and haulers of
source-separated recyclable materials operating in the Township shall
provide for at least one collection of leaves, garden residue, and similar
vegetative materials between March 1 and October 1 of each year.
E. Each licensed collector, waste hauler, or collectors and haulers of
source-separated recyclable materials operating in the Township shall
provide for at least one collection of shrubbery, tree trimmings and
similar vegetative materials between March 1 and October 1 of each
year. This collection is not to be combined with the collections of leaf
waste required by Subsection D, above, but shall be a separate
collection.
§ 95-4 WARWICK CODE § 95-5
95:220
§ 95-6. DEP license required.
F. Each licensed collector, waste hauler, or collectors and haulers of
source-separated recyclable materials operating in the Township shall
provide for at least one collection of Christmas trees between January 7
and January 31 of each year.
G. The licensed collector, licensed waste hauler, or collectors and haulers
of source-separated recyclable materials shall collect garbage, paper,
ashes, trash, rubbish, recyclables, leaf waste, shrubbery, Christmas
trees, tree trimmings and similar vegetative materials throughout the
Township on routes and according to schedules approved by the Board
or its designee.
H. Collections shall not be made on the following holidays: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day.
I. Collections shall be made at those hours mutually agreed upon between
the authorized collector and the Board or its designee. Hours agreed
upon shall be so indicated within the collection contracts.
J. All routes, schedules and traffic of collection trucks upon streets and
highways shall be subject to the approval of the Board or its designee.
No change in the service area or schedules shall be made unless the
Board or its designee and all affected customers receive at least two
weeks' written notice.
K. The licensed collector or waste hauler shall, on scheduled routes,
cooperate with special cleanup drives or weeks as may be promulgated
by the Township, which shall not exceed two in number in any one year.
In addition thereto, upon request, the authorized collector shall provide
a separate and special collection on a day or days as may be required in
order to collect abandoned Christmas trees.
L. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any refuse or other waste
material at the roadside for collection more than 24 hours prior to the
time prescribed by collectors or to leave any refuse containers at the
roadside for more than 24 hours after collection of such refuse or other
waste material.
M. Notwithstanding the collection requirements for vegetative materials
set forth in § 95-5D through F, the Township shall maintain a dropoff
location in or near the municipality where residents and commercial,
industrial, and municipal establishments are provided the opportunity,
at least weekly, to drop off leaf waste. Currently, the dropoff location for
leaf waste is located on Rushland Road. Dropoff times and
requirements, as well as any amendments to the dropoff location, are
available at the Township administrative offices and on the Township
website.
§ 95-5 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-6
95:221
A. No person shall collect or remove any municipal waste from within
Warwick Township without first obtaining written authorization from
PADEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 9045 and providing a
copy of such written authorization to Warwick Township. This section
shall not apply to private individuals (e.g., homeowners) who wish to
transport their own household waste to PADEP-approved facilities or
recyclables to appropriate recycling centers, nor to farmers,
landscapers or nurserymen who collect, remove, haul or otherwise
transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with their
respective business activities.
B. For a collector or waste hauler to collect and transport municipal waste
within Warwick Township, a collector or waste hauler shall submit a
registration form to Warwick Township which shall include a copy of his
or her state-issued written authorization, and a copy of his or her
municipal and residual waste transporter authorization application
(DEP Form 2500-PM-BWM0015) along with any of the following
information that may be deemed appropriate by the municipality:
(1) A list of collection vehicles covered under the written
authorization, including, as a minimum, the following information
for each vehicle:
(a) Identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle
license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number);
(b) Date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and
(c) Hauling capacity of the vehicle.
(2) The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.
(3) Certificate(s) of insurance evidencing that the waste hauler or
collector has valid liability, automobile and workmen's
compensation insurance in the minimum amounts established and
required by separate resolution of Warwick Township.
(4) If hauling or collecting source-separated recyclable materials in
the municipality, identify the materials being hauled or collected
and provide the following information for each vehicle:
(a) Identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle
license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number);
(b) Date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and
(c) Hauling capacity of the vehicle.
45.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa. C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 95-6 WARWICK CODE § 95-6
95:222
§ 95-7. Collection vehicles, equipment and personnel.
C. Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and
requirements of this article or is in violation of the provisions of this
article may not lawfully collect municipal waste or source-separated
material in Warwick Township.
D. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall meet the
requirements of Act 90, Act 97,46 Act 101,47 the Bucks County Municipal
Waste Management Plan, and all PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa.
Code Chapter 285).
A. Licensed collectors and licensed haulers shall meet the requirements of
25 Pa. Code § 285.201.
B. It shall be unlawful to collect, haul, transport or convey refuse in open,
unenclosed vehicles, and all vehicles used for collection of refuse shall
be equipped with compacting devices, unless such refuse is hauled from
private property by the owner, at which time such refuse shall be placed
in suitable containers and all other provisions of this article pertaining
to the collection and conveying of refuse shall be adhered to.
C. Collection trucks at all times shall be in good and proper mechanical
condition and in compliance with the minimum safety and sanitary
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Bucks and
the Township; provided, however, that open-type vehicles may be used
only for the collection of large items of debris which cannot be collected
by ordinary means because of size or weight. "Debris," as used in this
subsection, means broken furniture, appliances, chunks of concrete,
bricks, stones and similar material.
D. The licensed collector or waste hauler shall furnish proof that he is the
owner of the vehicle or vehicles to be used, or he must produce a
written lease or rental agreement between the titled owner of the
vehicle or vehicles and the collector.
E. Vehicles and equipment shall not be loaded so that garbage, trash or
debris, as defined in § 95-7C may spill or drop onto the highways or
streets, nor shall the equipment be so designed or maintained so as to
permit the leakage of fluids. All trucks shall be regularly cleaned and
kept in proper condition and shall bear the name and address of the
collector plainly visible on both cab doors.
F. The Board or its designee may inspect all vehicles for compliance with
the provisions of this article.
G. Each truck shall be manned by at least one driver and one helper.
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 95-6 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-7
95:223
§ 95-8. Failure to comply.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to deposit any garbage, rubbish, leaf waste
or debris, as defined in § 95-7C, or other waste material on public or private
property except in compliance with this article.
§ 95-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, occupier or person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article or who shall fail to comply with any of the conditions or requirements
of this article shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of the payment of said fine, said person
shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for
a period of up to 30 days. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of
this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
H. Each truck shall have at least one broom and one shovel to clean up
refuse that may be spilled or otherwise scattered during the process of
collection and transportation.
I. The collector shall file with the Township a list of all vehicles and
equipment with identification information thereon. Any change in
equipment shall be promptly reported to the Board or its designee so
that at all times the records will be correct and accurate.
J. The collector, at his expense, shall store and park the equipment at a
convenient and lawful place. No trucks or equipment may be parked or
stored on Township streets or roadways, except during actual collection
periods.
K. All vehicles shall be operated in full compliance with Chapter 123,
Noise, of this Code.
§ 95-7 WARWICK CODE § 95-9
95:224
ARTICLE II
Waste, Recyclables and Leaf Waste
§ 95-10. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Waste, Recyclables and
Leaf Waste Ordinance of Warwick Township."
§ 95-11. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
ACT 90 — The Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of 2002
(P.L. 596, No. 90, June 29, 2002).48
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).49
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).50
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable
materials.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
COUNTY — The County of Bucks, Pennsylvania.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the
solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of this
commonwealth. Disposal facilities include but are not limited to
municipal waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as
defined by Act 101, Act 97 and/or DEP rules and regulations (e.g., 25
Pa. Code Chapters 7551 and 271).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or production activities, including but not limited to
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
48.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa. C.S.A. § 6801 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code § 272.201 et seq.
§ 95-10 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-11
95:225
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing
homes, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tee trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any
collector or hauler of vegetative waste, municipal waste and/or sourceseparated
recyclables possessing a current license issued by the DEP.
MUNICIPALITY — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include any
source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency or any other
legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or
any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used
to convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include but are not limited to transfer facilities, recycling
facilities, composting facilities and resource-recovery facilities.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Residential dwelling units shall recycle
aluminum cans, glass containers, leaf waste, bimetal containers, No.
1 and No. 2 plastic containers, corrugated paper and newspaper.
Nonresidential recyclable materials shall include aluminum cans,
bimetal cans, high-grade office paper, glass containers, leaf waste, No.
1 and No. 2 plastic containers, newsprint, and corrugated paper.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which
would otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste, or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable material
other than a fuel for the generation of energy.
§ 95-11 WARWICK CODE § 95-11
95:226
§ 95-12. Prohibited activities.
§ 95-13. Standards for collection and transportation.
All collectors or waste haulers operating within Warwick Township must
comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a
processing or disposal facility.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials,
including leaf wastes, that are separated from municipal waste at the
point of origin or generation for the purpose of recycling.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at
any time after generation.
B. For the purposes of this article, the singular shall include the plural and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect leaf waste or municipal
waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any residential,
public, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment within
Warwick Township without first securing the necessary approvals from
DEP.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport leaf waste
or municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any
sources within Warwick Township in a manner not in accordance with
the provisions of this article, any applicable municipal ordinance, the
Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, Act 101, the
minimum standards and requirements established in Chapter 285 of
the DEP's Municipal Waste Management Regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 285) and/or any federal, state or local regulations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are
stored or placed for subsequent collection within Warwick Township
without prior approval from the municipality.
A. All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of
municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials must
comply with the requirements of Act 97 and Act 101 and Department
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, including the 25
Pa. Code Chapter 285, Subchapter B, regulations for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste.
B. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste, leaf waste, and/or
source-separated recyclable materials shall be operated and
maintained in a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a
hazard to public health, safety and welfare.
§ 95-11 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-13
95:227
§ 95-14. Mandatory residential recycling.
C. All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall be
watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering,
attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other nuisances.
D. All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste, leaf
waste, and/or source-separated recyclable materials shall be capable of
being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
E. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste, leaf waste, and/or
source-separated recyclable materials shall bear signs identifying the
name and business address of the person or municipality which owns
the vehicle and the specific type of material transported by the vehicle.
All such signs shall have lettering which is at least six inches in height
as required by Act 101.
F. All collection vehicles and equipment used by licensed collectors,
licensed waste haulers, and collectors and haulers of source-separated
recyclable materials shall be subject to inspection by the Warwick
Township or its authorized agents at any reasonable hour without prior
notification.
A. Separation.
(1) Recyclable materials. All residents within the municipality shall
source separate recyclable materials (as defined above) generated
by such person or generated within a residential unit, multifamily
unit or nonresidential unit occupied by such person. When placed
at the curbside of the resident for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this article, recyclable materials shall be placed in
separate, reusable metal or plastic containers which clearly
identify the contents as recyclables. Such containers shall initially
be provided by the Township.
(2) Leaf waste. All residents of Warwick Township shall separate leaf
waste from other municipal waste generated at their property and
shall prepare leaf waste for collection in accordance with
regulations adopted hereunder. Any resident who delivers his or
her leaf waste to a recycling or composting facility or composts his
or her own yard waste shall not be required to comply with the
provisions of this section.
B. Collection. Collection of recyclable materials shall be made only by a
municipal waste collector at a minimum of one time per week.
Collection of leaf waste shall be as set forth in § 95-5D through F of this
chapter. Christmas trees shall be collected at least once between
January 7 and January 31 by the Township or any collector contracted to
pick up trash in the Township.
C. Prohibition. No person shall place municipal waste in containers used
for the separation, collection and transportation of recyclables; no
§ 95-13 WARWICK CODE § 95-14
95:228
§ 95-15. Recycling for commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments, multifamily housing and sponsors or organizers of
community activities.
The following provisions apply to the separation and collection of materials
from commercial, institutional and municipal establishments, multifamily
housing and sponsors or organizers of community activities throughout the
Township:
person shall place recyclable materials or leaf waste in containers used
for the separation, collection and transportation of municipal waste.
D. Notice of violation. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall receive an official written notice of noncompliance from
the Township for the first and second offenses. Thereafter, all such
violations shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
A. Separation of recyclable materials.
(1) All owners and occupants of commercial, institutional or municipal
establishments shall separate the following recycling materials:
aluminum cans, bimetal cans, high-grade office paper, glass
containers, leaf waste, number one and two plastic containers,
newsprint, and corrugated paper.
(2) Persons in multifamily housing (which includes independent and
assisted living facilities) and sponsors or organizers of community
activities in Warwick Township shall separate the following
recycling materials: plastic, colored glass, clear glass, bimetal and
steel, corrugated paper, office papers, newsprint, aluminum and
leaf waste.
(3) Persons owning and/or operating commercial, institutional,
municipal establishments, multifamily housing and sponsors or
organizers of community activities shall be responsible for
providing a system to source separate recyclable materials from
the municipal waste generated at their property. This system
should be developed with the assistance of the municipal waste
collector.
B. Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit shall:
(1) Provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source separation of designated recyclable materials;
(2) Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each
multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to ensure that all
designated recyclable materials are source separated; and
(3) Provide collection and delivery to a facility of source-separated
designated recyclable materials at a frequency of not less than
once per month.
§ 95-14 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-16
95:229
§ 95-16. Licensing requirements.
A. No person shall collect or remove and then subsequently haul or
transport any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable material
through or upon the streets of Warwick Township without first
obtaining written authorization from DEP in accordance with the
provisions of Act 90. This section shall not apply to private individuals
(e.g., homeowners) who wish to transport their own household waste or
recyclables to approved facilities or recyclables to recycling centers,
nor to farmers, landscapers or nurserymen who collect, remove, haul or
otherwise transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with
their respective- business activities.
B. Each licensed waste hauler or collector shall dispose of all municipal
waste at a facility or facilities approved by DEP or facility approved by a
state other than Pennsylvania.
C. For a collector or waste hauler to collect and transport municipal waste
within Warwick Township, a collector or waste hauler shall submit a
registration form to Warwick Township which shall include a copy of his
or her state-issued written authorization, and a copy of his or her
municipal and residual waste transporter authorization application
(DEP Form 2500-PM-BWM0015) along with any of the following
information that may be deemed appropriate by Warwick Township:
(1) A list of collection vehicles covered under the written
authorization, including, as a minimum, the following information
for each vehicle:
(a) Identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle
license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number);
(b) Date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and
(c) Hauling capacity of the vehicle.
(2) The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.
(3) If hauling or collecting source-separated recyclable materials in
the municipality, identify the materials being hauled or collected
and provide the following information for each vehicle:
(a) Identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle
license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number);
(b) Date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and
(c) Hauling capacity of the vehicle.
D. Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and
requirements of this article or is in violation of the provisions of this
§ 95-16 WARWICK CODE § 95-16
95:230
§ 95-17. Reporting requirements.
article may not lawfully collect municipal waste or source-separated
material in Warwick Township.
E. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall meet the
requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal
Waste Management Plan, and all PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa.
Code Chapter 285).
A. All licensed collectors, licensed waste haulers, and collectors and
haulers of source-separated recyclable materials shall promptly report
any significant changes in the collection vehicles or equipment covered
under the license and any changes in insurance coverage to the
municipality.
B. All licensed collectors, licensed waste haulers, and collectors and
haulers of source-separated recyclable materials shall maintain
current, up-to-date records of the collected municipal waste and/or
source-separated recyclable material within Warwick Township. Such
records and collected volume reports shall be subject to review by and
made available to the municipality or its authorized agents upon written
request.
C. All licensed collectors, licensed waste haulers, and collectors and
haulers of source-separated recyclable materials operating within
Warwick Township shall document the origin of leaf waste and
municipal waste and source-separated recyclable material and the
ultimate disposal point of said waste and recyclables. As part of the
program, each licensed collector, licensed waste hauler, and collectors
and haulers of source-separated recyclable materials shall prepare and
submit a semiannual report to Warwick Township. The report for the
first half of the year (July through June) shall be submitted on or before
July 31, and the report for the second half of the year (January through
December) shall be submitted by January 31 of the following year. At a
minimum, the following information shall be included in each report:
(1) The total weight of municipal waste, leaf waste and sourceseparated
recyclable materials collected from all sources within
the municipality during each month of reporting period.
(2) The name of each processing and/or disposal facility used during
the reporting period and total weight of municipal waste, leaf waste
and/or source-separated recyclable materials delivered to each
facility during each month of the reporting period.
(3) Any other information determined to be necessary to demonstrate
municipal compliance with DEP regulations.
D. All semiannual reports submitted to the municipality from licensed
collectors, licensed waste haulers, and collectors and haulers of sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall be submitted by the municipality to
§ 95-16 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-17
95:231
§ 95-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
at a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine to the use of Warwick
Township of up to but not more than $1,000, together with costs of
prosecution, or be imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both. Each day of violation shall be considered as a separate offense.
§ 95-19. Injunctive powers.
Warwick Township may petition the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas
for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any of
the provisions of this article.
the county by August 31 (covering January through June) and by
February 28 of the following year (covering July through December).
§ 95-17 WARWICK CODE § 95-19
95:232
Chapter 98
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 111. Nuisances — See Ch. 127.
§ 98-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATE — To remove the graffiti by such means, in such a manner and to
such extent as the Board of Supervisors or other agent appointed by the
Board reasonably determines is necessary to remove the graffiti from public
view.
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti
was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property,
or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by
the Board.
§ 98-3. Prohibited acts.
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to help provide a procedure for
the prevention, prohibition and removal of graffiti from public and
private property. This order is to protect against vandalism and
deterioration and promote the health and safety of the Township. The
Township Board of Supervisors is authorized to enact this chapter
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 66506.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors finds that graffiti is a public
nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners, as
well as the entire community. Graffiti is obnoxious, contributes to
neighborhood deterioration and tends to remain on private and public
property, unless it is immediately abated. The Township must act to
prevent against the spread of graffiti and to avoid the detrimental
impact on the neighborhoods and residents.
C. The Township Board of Supervisors intends, through the adoption of
this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public
and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. The Board
does not intend for this chapter to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti
state laws.
§ 95-19 GRAFFITI § 98-3
98:233
§ 98-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 98-5. Graffiti as nuisance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti or deface any natural
or man-made surface on any Township owned property, or without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any private property.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone to possess any graffiti implement while
in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool,
recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or
operated by the Township or while within 50 feet of an underpass,
bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless
otherwise authorized by the Township.
C. All sidewalks, walls, buildings, fences, signs and other structures or
surfaces shall be kept free from graffiti that is visible from the street or
other public or private property.
A. Fines and imprisonment. Any person violating this chapter shall be
punished by a minimum fine of $200 to a maximum of $600, or by
imprisonment in the local jail for a term not to exceed 60 days, or by
both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
(1) Minors. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall
be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of all
fines.
(2) Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payments will
result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's
property that includes the fine and administrative costs.
(3) Upon an application and finding of indigence, the court may decline
to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian.
B. Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the
court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for
damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in
the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor,
the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severally
liable with the minor to make the restitution.
A. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is
subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this
chapter.
B. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has
been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the
right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of
graffiti.
§ 98-3 WARWICK CODE § 98-6
98:234
§ 98-6. Removal.
Chapter 101
IMPACT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
A. Removal by the perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or
private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24
hours after notice by the Township or private owner of the property
involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the
Chief of Police, the Board of Supervisors or an authorized agent of the
Board. Any person applying the graffiti shall be responsible for the
removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure to remove the
graffiti or pay for the removal by the responsible party shall constitute
an additional violation under this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by a
minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be responsible for such
removal or for the payment for the removal.
B. Property owner responsibility. If graffiti is not removed by the
perpetrator according to Subsection A above, graffiti shall be removed
by the owner or occupier of the property. It is unlawful for any person
who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of
property or for repair or maintenance of property in the Township to
permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a
period of 10 days after service of notice of violation. The notice shall
contain the following provisions:
(1) The street address and legal description of the property sufficient
for identification of the property;
(2) A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the
finding;
(3) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days after
the receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within
that time the Township will declare the property to be a public
nuisance; and
(4) An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance
programs available through the Township and private graffiti
removal contractors.
C. Exceptions to property owner responsibility. The removal requirements
above shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party can
demonstrate that the owner or responsible party lacks the financial
ability to remove the defacing graffiti.
§ 98-6 IMPACT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT § 98-6
101:235
§ 101-1. Submission and filing; modifications.
A significant features impact disclosure statement containing the matter
and conditions set forth in Exhibit A52 shall be submitted by the applicant
for Township approval as a part of the final plan and filed as required herein,
and the same referred to hereinafter as the "disclosure statement". Said
disclosure statement (Exhibit A) may be modified by the Township from time
to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 101-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the significant features impact disclosure statement is to
advise and notify the Township and any prospective purchaser of a
residential lot or unit of the existence and location of significant matters,
features and conditions which may have an impact upon the residential lot
or unit to be purchased within a multifamily residential subdivision or land
development.
§ 101-3. Completion and filing.
A. A fully executed disclosure statement shall be attached as a rider or
addendum to each agreement of sale for a lot or unit within any
residential development in the Township, and a fully executed copy of
the disclosure statement shall be delivered to the Township Code
Enforcement Officer not later than seven days after the execution of the
agreement of sale and also prior to the issuing of both the building
permit and the use and occupancy permit for the lot or unit to be sold
under the subject agreement of sale.
B. The disclosure statement shall notify and advise a purchaser of the
existence and location of the matters and conditions which may have
impact on the property to be purchased subject to the agreement of
sale. Such matters and conditions shall be identified on the disclosure
statement by the purchaser's initials next to the particular item listed
thereon, and the same shall be disclosed on a copy of the plot plan for
the applicable portions of the subdivision or land development, which
shall be attached thereto, in reduced size, as necessary.
C. The disclosure statement shall contain a statement signed by both the
developer/seller and the purchaser acknowledging the full disclosure
and location of the items required by the disclosure statement and a
representation that the disclosure statement shall be made a part of
and incorporated by reference in the agreement of sale for the
particular lot or unit to be sold thereby.
52.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 98-6 WARWICK CODE § 101-4
101:236
§ 101-4. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or entity to
sell a residential lot or unit within any residential subdivision or land
development in Warwick Township without first filing with the Township
Code Enforcement Officer a significant feature impact disclosure statement
duly executed and fully completed to the extent that the provisions thereof
are applicable to the residential lot or unit proposed for sale and as required
by this chapter.
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity which shall violate
this chapter shall, by suit or summary proceeding brought in the name
of Warwick Township before the District Justice having jurisdiction over
Warwick Township, be sentenced to pay a fine and penalty not exceeding
$600 for each violation, plus court costs. Upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction or by proceeding by summons on default of the
payment of a fine or penalty imposed and the costs for violation of this
chapter, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Bucks
County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 101-6. Disposition of fines and penalties.
All fines and penalties collected for violation of this chapter shall be paid
over to the treasury of Warwick Township.
Chapter 102
INSURANCE
§ 101-4 IMPACT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT § 101-6
101:237

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1]
§ 102-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Warwick where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to
the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is
furnished by the Warwick Township Treasurer with a certificate
pursuant to 508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921 (40 P.S.
§ 638) (the "Act"), and unless there is compliance with the procedures
set forth in 508(c) and (d) of the Act.
B. Municipal claims.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which the Township of Warwick has incurred as a cost for
the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on
the property (collectively "municipal expenses"), the Manager of
the Township of Warwick shall immediately render a bill for such
work, if he has not already done so. Upon written request of the
named insured specifying the tax description of the property, the
name and address of the insurer and the date of receipt by the
insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Treasurer shall furnish,
within 14 working days after the request, to the insurer, a
certificate (or at his discretion an oral notice confirmed in writing)
either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a) of this section, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named
insured, subject to the provisions of subsection (3) hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1)(a) indicating that
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the
property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
§ 102-1 IMPACT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT § 102-1
101:239
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If, at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such
insured has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Township of
Warwick, a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure in an amount
less than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer
formula, the insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. If there is
more than one insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro
rata basis by all insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Treasurer shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
the Township of Warwick to be required in removing, repairing
or securing the building or structure as required by this article.
Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal or administrative costs incurred by the Township of
Warwick in connection with such removal, repair or securing
or any proceedings related thereto; and
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice the proceeds have been received by the
Township of Warwick and that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
Township of Warwick a contractor's signed estimate of the cost
of removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the Township of
Warwick in excess of that required to pay the municipal
expenses; provided, the Township of Warwick has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure, in which case the Township of Warwick will
complete the work.
(d) Pay to the Township Manager, for reimbursement to the
Township of Warwick general fund, the amount of the
municipal expenses paid by the Township of Warwick.
§ 102-1 WARWICK CODE § 102-1
101:240
§ 102-2. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
article or to make this Township of Warwick, any Warwick Township official,
a municipality or public official an insured under a policy of insurance or
to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal
liens or expenses other than as provided in this article.
§ 102-3. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this article for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the Township of Warwick shall have a
full benefit of such payment including all rights of subrogation and of
assignment.
§ 102-4. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Township Manager that the repair, removal or securing of the
building or other structure has been completed in accordance
with all applicable codes and regulations of the Township of
Warwick.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Township of Warwick to recover any deficiency in the
amount of municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered
pursuant to this article, or to insurance proceeds, by an action
at law or in equity to enforce the codes of the Township of
Warwick or to enter into an agreement with the named insured
with regard to such other disposition of the proceeds as the
Township of Warwick may deem responsible.
§ 102-1 IMPACT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT § 102-4
101:241
Chapter 103
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 103-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this
chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include but not be
limited to scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles,
machinery, equipment, glass, paper, containers and structures. It shall not
include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the
purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who shall engage in the business of selling,
buying, salvaging, storing and dealing in junk and any person who
maintains and operates a junkyard within the Township.
JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk is stored, disposed of or
accumulated.
LICENSE — The permit granted by the Township to a person who
accumulates, stores or disposes of junk.
§ 103-2. License required.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or maintain a junkyard
without first having obtained a license issued by the Township, for which a
license fee in accordance with the Warwick Township Fee Schedule 53 shall
be paid to the Township. The license shall be issued for the twelve-month
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same year, and
each license must be renewed annually on or before the first day of January
of each year.
§ 103-3. License application.
The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Board after
written application shall have been made therefor by the person desiring
to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to whom
such license is issued and the premises on which said business is to be
conducted or such junkyard is to be maintained. Such license shall be
posted conspicuously upon the premises licensed thereunder. The written
53.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 102-4 WARWICK CODE § 103-3
103:242
application for license hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by
a form, every question of which must be answered, which form will be
supplied by the Board. The applicant shall also submit therewith a plot plan
of the premises used or to be used in connection with such license.
§ 103-4. Issuance or denial of license.
Upon receipt by the Board of an application, the Board shall issue a license
or shall refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor after
an examination of the application and after taking into consideration the
suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purpose of the
license, the character and zoning classification of the properties located
nearby and the effect of the proposed use upon the Township, both
economic and aesthetic. In the event that the Board shall issue a license, it
may impose upon the license and the person applying therefor such terms
and conditions, in addition to the regulations herein contained and adopted
pursuant to this chapter, as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit
and intent of this chapter.
§ 103-5. License restrictions.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Township or maintain more than
one junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. No
person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the
place designated upon his license or maintain a junkyard in any place other
than the place designated upon his license.
§ 103-6. Transfer of license.
No license issued by the Board shall be transferable by the licensee to
any other person unless such transfer is authorized by the Board. Any
person desiring to transfer his license shall notify the Board in writing,
which notification shall be accompanied by an application for a license, as
described in § 103-3 of this chapter, by the intended transferee.
§ 103-7. Transfer fee.
In the event that the Board shall approve the transfer of a license, the
transferee shall immediately pay to the Township a transfer fee as set forth
in the Warwick Township Fee Schedule.54
§ 103-8. Records to be kept by licensee.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall provide and shall
consistently keep a book in which shall be fairly written down in the English
language at the time of the purchase of any junk a description of every
article or material purchased or received by him, the date and hour of
54.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file and available for inspection in the Township
Office.
§ 103-3 JUNKYARDS § 103-8
103:243
such purchase and the person from whom such article or material was
purchased, received or handled by such person, which book shall at all
times be subject to the inspection of any official of the Township.
§ 103-9. Delay in disposal required.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall keep and retain upon the
licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not disturb
or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or content until such
period of 48 hours has elapsed.
§ 103-10. Maintenance and use of premises.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall consistently maintain the
licensed premises in accordance with any special provisions imposed by the
Board and in the manner prescribed by this section and any subsequent
regulations adopted by the Board.
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in or on such premises as
junk, all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom.
Gasoline in an amount not exceeding 10 gallons may be stored above
ground in said junkyard, provided that the same be placed in containers
approved by the Board. All other gasoline which is kept in or on the
premises shall be stored underground, which underground storage
must be approved by the Board.
D. The manner of storage and accumulation of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. All junk kept, stored or arranged on the licensed premises shall at all
times be kept, stored and arranged within the junkyard as described in
the application for license hereunder and as limited under Subsection
D.
F. A person licensed under this chapter shall not burn any motor vehicle
or part thereof at any time. No oil, grease, tires, gasoline or other
similar material that might be dangerous or tend to produce obnoxious
smoke or odors shall be burned within a junkyard at any time.
G. When the Board shall deem it necessary, the premises to be licensed
shall be enclosed by a fence of the type and style to be determined by
the Board as necessary under the circumstances to satisfy public safety
considerations.
§ 103-8 WARWICK CODE § 103-11
103:244
§ 103-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-655]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $300 and not more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution.
In default of the payment of said fine, said person shall be sentenced to
undergo imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period of up to
30 days. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 103-12. Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedies provided in this chapter, the Board may employ
or invoke the provisions of Chapter 127, Nuisances, §§ 127-2 and 127-3.
Chapter 111
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Graffiti — See Ch. 98.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
§ 111-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose, and scope of this chapter to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the community by prohibiting the deposit or dumping
of garbage, litter, refuse or rubbish on properties owned by the Township,
on roads and road rights-of-way within the Township and on private
property owned by others.
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any piece of furniture, bottle, jar or can or any top,
cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage, trash,
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 103-11 LITTERING § 111-2
111:245
refuse, debris, rubbish, vehicle part, including tires, grass clippings or other
lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper
containers or other packaging or construction material, but not including
political literature.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
used either wholly or in any part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all roads, streets, road rights-of-way, sidewalks,
parking areas open to the public, alleys and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds and public buildings.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, including ashes, street cleanings, abandoned
automobiles, dismantled vehicles, other abandoned personal property and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets, pamphlets, wrappers,
handbills, newspapers and any and all other printed material, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, building materials
and other like materials, but not including political literature.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warwick.
§ 111-3. Prohibition against littering.
§ 111-4. Enforcement.
The Township Manager, Code Enforcement Officer or any member of the
Warwick Township Police Force (or other authorized Police Department)
shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any individual
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place garbage, refuse, lifter or rubbish of any nature upon any public
place or private property other than in a receptacle provided by the
Township or the owner of the private property.
B. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a public or
private street, road or highway, shall throw litter, refuse, garbage or
rubbish of any nature or allow litter, refuse, garbage or rubbish of any
nature to be thrown from the vehicle.
C. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle onto any
street, road, highway or public place unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of the contents thereof from
being blown or deposited from the vehicle upon any street, alley or
other public place.
§ 111-2 WARWICK CODE § 111-4
111:246
or entity authorized to enforce this chapter shall be authorized to file a
complaint for the violation of this chapter with a District Justice. Police
officers shall further have the authority to arrest and detain an individual or
individuals in violation of this chapter.
§ 111-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished,
upon conviction thereof, by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and costs of
prosecution or by imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for not more
than 90 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. In the event of the
imposition of a fine only, default in payment of such fine and costs of
prosecution shall subject the violator to imprisonment in the Bucks County
Prison for not more than 90 days.
Chapter 117
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 117, Mechanical Standards, adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-1 as Part 4:200 of the 1984 Warwick Township Code, as
amended, was superseded 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3. See now Ch.
62, Uniform Construction Codes.]
Chapter 123
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 41.
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 49.
Nuisances — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 123-1. Measurement; sound level restrictions.
A. Noise shall be measured with a calibrated, Type II sound level meter
having an A-weighted filter constructed in accordance with
specifications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Measurements are to be made at any point on the boundary line of any
residential, commercial or other district property within the Township.
B. Impact noise shall be measured using the fast response of the sound
level meter. Impact noises are intermittent sounds such as from a punch
or drop forge hammer. Measurements are to be made at any point on
the boundary line of any residential, commercial or other district
property within the Township.
C. In all zoning districts, as defined and designated under the provisions of
the Code of Warwick Township,56 at no point on or beyond the boundary
§ 111-4 NOISE § 123-1
123:247
§ 123-2. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the provisions of these regulations:
§ 123-3. Permissible sound levels.
The following table describes the maximum pressure level permitted from
all properties located in any zoning district, as defined and designated by
the Code of Warwick Township.57 The noise level shall be measured from
any point on or beyond the boundary line of any adjacent property.
TABLE I
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels From Any Source Decibels (dBA)
Sound Measured In
Continuous Slow
Meter Response
Impact Fast Meter
Response
Residential districts 50 60
Commercial districts 65 75
All other districts 70 80
§ 123-4. Vibration.
of any adjacent property shall the sound level of any person, property,
residence, business or corporation exceed the dBA levels shown in
Table I below. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., the
permissible sound levels shall be reduced by 20 decibels as measured
under the test procedures established under this chapter.
A. Police, fire, ambulance and other governmental emergency vehicles.
B. Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves.
C. Governmental warning devices.
D. Aircraft (except model aircraft).
E. Temporary construction, specifically authorized by the Township.
F. The work to provide electricity, water or other utilities when public
health or safety is involved.
G. Public celebrations, specifically authorized by the Township.
A. Vibration shall be measured at or beyond any adjacent lot line indicated
in Table II below, and such measurements shall not exceed the particle
velocities so designated. The instrument used for these measurements
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 123-1 WARWICK CODE § 123-4
123:248
Chapter 127
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Junkyards — See Ch. 103.
Littering — See Ch. 111.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
shall be a three component measuring system capable of simultaneous
measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions.
B. The maximum vibration is given as particle velocity, which may be
measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the
basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the following
formula shall be used:
PV = 6.28 F x D
Where:
PV = Particle velocity, inches per second
F = Vibration frequency, cycles per second
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches.
C. The maximum particle velocity shall be the vector sum of the three
individual components recorded. Such particle velocity shall not exceed
the values given in Table II.
TABLE II
Maximum Ground Transmitted Vibration For O and O-1, C-1
C-2 and C-3 and LI Districts
Districts
Particle Velocity
Adjacent Lot Line
in Inches/Second
In Inches/Seconds
Residential District
O and O-1 Office/
Nonmanufacturing
Districts (Mobile Home)
0.10 0.02
C-1, C-2 and C-3
Commercial Districts
0.20 0.02
LI Limited Industrial
District
0.20 0.02
NOTE: Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses, and such
impulses do not exceed frequency of 100 per minute, then the values
in Table II may be multiplied by two.
§ 123-4 NUISANCES § 123-4
127:249
§ 127-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, allow, permit or maintain
on private or public property in the Township any nuisance, including but
not limited to accumulations of garbage, rubbish or other waste material,
the storage of abandoned or junked automobiles and any dump or dumping
ground, whether or not for profit or compensation, whereby accumulations
of garbage, rubbish or other waste material may result. It shall be unlawful
to carry on any offensive manufacture or business in the Township.
§ 127-2. Removal authorized; penalty. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-658]
The Board shall have the power to remove any nuisance or dangerous
structure on public or private grounds within the Township, after notice to
the owner or occupier to do so and his default, and shall collect the costs of
such removal, together with a penalty of $500 for the use of the Township,
to be collected from the owner or occupier of said premises by summary
proceedings.
§ 127-3. Actions for relief.
If any person or persons shall violate this chapter, the Board shall have the
power, in the name of the Township, to institute proceedings against him or
them in the Courts of Equity for injunctive or other equitable relief.
§ 127-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-659]
Any person violating the provisions of § 127-1 shall, upon summary
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution. In default
of the payment of said fine, said person shall be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period of up to 30 days.
Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 131
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 111. Speed limits in parks — See Ch. 177.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 123-4 WARWICK CODE § 127-4
131:250
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-860]
§ 131-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to ensure the preservation
of outdoor public parklands, outdoor recreation facilities and outdoor
playground areas within the Township of Warwick for the perpetual
enjoyment of the residents of the Township of Warwick, to regulate activities
within these areas consistent with the enjoyment of natural settings and
park facilities and to prevent any nuisances to the residents of the Township
of Warwick in the use of such public parklands, recreation facilities and
playground areas or in the enjoyment of private property adjacent to such
areas.
§ 131-2. Use of grounds and facilities.
Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall
clean up all debris and leave the premises in good order and the facilities
in a neat and sanitary condition. Each and every failure to conform to the
provisions of this section shall be considered a separate violation of the
provisions of this article.
§ 131-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such
parks, recreation or playground areas to either perform or permit to be
performed any of the following acts.
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or
paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock or other mineral.
(3) Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be
disturbed any wild bird or animal within the recreation, park and
conservation sites owned by the Township, except as permitted by
special permit of the Parks and Recreation Director as hereinafter
provided.
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, General Provisions, adopted
9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 6:1100 of the 1984 Warwick Township Code, as
amended.
§ 131-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 131-3
131:251
(4) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which may result in the pollution of said waters; or dump,
deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or trash anywhere within the park
and playground sites owned or operated by the Township, but
rather make use of proper receptacles where these are provided;
where such receptacles are not provided, all such materials shall
be carried away from the park by the person responsible for their
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(5) Disturb the peace or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous
language.
(6) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(7) Commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting.
(8) Bring to the park any type of weapon, including but not limited to
firearms, knives, archery bows, etc.
(9) Violate any rule for the use of the park, recreation land or
playground areas, made or approved by the Parks and Recreation
Board, the Parks and Recreation Director or the Supervisors of
Warwick Township.
(10) Fires may not be built or allowed anywhere in recreation, park or
playground areas without prior approval of the Park and
Recreation Director.
(11) Use of a hard puck or lacrosse ball in the hockey rink.
B. It shall be unlawful to bring or cause to be brought into any park,
recreation or playground area any animal, except where posted. In
those areas where posted, it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in
any such area unless such dog is secured on a leash of not more than six
feet in length. Owners of leashed or unleashed animals, whether legally
or illegally on any park, recreation or playground area, shall be
responsible for the immediate removal and disposal of fecal matter
deposited by that animal. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
stated herein, the training and/or exhibition of animals in designated
areas shall be permitted only by special permit of the Parks and
Recreation Director. Trained guide dogs for the blind are expressly
exempt from all provisions of this article.
C. Gambling is prohibited on recreation, park or playground areas.
D. No person, corporation or firm shall, in recreation, park or playground
areas:
§ 131-3 WARWICK CODE § 131-3
131:252
§ 131-3.1. Hours of operation.
Recreation, park and playground areas shall be open daily to the public
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, except as
otherwise posted by the Township; and it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation, other than Township personnel conducting Township
business therein, to occupy or be present during any hours during which
the park is not open to the public. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, special
permits may be obtained from the Parks and Recreation Director for use
after the aforesaid hours or after posted hours for specific activities in the
manner and on the terms as hereinafter set forth. Any section or part of
the recreation, park or playground areas may be declared closed to the
public at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular or stated intervals. During such periods of time, it shall be unlawful
to enter upon or occupy such areas or portions thereof contrary to posted
regulations or the conditions of a permit issued by the Parks and Recreation
Director.
§ 131-3.2. Permits for group activities.
Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use recreation
or park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, meetings, parties
or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of said group,
association or organization shall first be required to apply for and obtain a
permit from the Parks and Recreation Director for the specific use desired
in specifically designated areas as hereinafter set forth. The Board of
Supervisors may adopt an application form to be used by the Director
of Parks and Recreation, which may require an indemnity bond or other
security to protect the Township from any liability of any kind or character
and to protect Township property from damage. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall grant the permit if it appears that the group, association
(1) Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand,
cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such
article or thing, except under the authority of the Parks and
Recreation Director by application and permit as hereinafter
provided.
(2) Announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
(3) Post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw, carve, tack or affix any
placard, bill, notice, sign, advertisement or any inscription
whatever upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or enclosure
within any recreation, park or playground area or on any public
lands or highways or roads adjacent to any recreation, park or
conservation area, except that the Township may place
informational signs within such areas.
E. It shall be unlawful to land a private or commercial airplane or
helicopter on recreation, park and playground lands.
§ 131-3 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 131-3.2
131:253
or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by
the individual members of the public and if the group, association or
organization meets all other conditions contained in the application.
§ 131-3.3. Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, custody
or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever.
§ 131-3.4. Special activities; motor vehicles.
§ 131-3.5. Permit forms; fees.
All permits deemed necessary by the Parks and Recreation Director, Board
of Supervisors and the Parks and Recreation Board to properly regulate
Township park and recreational areas and facilities shall be granted by the
Director upon the determination that they are not in conflict with the terms
and purposes of this article, as follows:
A. Facilities and areas in Township recreation, park or playground sites
shall be used only for the purposes designated or implicit in their
character. Special activities, including flying model airplanes, games,
picnics and the operation of motor scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, gocarts,
snowmobiles and similar vehicles, shall be permitted only at
locations or trails specifically designated for such use and at times
established and posted by the Parks and Recreation Director as
hereinafter provided.
B. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on designated
roadways. The speed limit for such vehicles shall be 15 miles per hour
on such roadways. Motor scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts and
snowmobiles shall not be permitted on roadways designated for
licensed vehicular traffic unless licensed for travel on public roads of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All vehicles shall be parked in
areas or places so provided and designated. Parking in places contrary
to posted regulations and times is prohibited, and such vehicles may be
removed by the Township at the owner's expense. All parking is
prohibited after regular closing time. It shall be unlawful to clean,
wash, repair or do any work whatsoever on private vehicles within
recreation, park and playground areas except for emergency repairs.
A. The Parks and Recreation Director shall issue permits and prescribe
conditions upon forms and applications designated by himself, the
Board of Supervisors or the Parks and Recreation Board.
B. Applications for permit must be made to the Park and Recreation Office
at least 10 days prior to the use requested. Larger events and special
circumstances will require additional time to process the permit. Please
consult the Park and Recreation Office at least three months in advance
to determine how much additional time will be necessary.
§ 131-3.2 WARWICK CODE § 131-3.5
131:254
§ 131-3.6. Posting of areas designated for particular activities.
The Parks and Recreation Director and/or the Police Department of Warwick
Township, under his supervision, shall designate or cause to be designated
various areas of the park, playground or recreation lands and facilities of
the Township for specific purposes as hereinabove mentioned. The same
shall be accomplished by appropriate posting of signs in or about the areas
designating the uses and areas involved conspicuously so as to provide
adequate notice to the public.
§ 131-3.7. Administration.
The Director of Parks and Recreation and/or the Township Manager shall
administer the provisions of this article, including the establishment and
collection of fees, preparation of application forms, issuance and revocation
of permits, promulgation of rules and regulations to implement the
provisions of this article and all other decisions relative thereto. When acts
or conduct of individuals or groups is determined to be in violation of this
article or rules and regulations promulgated by the authority of this article
or not to be in the best interests of the recreation, park and playground
area, or when such acts are deemed to be disruptive to the surrounding
neighborhood, or when such acts or conduct affect other people, private or
public property, the Township police, Director of Parks and Recreation or
his agent assigned to such area or program shall have the authority to cause
such acts to be terminated, or to expel the perpetrators of such acts from
the area, or to call the Township police to arrest and detain such individual
or individuals, or to file a complaint for the violation of this article with a
District Justice.
§ 131-3.8. Violations and penalties.
C. All permits shall be granted for a period not to exceed the time or the
duration of the anticipated use and activity.
D. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the authority to fix and
establish a fee schedule for permits, accept the amounts of deposits and
prescribe conditions under which deposits are collected or forfeited. All
such revenue collected for permits shall be used for park, recreation
and conservation purposes within the general fund of Warwick
Township.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than $60 nor
more than $600 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment in the
Bucks County Prison for not more than 90 days, or by both fine and
imprisonment. In the event of the imposition of a fine only, default in
payment of such fine and costs of prosecution shall subject the violator
to imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for not more than 90 days.
B. Where such violator has removed, destroyed, damaged, defaced or
befouled the recreation, park or playground area or the contents
§ 131-3.5 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 131-3.8
131:255
thereof, the cost of maintenance, repair or replacement shall be
charged to such person or group in addition to any fine. Further use of
recreation and park facilities may be denied to violators of this article in
addition to the imposition of fines or costs. The term “person violating”
as set forth in this section shall mean, in the case of action or activity
by any minor (herein defined as an unmarried person under the age of
18 years), in addition to such person, the parent, parents or guardian
or any other person having lawful custody and control who knowingly
permits the violation of this article. Such parent, guardian or person
having lawful custody and control of such minor shall be considered
separately and individually in violation of this article.
§ 131-3.8 WARWICK CODE § 131-3.8
131:256
ARTICLE II
Ponds and Bodies of Water
[Adopted 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
§ 131-4. Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in, ice-skate on or engage in any
activity in or on a pond or other body of water which is located within a
public park, as defined herein, in Warwick Township, and the same is hereby
prohibited.
§ 131-5. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PARK — Any real estate in which Warwick Township has an
ownership interest, either in fee simple, lease or easement, which is used,
intended for use or made available for use as public open space or
recreational facilities, including such as may be limited to use by only
residents of a particular area of the Township, whether or not the public
park is supervised and managed by the Warwick Township Parks and
Recreation Board.
§ 131-6. Fishing.
Fishing in a pond or other body of water in a public park is a permitted
activity, and it is not prohibited by this article.
§ 131-7. Supervision of minors.
Parent(s) shall be responsible at all times for the supervision and conduct of
their minor children in a public park.
§ 131-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction in summary
proceedings before a District Justice having jurisdiction over Warwick
Township, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than $600, plus
the costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Bucks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 131-4 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 131-8
131:257
Chapter 135
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION AND TRANSIENT RETAIL
BUSINESSES, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 81. Permits and licenses — See Ch. 138.
§ 135-1. Permit required; exceptions; limitations.
A. Every person, whether principal or agent, entering into, beginning or
desiring to begin a transient retail business in Warwick Township for
the sale of any goods, wares, or merchandise whatsoever and who
hires, leases, occupies or uses any roadside, parking lot, room,
apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other place or structure
for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or merchandise shall
obtain a permit from Warwick Township prior to entering into or
beginning a transient retail business; provided, however, nothing
herein contained shall apply to farmers selling their own produce or to
any sale of goods, wares or merchandise conducted for charitable or
philanthropic purposes, including sales at functions sponsored by
charitable or philanthropic organizations, such as flea markets.
B. Any transient retail business being conducted without the required
permit shall be immediately closed by the appropriate Township
authorities until the required permits have been obtained.
C. A permit for a transient retail business shall not authorize door-to-door
solicitation. Permits for door-to-door solicitation must be obtained from
the Warwick Township Police Department where such solicitation is
performed by representatives of commercial entities. There shall be no
permit, fee, or other registration requirement for religious or charitable
organization performing door-to-door solicitation.
D. Every person, whether principal or agent, who has received a permit for
a transient retail business or who has received a permit for door-to-door
solicitation pursuant to this chapter shall obtain from the Township an
identification badge which includes, at a minimum, their name and
photograph. The identification badge shall be worn at all times when
conducting business pursuant to the permit issued under this chapter.
E. Township residents and businesses may obtain a "No Solicitation" sign
from the Township to be conspicuously displayed in the front window of
their residence if they do not wish to receive door-to-door solicitations.
In the event that a Township resident or business has displayed such a
sign, the transient retail business shall be prohibited from soliciting on
the property.
§ 131-8 WARWICK CODE § 135-1
131:258
§ 135-2. Fees.
The fees for a transient retail business shall be in such amount as shall be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 135-3. Permit application procedure.
Any person applying for a permit for either commercial solicitation or
transient retail business shall complete the application form provided by
the Township during normal business hours. If the application is not fully
completed, a permit will not be issued. Applicants must have written
permission from the property owner or tenant on whose property they
intend to locate and must demonstrate that there is adequate parking for
their business. Applicants must also present a certificate that they carry a
minimum of $500,000 single-limit general liability insurance, naming the
property owner or tenant as an additional insured. The applicant must be
prepared to show proof of identity in a form satisfactory to the Township
when applying for the permit, together with a valid Warwick business
privilege license for each place of business within Warwick Township where
the merchant intends to operate. Upon completing the permit application,
presenting a business privilege license, and paying the required fee, a
permit will be issued.
§ 135-4. Display requirements.
Each transient merchant or person or entity engaged in door-to-door
solicitation must display the identification badge issued pursuant to
§ 135-1D on their person at all times when engaged in activities, including
door-to-door solicitation, under this chapter. Each transient retail merchant
must also prominently display his or her permit, together with his or her
business privilege license, while engaged in the activities of a transient
retail merchant.
§ 135-5. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The Township may suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter
when such suspension is deemed beneficial to the public health, safety,
morals and/or welfare or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or for giving false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
Any request for reinstatement of a license must be heard before the Board
at a regular or special meeting.
§ 135-6. Renewals.
Permits shall be issued for the day, week, or month. Upon expiration of
the permit, each permittee shall be required to submit a new application
to renew a permit previously issued. No permit shall be automatically
renewed. Accordingly, any applicant wishing to continue to operate
F. There shall be no canvassing or other commercial solicitation permitted
within the Township after 6:30 p.m. DST and 5:00 p.m. EST.
§ 135-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 135-6
131:259
pursuant to a permit shall submit an application for renewal prior to
expiration of an existing permit.
§ 135-7. Payment of taxes required.
Each transient retail merchant shall be responsible to pay all earned income
taxes, business privilege taxes, and occupational privilege taxes which are
due on the business which he or she conducts within Warwick Township.
§ 135-8. Unlawful acts.
§ 135-9. Violations and penalties.
A person committing any of the prohibited acts shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, be fined not less than $375 and not more than $1,000
per offense and, in default of payment of said fine, shall be imprisoned in
the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days per violation.
Chapter 136
PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS,
ANTIQUES AND SECONDHAND GOODS
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS DAYS — Excludes Saturdays, Sundays and federal or state legal
holidays.
DEALER — A pawnbroker, dealer in precious metals, antique dealer and/or
secondhand dealer.
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity, who or which purchases precious metals
from the general public for resale or other commercial disposition, or any
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hire, lease, occupy, or use any
roadside, parking lot, room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway
car, or other place or structure for the exhibition and sale of goods,
wares, or merchandise as a transient retail merchant without first
having obtained a transient retail merchant's permit.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who has obtained a permit not to
prominently display the permit during the exhibition and sale of his or
her goods, wares, or merchandise.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person who has obtained a permit to refuse
to display it to any official of Warwick Township upon request.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit door-to-door without a
permit.
§ 135-6 WARWICK CODE § 136-1
131:260
individual who acts as agent for such individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity for such purchase or purchases.
GOVERNMENT IDENTIFICATION — An unexpired document issued by the
federal government, the commonwealth or any other state government,
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or any United
States territory that includes all of the following: the name, age, date of
birth and address of the seller; a photograph of the seller; an expiration
date.
ITEM — Personal property, precious metal, antique and/or secondhand or
used good.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
PAWNBROKER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or
other business entity, including an itinerant merchant, doing, business in
the Township that lends money in exchange for personal property deposited
by a pledger as security that can be sold if the loan is not repaid within a
specified period, and/or engages in purchase and resale of any merchandise
from a pledger or seller.
PLEDGE — An article and or articles deposited with a Pawnbroker as
security for a loan or currency, in the course of his/her business as defined
in the preceding definition.
PLEDGER — The person who obtains the loan from a Pawnbroker and
delivers a Pledge into the possession of a Pawnbroker, unless such person
discloses that he/she is or was acting for another, in which case a "pledger"
means the disclosed principal.
PRECIOUS METALS — Items containing or being of gold, silver or platinum,
including, but not limited to, jewelry and silver services, but excluding
coins, ingots, bullion or photographic film or any article containing less than
5% of gold, silver or platinum by weight.
SECONDHAND DEALER or ANTIQUE DEALER — An individual,
partnership, association, corporation, or other business entity including
an itinerant merchant doing business in the Township that purchases or
makes appraisals of secondhand or used goods for resale or refining, or an
individual who acts as an agent for such individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or other business organization or entity.
SECONDHAND OR USED GOOD — One that is being purchased by or
otherwise transferred for value to a second or later end user.
SELLER — The person who obtains payment from a Dealer in return for the
sale of any merchandise to the Dealer.
TRANSACTION — A purchase, sale or loan by any dealer.
§ 136-2. Licenses and registration.
A. License required. No person shall act as a Dealer unless he or she has
obtained a license from the Township for each location from which that
person intends to operate.
§ 136-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 136-2
131:261
§ 136-3. Records required.
B. Registration. No person shall act as a Dealer unless he or she pays an
annual registration license fee of as outlined in the Township fee
schedule for each location from which the applicant intends to operate.
C. Pawnbrokers license. No license to act as a Pawnbroker shall be issued
by the Township unless the Applicant has been licensed first by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as required by the Pawnbrokers
License Act, 63 P.S. 281-1, et seq.
A. All dealers are required to maintain records of all transactions,
including but not limited to, pledges, loans, purchases and sales.
Records shall be kept in the English language.
B. All records shall include the following information:
(1) Date of sale;
(2) Time of sale;
(3) Location of sale;
(4) Make;
(5) Model;
(6) Serial number;
(7) Model number;
(8) Description;
(9) Color;
(10) Special markings of the Pledge or sale item;
(11) Currency amount paid to pledger and/or seller;
(12) Copy of the pledger/seller government identification.
C. A color photograph shall be produced for all items. A color photograph
shall be produced for all precious metals received. The photograph
shall be taken from two different perspectives; no less than 1:1 scale;
and of sufficient size and clarity to identify any distinguishing details of
a purchased item, including identifying marks, initials, insignias,
inscriptions or other unique identifying features.
D. A photograph of the seller, directly facing the camera in full-face view,
of sufficient size to ensure that the head measures between one and 1 3/
8 inches from the bottom of the chin to the top of the head.
E. A copy of all pledge and/or sale transactions containing this information
shall be retained at the location of the business for a period of two years
§ 136-2 WARWICK CODE § 136-3
131:262
§ 136-4. Weighing devices.
§ 136-5. Identification of pledger/seller.
The dealer shall obtain the following information from the pledger and/or
seller for the purposes of establishing identification of each pledger and/or
seller:
§ 136-6. Stolen property.
A dealer may seize any item offered in a sale or pledge which the dealer has
reason to believe is stolen property. The dealer shall issue a seizure receipt
to the person presenting such property in pledge and shall immediately
deliver such seized property together with a copy of the seizure receipt to
the Township Police Department.
§ 136-7. Electronic filing.
after the date of transaction, payment, loan or sale of the pledge,
whichever is later.
A. All scales or other devices used by dealers to weigh precious metals
must be of a type approved for commercial use in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and must be inspected and sealed by the Bucks County
Weights and Measures, Department of Consumer Protection.
B. Dealers must notify the Bucks County Weights and Measures,
Department of Consumer Protection whenever a weighing device
referred to in Subsection A above is moved from one location to
another.
A. A photocopy of verified government identification.
B. An accurate physical description of the pledger and/or seller including
race, gender, eye and hair color and identifying marks, if any.
A. Responsibility of Township.
(1) The Township Police Department shall enter into an agreement
with an online entity which operates an electronic database for law
enforcement agencies for the purpose of identifying stolen
merchandise and persons suspected of thefts.
(2) The entity chosen by the Township Police Department to administer
the electronic inventory tracking system shall ensure that all data
remain secure and confidential by providing to each dealer login
security protocols which meet current industry standards and shall
employ state of the art technology to protect the data from all
forms of unauthorized access and malicious intrusion.
B. Responsibility of dealer.
§ 136-3 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 136-7
131:263
§ 136-8. Holding period and inspection.
§ 136-9. Business with minors.
All business transactions between dealers and minors are prohibited.
§ 136-10. Violations and penalties.
(1) Each dealer doing business in the Township shall, within 30 days of
the adoption of this chapter, maintain an electronic inventory
tracking system which is capable of securely and confidentially
uploading all transactions via computer to the online entity
designated by the Township Police Department.
(2) No later than the conclusion of each business day, every dealer
must upload, in the manner specified by the Police Department, the
required tracking information for all transactions during the course
of business on that day.
A. All items shall be kept in unaltered condition, available for inspection
by law enforcement officials in the course of their law enforcement
duties, for 10 full business days following a transaction by a dealer or a
data upload as specified in § 136-7 above.
B. Law enforcement officials shall not be required to obtain a search
warrant to inspect the item, unless the inspection is made during hours
other than regular business hours.
C. During the holding period, any item subject to the holding period shall
be segregated from other inventory to ensure that it is not placed in an
area or section where personal property and/or precious metals are
offered for sale. Where any item(s) is held off the premises, the dealer
shall make the Item available for inspection within 24 hours after
receiving a request for inspection by law enforcement officials.
D. Any law enforcement official who has reason to believe any item was
not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct the dealer to hold
the items for a reasonable length of time that the law enforcement
official considers necessary to identify it.
A. Fines. Any person and/or dealer who violates, fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of this chapter, upon summary conviction
before a District Justice, shall pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Dealer's license suspension. In addition to the fines specified in
Subsection A above, a dealer who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall have his license(s) suspended.
§ 136-7 WARWICK CODE § 136-10
131:264
(1) The dealer's license shall be suspended for 90 days for the first
offense.
(2) The dealer's license shall be suspended for a period of one year
upon each succeeding violation.
C. Suspension of dealer's license.
(1) If a dealer's license is suspended, the Township shall provide
written notice of the suspension to the Secretary of Banking for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Secretary of Banking shall
then conduct a hearing to ascertain if the dealer's license shall be
revoked.
(2) If the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
revokes the dealer's license, the dealer shall be prohibited from
obtaining an operating license in the Township for five years or at
such time the dealer obtains another valid license,
(3) No operating license shall be issued when any dealer's license has
been revoked by the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, where the dealer retains a property interest in the
location where the operating license was suspended, or the
Pawnbroker retains a pecuniary interest in the corporation or any
affiliated business entities therein,
D. Cease operations.
(1) During any period of license suspension, the dealer shall cease
operation at each and every location of the dealer's business.
(2) Cease operations order.
(a) The Township shall issue a cease operations order for each
business location operated by the dealer whose license(s) has/
have been suspended in accordance with the Township
Administrative Code.
(b) The cease operations order shall identify the prohibited
operations and shall state that the applicable license has been
suspended for violation(s) of the Code.
(c) The cease operations order shall be in force for the full period
of any license suspension and shall set forth this period in the
order.
(d) The Township shall not remove any posted cease operations
order until the Township is satisfied that all suspended licenses
have been restored, or the property interests in the location
have been changed so that neither the person or dealer under
license suspension, nor any member of his immediate family, or
in the case of a corporation, the corporation or any affiliated
business entities, retain a pecuniary interest therein.
§ 136-10 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 136-10
131:265
Chapter 138
PERMITS AND LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 81.
(e) License at cease operations location. No person or dealer shall
be issued a license for a business location that has been posted
with a cease operation order, as long as any person under a
license suspension or revocation, or any member of that
person's immediate family, or in the case of a corporation, the
corporation or any affiliated business entities, retain a
pecuniary interest in the property at that location.
§ 136-10 WARWICK CODE § 136-10
138:266
ARTICLE I
Issuance to Debtors Restricted
[Adopted 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-11]
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DELINQUENT — Any name and property listed on the County Tax
Collectors report of liens prepared by the Tax Claim Bureau.
INTERESTED PERSON — Any legal entity applying for a Township permit
or on whose behalf or for whose benefit an application for a Township
permit is made.
OFFICIAL DEBT — Any delinquent or overdue tax, fee, assessment or
other debt owed to Warwick Township and the Warwick Township Water
Sewer Authority, including but not limited to any deficiency in any financial
security posted pursuant to Section 509 of the Municipalities Planning
Code61 as adjusted in accordance with that section, and any escrow or
other security posted by a developer to secure payment of engineering,
legal and administrative costs of review in connection with a subdivision
or land development plan. The amount of "official debt" shall include all
accumulated penalties and interest.
TOWNSHIP PERMIT — Any permit or license issued by the Township or by
any Township officer, employee, authority, board or commission.
§ 138-2. Issuance restricted.
Except as provided in § 138-3, no Township permit shall be issued if an
interested person owes any official debt. Upon full payment of the official
debt, the Township permit shall be issued on compliance with all other
applicable requirements.
§ 138-3. Exceptions.
This article does not forbid issuing a Township permit when the validity of,
obligation to pay or the amount of the official debt is currently the subject
of an appeal or other formal legal protest, contest or proceeding by the
interested person.
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 138-1 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 138-3
138:267
Chapter 141
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 141, Plumbing, adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as
Part 4:300 of the 1984 Warwick Township Code, as amended, was
superseded 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3. See now Ch. 62, Uniform
Construction Codes.]
Chapter 145
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 57.
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
61.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 69.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 117.
Plumbing — See Ch. 141.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 145-1. Adoption of standards.
The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of Warwick; for the control of building
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in § 145-2 of this chapter.
§ 145-2. Additions, deletions and amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. In Section 101.1, insert "Township of Warwick."
B. In Section 103.5, insert Warwick Township Fee Schedule.
C. In Section 112.4, insert "not less than $250 nor more than $1,000. Each
day work is continued after receiving a lawfully issued stop work order
shall constitute as a separate offense."
D. In Section 302.4, insert "six inches."
E. In Section 302.4, add the following sentence at the end of the first
paragraph: "This section shall apply to within 200 feet of any habitable
or occupiable structures or buildings. This section shall not apply to
§ 138-3 WARWICK CODE § 145-2
138:268
§ 145-3. Effect on pending provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the International Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed as cited in § 145-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
property owned, leased or under the control of Warwick Township
which has been naturalized."
F. In Section 304.14, insert "May 1 to November 1" where appropriate.
G. Section 304.3 Premises identification shall be amended to read as
follows:
The Township shall have final authority as to the assignment of a street
number or address for each structure. Each structure to which a street
number has been assigned by the Township shall have the appropriate
number displayed in a location and size as to be readily observed and
readable from the closest public right-of-way. All street numbers shall
be in Arabic characters at a minimum of six inches in height, with
one-half-inch-wide stroke. Structures that are set back more than 50
feet from the public right-of-way, or any distance when the number
cannot be readily seen from the right-of-way, shall have the assigned
street numbers attached to a post or mailbox placed at the end of
the driveway on the same side of the road as the structure is located.
These numbers shall be at least four inches in height with one-halfinch-
wide strokes and shall be placed on both sides of the post or
mailbox, at a minimum height of three feet so as numbers can be seen
by vehicles traveling from either direction. All street numbers shall be
illuminated when possible and shall be colored in contrast with the
background upon which the number is placed.
No street numbers may be painted upon any public curbs, streets,
signs, posts or sidewalks, without prior written approval of the
Township. Any resident wishing to display a street address upon the
public curbline, may do so only with the permission and in accordance
with the instructions of the Fire Marshal's office.
All curb painting shall be in addition to the display of numbers listed
above. Any person(s) soliciting for curb painting shall first obtain
a Township soliciting permit, as well as prior approval of the Fire
Marshal. Commercial contractors may be required to produce
evidence of liability and workers' compensation insurance coverage.
H. In Section 602.3, insert "September 1 to May 1" where appropriate.
I. In Section 602.4, insert "September 1 to May 1" where appropriate.
§ 145-2 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 145-3
138:269
Chapter 146
PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 145-3 WARWICK CODE § 145-3
138:270
ARTICLE I
Massage Providers
[Adopted 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-9]
§ 146-1. Findings.
The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors finds as follows:
§ 146-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. That those businesses or enterprises known as "massage businesses" or
"massage establishments," as hereinafter defined, frequently operate
as houses of prostitution and otherwise in violation of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
B. That, in many instances, unsanitary and otherwise unhealthful
conditions exist in those businesses or enterprises known as "massage
businesses" and "massage establishments," as those terms are
hereinafter defined; and
C. That, based on Subsections A and B above, the close regulation of those
businesses or enterprises known as "massage businesses" and
"massage establishments," as hereinafter defined, is necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
A. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of
the Township of Warwick, or said Code Enforcement Officer's designee
or any individual employed by the Township, including, but not limited
to, a police officer who is authorized by the Board of Supervisors to
enforce this article.
MASSAGE — Any method of treatment or therapy of the superficial soft
parts of the body by rubbing, stroking, tapping, pressing, shaking, or
kneading with the hands, feet, or elbow, and whether or not aided by
any mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliances, or supplementary
aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powders,
creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice.
MASSAGE BUSINESS — The administering of a massage in return for
the payment of a fee or other compensation or consideration to the
person administering the massage either directly or indirectly.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any place in the Township where
massages are administered for the payment of a fee or other
compensation or consideration, but not including a hospital, nursing
home, medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, physical
therapist, chiropractor or osteopath, currently licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to include barbershops or beauty
salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck
§ 146-1 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 146-2
138:271
§ 146-3. License requirements.
or shoulders, or any athletic program of an accredited junior and senior
high school or college in which a massage is administered by a trainer
within the scope of such athletic program.
MASSAGE PROVIDER — Any massage establishment as defined herein
or any massage technician as defined herein.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any person who administers a massage to
another as a part of a massage business, but not including a physician,
surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or nurse, currently
licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any coach
and trainer of an athletic program of an accredited junior and senior
high school or college in which a massage is administered by such
coach or trainer within the scope of such athletic program.
PERSON — Any individual, association, firm, partnership, limited
partnership, corporation, trust or other legally recognized entity.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or educational institution
licensed and accredited to operate as a school or educational institution
in the state in which it is located or any school recognized or approved
by the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc.
SEXUAL OR GENTIAL AREA — The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus
or perineum of any person and the vulva and breasts of a female.
B. In this chapter, any word used in the singular shall include the plural,
and any word used as a plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in a massage business (including as a massage
technician) unless such person shall possess a valid license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article, and no person shall operate a
massage establishment at any place within the Township unless a valid
license is issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and
every such establishment.
B. Application.
(1) Fee. Any person desiring to obtain a license to engage in a massage
business or operate a massage establishment shall submit an
application to the Code Enforcement Officer. A fee shall accompany
the submission of the application to defray the costs of
administration and investigation. The amount of the fee shall be
$250 or a different amount as may be from time to time set by
resolution of the Township of Warwick.
(2) Contents. Any person desiring to obtain a license to engage in a
massage business or operate a massage establishment shall file a
fully completed written application with the Code Enforcement
Officer on a form to be provided by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The application form shall include a criminal release form to enable
§ 146-2 WARWICK CODE § 146-3
138:272
§ 146-4. Massage establishment facilities.
Each massage establishment shall comply with the following requirements:
the Code Enforcement Officer to investigate the criminal offense
history of any applicant.
C. Investigation. Applications for licenses under this article shall be
referred to the Warwick Township Police Department, which shall cause
an investigation to be made and report the findings to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Applicants shall cooperate with any investigation
conducted pursuant to the provisions of this article and shall permit
access to the proposed place of business and facilities in conjunction
with such investigation.
D. Granting of license. Within 60 days of the receipt of an application and
fee, the Code Enforcement Officer shall either grant or deny the license
applied for by the applicant. The license shall be granted, provided that:
(1) The proposed massage establishment complies with all applicable
ordinances of the Township, including but not limited to the
building, fire prevention, and zoning ordinances of the Township.62
(2) No person whose name appears on the application, including
owners and prospective employees, has been convicted of or
entered a plea of guilty to any felony or has pleaded guilty to a
felony or has a felony charge currently pending or has forfeited bail
or has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of Section
5902 of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 5902, pertaining to prostitution and related offenses, or
any law of any other jurisdiction involving sexual misconduct.
(3) The massage technician or massage establishment, as applicable,
applies for and obtains any required business licenses and makes
arrangements for the payment of any required business privilege
taxes, occupational privilege taxes, or earned income taxes
imposed by the Township.
E. No person shall be licensed and/or recognized as a massage technician,
by the Township, unless such person shall have completed a course of
study in a recognized school, which has for its purpose the teaching of
the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school
requires at least 70 hours of course study for the issuance of a diploma
or certificate of graduation. In the event that such person was
previously licensed to perform massages in the Township, not having
completed such course of study, at the expiration of such person's
current license, such person shall be issued a provisional license for a
six-month period for the purpose of enrolling in and completing such
course of study.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Uniform Construction Codes; Ch. 89, Fire Prevention; and Ch.
195, Zoning.
§ 146-3 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 146-4
138:273
§ 146-5. Massage establishment operation requirements.
Every massage establishment and every massage technician shall comply
with the following requirements:
A. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
instruments and materials used in the administration of massages.
Such instruments and materials shall be disinfected after every use.
B. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam rooms, sauna rooms,
bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily
disinfected.
C. All walls, ceilings, floors, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, sauna rooms
and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
D. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services.
E. Each massage establishment shall have a minimum of one shower, one
toilet and one washbasin.
F. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, such
massage rooms, dressing facilities, toilet facilities, steam rooms and
sauna rooms as are provided shall be provided as separate facilities for
male and female patrons, and each such separate facility or room shall
be clearly marked as such.
G. Rooms in which massages are to be administered shall have at least 50
square feet of clear floor area and shall maintain a light level of no less
than 20 footcandles as metered at three feet above the surface of the
floor (for illustrative purposes only, such light level is equivalent to light
from a single 40 watt fluorescent light bulb in a fifty-square-foot room).
Lighting in colors other than white shall be prohibited. Such rooms
shall contain a door incapable of being locked from either the exterior
or the interior.
H. No stuffed or upholstered furniture or beds and mattresses shall be
permitted in rooms in which massage is to be administered. Such rooms
shall be equipped with massage tables having a hard surface
impervious to liquids, with a width of no more than three feet and a
length of no more than eight feet. The surface of such tables shall be
positioned at least two feet above the surface of the floor. Such tables
may be equipped with either nondisposable pads or coverings or
disposable pads or coverings not more than 2 1/2 inches thick.
Nondisposable pads or coverings shall be removable, impervious to
liquids and cleanable.
§ 146-4 WARWICK CODE § 146-5
138:274
A. Prohibited conduct. No person other than an employee of the massage
establishment shall be permitted to give massages in such massage
establishment, and all massage technicians giving massages in any
massage establishment shall be licensed as such and shall be deemed to
be employees of the massage establishment for all purposes by the
Borough and shall not be deemed to be independent contractors.
B. Massage establishments shall commence operations and massages may
be administered no earlier than 7:00 a.m. The hours of operations shall
extend no later than 10:00 p.m.
C. A massage establishment shall prominently and publicly display its
license on the premises, and each massage technician's license shall be
available for inspection. Price rates charged for any and all services
shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available
for view, and no charges may be made other than in accordance with
such posted rates.
D. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted to enter
or remain on the premises or receive any massage.
E. Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate
supply of clean towels, linens and coverings. Towels, linens and
coverings shall not be used by or on more than one patron unless they
have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels, linens
and coverings shall not be used by or on more than one patron. Soiled
towels, linens and coverings shall be deposited in approved
receptacles; disposable items shall not be deposited in the same
receptacle as nondisposable items.
F. Instruments used in administering massages shall not be used on more
than one patron unless they have first been disinfected. Massage table
pads and usable table coverings shall be disinfected after each use.
G. Lotions and powder used during the administration of massage shall be
stored separately in containers clearly labeled as to contents and shall
be stored in cabinets used solely for such purpose.
H. Massages shall not be administered to any patrons who have open sores
or other visual signs of contagion or communicable disease.
I. For the purposes of ascertaining violations of this article and
conducting routine inspections, health inspectors, building inspectors,
the Fire Marshal or duly authorized fire code inspectors of the
Township, or police officers of the Warwick Township Police
Department, shall have the right of entry into the premises of any
massage establishment during the hours such establishment is open for
business.
J. If an inspector observes that any massage technician has open sores or
otherwise has reasonable grounds to believe that any massage
technician is infected with a contagious or communicable disease, the
§ 146-5 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 146-5
138:275
§ 146-6. Sale or transfer of massage establishment.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferrable
to another person. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage
establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void. Any person
desiring to continue to operate such massage establishment following the
sale or transfer of any interest shall make application therefor pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
inspector shall have the right to suspend such technician from
practicing or administering massages until such time as the massage
technician furnishes a doctor's certificate showing the massage
technician to be free of any contagious or communicable disease.
K. The owner or licensee or duly authorized manager shall be on duty at
all times during the hours such establishment is open for business, such
owner, licensee or manager being able to be identified by wearing
prominently an identification badge identifying as such owner, licensee
or manager.
L. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed on the premises,
including but not limited to the serving, either for sale or otherwise, or
the possession of any alcoholic beverages, other than in a lunch or
breakroom for employees only.
M. Animals, except for guide animals for the handicapped, shall not be
permitted within massage establishments.
N. All employees, including massage technicians, shall only perform
massages and have contact with patrons while fully clothed in clean and
opaque clothing that fully covers the body from the shoulders to the
thighs and is no shorter than six inches above the knee. The wearing of
any form of lingerie as the sole garment shall be prohibited.
O. No person, other than employees of the massage establishment, shall
remain on the premises of a massage establishment more than one hour
after closing. No massage establishment shall be used as a dwelling
unit or for residential purposes by any massage technician, and to
prevent the use of a massage establishment for use as a dwelling unit,
all persons, including employees, shall vacate the premises within two
hours after closing and shall not reenter the premises more than two
hours prior to opening.
P. Massage technicians shall wash their hands immediately prior to and
subsequent of the administration of any massage.
Q. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place
his or her hands upon, touch, fondle or otherwise have any physical
contact including massaging a sexual or genital part of any other
person or to offer to so touch any person. It shall be unlawful for any
person in a massage establishment to expose his or her sexual or
genital area to any other person.
§ 146-5 WARWICK CODE § 146-7
138:276
§ 146-7. License revocation.
Every license issued under the provisions of this article is subject to
revocation for violation any of the provisions of this article. Said license may
be revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer after notice of the basis for
such revocation. The license holder shall have the right to appeal from such
proposed revocation to the Township Council and request a hearing. Notice
of revocation shall be given in writing and shall be served at least 10 days
prior to the effective date of the revocation by certified mail, by personal
service on the license holder or by posting the notice upon the entrance
to the massage establishment. The notice shall advise the license holder of
the right to appeal the proposed revocation. A hearing shall be held before
the Township Council, and the license holder shall have the right to be
represented at such hearing and to produce evidence.
§ 146-8. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
one year after the date of issuance. No later than one month previous to the
expiration, licensees shall make application for renewal of said license.
§ 146-9. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the refusal or revocation of a license as provided under this
article, the owner of a massage establishment or any officer thereof shall be
liable for a civil penalty of not less than $1,000 for each and any violation of
any provision of this article on the part of any agent, servant, or employee of
such owner of a massage establishment in a civil proceeding brought before
a District Justice by the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. It shall be an affirmative defense that the violation
alleged occurred without the knowledge of or outside the control of such
owner or officer.
§ 146-10. Time for compliance.
Businesses subject to the provisions of this article operating in the Township
of Warwick as of the time of the effective date of this article shall have five
days from said effective date in which to comply with the provisions of this
article.
§ 146-7 PERMITS AND LICENSES § 146-10
138:277
Chapter 147
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property registration — See Ch. 151,
Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 147-1. Registry established.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township hereby establishes a real
estate registry for Warwick Township, which registry shall include the list
of tax parcels and property owners set forth in the records provided to
Warwick Township by the Tax Assessment Office of Bucks County.
§ 147-2. Registration required.
After the effective date of this chapter, every grantee, devisee, person or
entity acquiring title to real property in Warwick Township in any manner
whatsoever shall, within two business days of recording the deed or
conveyance with the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, register the deed or
conveyance with Warwick Township by hand delivering or sending a copy of
the deed or conveyance, as recorded, to Warwick Township by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 147-3. Failure or refusal to deliver deed or conveyance of property
deemed a violation.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to
deliver or send to Warwick Township, in the time and manner set forth in
§ 147-2 above, a deed or conveyance of property within Warwick Township.
§ 147-4. Registration fee.
A fee, not to exceed $10 per deed, shall be charged and must be paid to
Warwick Township for the registration of each deed and/or instrument of
conveyance.
§ 147-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or any other entity capable of
holding title to real property pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania who or which shall neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter, upon such a finding in a summary proceeding
before a District Justice for Warwick Township, shall be subject to pay a
fine not to exceed $600 per violation and for the payment of all court
costs. In the event the fine is not paid within 30 days, said violator shall
§ 146-10 WARWICK CODE § 147-5
138:278
be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for punishment of summary
offenses.
§ 147-6. Implementation; notification of adoption.
The Warwick Township Manager is authorized to establish rules and
regulations and application forms as necessary to implement the provisions
of this chapter. The Warwick Township Manager is also directed to deliver
a certified copy of this chapter to the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds and
the Bucks County Board of Realtors advising that office of the adoption of
this chapter.
Chapter 149
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95. Littering — See Ch. 111.
§ 149-1. Title. [Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14]
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Township of Warwick Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 149-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored in whole or in part
by a mandated municipality or conducted within a mandated municipality
and sponsored privately which include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200
or more individuals per day.
COMPOSTING — A controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to
produce a relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
§ 147-5 RECYCLING § 149-2
149:279
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as "white ledger" paper and computer
paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTION ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility engaged
in services, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar materials but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE — Any occupied residential structure having
in excess of four dwelling units per structure, including without limitation
apartments, townhouses, condominiums and cooperatives.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building owned or
operated by a local government or county government, local government
or county government authority, state government or agency or federal
government or agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act63 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded, however, are newspapers which have been soiled.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 149-2 WARWICK CODE § 149-2
149:280
of rights and duties. In any provisions of this chapter prescribing a fine,
imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term
"person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may
stipulate specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR/HAULER — A person providing collection, hauling
and disposal services for municipal waste and/or recyclable materials on a
private contract basis.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the municipality
to be recycled. This list of materials is specified in the recycling regulations
resulting from this chapter, are designated in § 149-4 hereof and may be
revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the municipality.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reuseable materials
other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling having up to
four dwelling units per structure from which a municipal or private hauler
collects solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — All refuse, garbage and rubbish and other discarded solid
material normally collected by municipal or private haulers.
§ 149-3. Program established. [Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-14]
There is hereby established a program requiring the separation from
municipal waste of recyclable materials and leaf waste generated at
residences, multifamily residences, commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and community activities.
§ 149-4. Separation of recyclables; placement for disposal.
[Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14]
A. Residences. Designated recyclable materials generated at residences
shall be placed at the curb separate from municipal waste for collection
at such times and dates and from such containers as may be established
by regulation. Designated recyclable materials for residences are
aluminum cans, clear glass containers and newspaper.
B. Multifamily residences. Recyclable materials generated at multifamily
residences shall be placed in appropriate containers, separate from
municipal waste. Collection receptacles of sufficient size for recyclable
materials shall be placed in easily accessible locations, such as storage
§ 149-2 RECYCLING § 149-4
149:281
areas or areas where municipal waste is presently collected. Recyclable
materials shall be stored in accordance with State Fire Code
regulations and all federal, state and local health and safety laws and
ordinances until collection. Recyclable materials shall be collected at
least once per month. Designated recyclable materials for multifamily
dwellings are aluminum cans, clear glass containers and newspaper.
C. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and community
activities. The owners/operators of commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments or sponsors/organizers of community
activities shall separate designated recyclable materials from municipal
waste. Recyclable materials shall be placed in appropriate containers.
Collection receptacles shall be placed in all buildings, in all floors and
wings thereof, in each office and in all areas where food is served or
consumed, including without limitation cafeterias, lunchrooms, fastfood
areas and vending machine rooms. Recyclable materials shall be
stored in accordance with State Fire Code regulations and all federal,
state or local health and safety laws and ordinances until collection.
Recyclable materials shall be collected at least once per month.
(1) Designated recyclable materials for commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments and community activities are
aluminum cans, high-grade office paper and corrugated paper.
(2) Exemption: Owners/operators of commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments may obtain an exemption from the
requirements of this chapter if those persons/establishments
otherwise provide for recycling high-grade office paper, aluminum,
corrugated paper, leaf waste and any other materials that such
establishments are required to recycle. To qualify for an exemption
under this subsection, commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments must provide written documentation on or before
January 20 for the previous calendar year. This documentation may
be in the form of one of the following:
(a) Copies of weight receipts or statements which consolidate
such information.
(b) A report from the provider of recycling collection services
which identifies the amount of each material collected and
marketed. The type and weight of recyclables generated by an
individual establishment may be approximated based on a
representative sample of its source-separated materials.
Where recyclables from several establishments are collected in
the same vehicle, an individual establishment's contribution to
the load may be apportioned. Only the weight of materials
marketed for recycling purposes can be credited to an
establishment.
(c) A report from the provider of waste collection services that
identifies the type and weight of each recyclable material
§ 149-4 WARWICK CODE § 149-4
149:282
§ 149-5. Leaf waste. [Added 9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14]
Persons shall separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated
within the municipality. No leaf waste shall be placed for collection unless
the leaf waste is to be composted.
§ 149-6. Private collectors/haulers. [Added 9-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-14]
§ 149-7. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s) unauthorized by
the municipality to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable material. Each such collection in violation hereof
collected and marketed in cases where recyclables are
commingled with the establishment's waste. The type and
weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment
may be approximated based on a representative sample of
its waste. Where materials from several establishments are
collected in the same vehicle, an individual establishment's
contribution to the load may be apportioned. Only the weight
of materials marketed for recycling purposes can be credited
to an establishment.
A. All municipal waste and recyclable materials and leaf waste
accumulated at residences, multifamily residences, commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments and at community activities
shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of only by private collectors/
haulers under contract with or licensed by the municipality. When
approved by the municipality, commercial, institutional or municipal
establishments may collect, convey and dispose of municipal waste and/
or recyclable material generated by said establishments.
B. All licensed private collectors/haulers shall file with the municipality an
annual report due January 20 of all solid waste and recyclable material
collection and separation activities performed by the licensee within
the municipality during the previous calendar year at each commercial,
institutional or municipal establishments and community activity
providing the following information:
(1) The type and amount of compostable materials collected within the
reporting period.
(2) The type and amount of recyclable materials collected within the
reporting period.
(3) The type and amount of all solid waste, compostable and recyclable
materials collected within the reporting period.
(4) The name and address of the private collector.
§ 149-4 RECYCLING § 149-7
149:283
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 149-8. Enforcement and administration.
The Board of Supervisors is authorized and directed to enforce this chapter.
The same is hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate
reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection
of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof and any other
matters required to implement this chapter. The Board of Supervisors may
change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and regulations
at any time.
§ 149-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-14]
§ 149-10. Agreements with collectors.
The Board of Supervisors may enter into agreements with public or private
agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable
materials from curbside. Until or unless the entry into such an agreement,
this chapter shall not be in effect.
§ 149-11. Alternative collection of recyclables. [Amended 9-24-1990
by Ord. No. 90-14]
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations that are licensed or authorized by the municipality in its
recycling regulations. These materials must either be delivered to the
individual's or organization's site or they may be placed at the curb for
collection by said individual or organization on days not indicated as
A. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter or of any regulation promulgated
pursuant hereto pertaining to the separation, storage, collection,
transportation or disposal of recyclable materials or municipal waste
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to payment of court costs and
a fine not to exceed $10 upon first conviction, $25 upon second
conviction and $50 upon third or subsequent convictions. No
prosecutions hereunder shall be instituted for offenses less than 90
days from the effective date of this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person who violates this chapter by
collecting or picking up or causing to be collected or picked up without
the appropriate municipal license recyclable materials shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to payment of court costs and a fine not to
exceed $300.
C. Owners, landlords and agents for owners or landlords who comply with
this chapter shall not be liable for the noncompliance of tenants/
occupants of their property.
§ 149-7 WARWICK CODE § 149-11
149:284
recyclable material collection days by the municipality. Said individuals
or organizations may not collect recyclable materials on or immediately
preceding (within 24 hours) a regularly scheduled curbside collection day.
Chapter 151
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 57. Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
61.
§ 149-11 RENTAL PROPERTY § 149-11
151:285

ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-164]
§ 151-1. Purpose; establishment of registry.
The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors, in order to collect Township
taxes in a more efficient and equitable manner, hereby enacts the following
article requiring owners of certain leased properties situate in the
boundaries of the Township to report the name and address of the tenant
or tenants of the leased property, and prescribing a system of tenant
registration.
§ 151-2. Registration required.
It is hereby ordained that all owners of property leased for either
residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial occupancy shall annually
report the home address of residential tenants, and/or the principal office
address of commercial, institutional, or industrial tenants. Such reporting
shall occur by January 31 of each new year. This requirement shall be
independent of all other sections of this article including §§ 151-3 and
151-4 regarding preparation and mailing of forms.
§ 151-3. Appointment of Registration Officer.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township shall, within 45 days of
the adoption of this article, appoint a person or persons whose duty shall
be to compile and maintain a compilation of all residential, commercial,
institutional, and industrial real estate leased within the boundaries of the
Township. In addition, the above appointed person or persons shall maintain
a compilation of the tenants occupying said real estate. Vacancies in the
office of the registration official shall be filled within 30 days.
§ 151-4. Forms for registration.65
Warwick Township shall provide forms to be used for the registration of
tenants in leased properties within the boundaries of Warwick Township.
The preparation of these forms shall be accomplished within 60 days of
the adoption of this article. The initial mailing of these forms shall be
accomplished within 90 days of the adoption of this article. All subsequent
mailings shall be accomplished biannually, at a date deemed appropriate
by the Registration Officer. Also required on the form shall be the name or
names and addresses of tenants who have vacated the property within six
months of the date of the mailing of the form. Owners of real property which
is currently leased, or which has been released during the previous calendar
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Registration, adopted
1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2.
65.Editor's Note: Said forms are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 151-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 151-4
151:287
year, shall complete the form and forward it to the Township within 15 days
of the receipt of same.
§ 151-5. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this article are declared to be for the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the Township and persons violating any provisions
of this article, upon conviction before the District Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas of Bucks County, shall be subject to a minimum fine not less
than $600. Each year within which a report is not filed shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
§ 151-4 WARWICK CODE § 151-5
151:288
Chapter 153
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and Sewer Resource Panel — See Ch.
29.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
§ 151-5 RENTAL PROPERTY § 151-5
151:289

ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 91-7]
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 153-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The duly elected or appointed governing body
of the Township.
COMMERCIAL USE — Any building from which a wholesale or retail
business is conducted.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its
successor.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site, as defined in 25 Pa. Code § 71.63. "Holding tanks"
include but are not limited to the following:
INDUSTRIAL USE — Any building from which a nonresidential or
noncommercial use is permitted within the Limited Industrial Zoning
District in the Township.
A. To protect, benefit and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of Warwick Township by establishing procedures for
approving, on a case-by-case basis, the use, care, emptying and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain certain
sewage from certain residential, commercial, institutional and
industrial uses where connection to sanitary sewers is anticipated
within two years from the date a permit is issued.
B. To ensure proper maintenance, use and care of holding tanks now in
existence.
C. To authorize the adoption of rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a
water carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage by
methods other than pressure.
C.
§ 153-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-2
151:291
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any building from which a use such as a church,
firehouse or public building not involving residential or commercial use
is permitted. Specifically excluded are dormitories and other quasiinstitutional
buildings designed for human occupancy.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any building constructed for the primary purpose of
housing individuals or families, such as a house, apartment or dormitory.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products,
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings. Human
blood or the results of medical procedures, industrial processed wastes,
chemicals or hazardous waste are included within the definition only if
specifically authorized in writing by the Authority. Specifically excluded
from the definition are any substances which are harmful to the public
health, harmful to animal or aquatic life, harmful to the use of water for
domestic water supply or recreation or in any way harmful or deleterious to
the Authority's sewage treatment plant.
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 153-3. Rights and privileges granted.
The Township Board of Supervisors and its duly authorized agents are
hereby authorized and empowered to manage, regulate and control the
use, care and maintenance of holding tanks within the Township and the
collection, transportation and disposal of holding tank sewage within the
Township.
§ 153-4. Rules and regulations.
All rules and regulations adopted by the Township pursuant to this article
shall be in conformity with the provisions hereof, other ordinances of the
Township and all applicable laws and regulations of Bucks County and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and administrative agencies thereof and
the provisions of 25 Pa. Code Chapters 71 and 73.
§ 153-5. Collection and transportation.
All sewage from any residential, commercial, institutional or industrial use
utilizing a holding tank shall be collected under the direction and control
of the Township or its duly authorized agents and the disposal thereof shall
be made only at the sewage treatment plant owned and operated by the
Authority or such other site as many be specifically authorized in writing by
the Authority and the Bucks County Department of Health.
§ 153-2 WARWICK CODE § 153-6
151:292
§ 153-6. Procedure for obtaining holding tank permit.
Before a holding tank may be lawfully constructed, installed or used to
service a residential, commercial, institutional or industrial use on any
property in the Township, the property owner shall:
A. File an application for a holding tank permit with the Township and
ultimately obtain a suitability determination from the Township,
indicating that the issuance of a holding tank permit will be in
accordance with the Township sewer plan and all the applicable
governmental regulations relating to the same.
B. Apply for and obtain, at the property owner's cost and expense,
approval from the DEP for the necessary revisions to the Township's Act
53766 official plan and DEP approval of the replacement schedule of the
holding tank by public sewers.
C. Apply for and obtain an on-lot sewage permit for the holding tank from
the Bucks County Department of Health in accordance with the
regulations under Act 537.
D. File with the Authority a copy of the Bucks County Department of
Health application and permit and a sketch showing the location and
design of the on-lot sewage system on the property.
E. Obtain the Authority's written approval of and provide evidence to the
Authority of a fully executed written agreement between the property
owner and a contractor approved by the Authority, which agreement
shall provide for regular cleaning and emptying of the holding tank and
for the hauling and disposal of holding tank sewage to the Authority's
treatment plant or such other site as is approved by the Authority and
the Bucks County Department of Health.
F. Submit such additional information as the Authority Engineer may
require and direct in order to complete the Authority's review of the
holding tank permit application. The approval of the Engineer for the
Authority, indicating that the holding tank complies with the provisions
of this article and all other applicable regulations and laws, shall be one
of the prerequisites and conditions to the granting of a holding tank
permit.
G. Deposit the sum of money or provide financial security, in the form and
amount as provided by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
to this article and satisfactory to the Solicitor of the Authority. These
funds will be held by the Authority and used in the event that the
Township or the Authority is required to obtain or perform any services
in any way relating to the use, care, cleaning, emptying and
maintenance of the holding tank upon default of the provisions of the
issuance of the holding tank permit. The Township or the Authority shall
have the right to utilize the entire escrow deposit to perform such
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 153-6 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-6
151:293
§ 153-7. Duties of property owner.
The owner of a property who utilizes a holding tank and to whom a holding
tank permit is issued shall:
services relating to the holding tank or as reimbursement for its
expenses incidental to the costs thereof in order to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this article and other applicable regulations
of the Bucks County Department of Health or DEP, and the property
owner shall indemnify, defend and save the Township and the authority
harmless on account of the same.
H. Pay all fees required by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
to this article and in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by
the authority and/or the township, 67 from time to time, regarding
holding tanks.
I. Execute an agreement to indemnify and hold the Authority and the
Township harmless in the event of any claim against the Township and/
or the Authority arising from the installation, use, maintenance or
operation of the holding tank in violation of this article or other law or
regulation of applicable governmental agency.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformity with ordinances of the
Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Township, the Authority and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and all the applicable agencies thereof.
B. Permit only persons authorized and approved by the authority to
collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
C. Clean, empty, repair and maintain the holding tank in order to prevent
health hazards, including, without limitation, odors, leaks, overflows
and similar problems, and provide to the Authority, at least quarterly,
detailed records regarding all services performed and required to be
performed with regard to the same.
D. Provide and maintain access to the holding tank for purposes of
inspection, cleaning, emptying and hauling its contents, including, if
necessary, by the Township, the Authority or its duly authorized agents.
E. Pay all costs incurred and charged by the Authority and the Township
related to permitting, installing, repairing, maintaining, cleaning,
emptying and inspecting the holding tank.
F. Comply with and abide by any written directives issued by the Township
or the Authority pertaining to the holding tank.
G. Otherwise abide by and comply with the provisions of this article and all
rules and regulations promulgated by the Township and/or the
67.Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 153-6 WARWICK CODE § 153-7
151:294
§ 153-8. Delegation of administrative responsibility.
Without limiting its right to enforce the provisions of this article, the
Township hereby designates the Authority as its agent to administer the
provisions of this article. The Authority shall receive, review and retain
the aforesaid quarterly records required to be submitted by the property
owner as well as the holding tank pumping receipts. The Authority shall
perform an inspection of all holding tanks existing in the Township, at the
property owner's expense, at least annually but more frequently if violations
of this article shall occur pertaining to such holding tank. The results of
such inspection shall be retained by the Authority and may form the basis
for a written direction by the Authority to a property owner to correct any
malfunction in the holding tank and/or to prevent or prohibit any health
hazard resulting from the use, maintenance or operation of a holding tank
in violation of this article.
§ 153-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 153-10. Connection to public sewers.
Where sanitary sewer lines are to be constructed pursuant to an approved
development plan and a holding tank lawfully is permitted to be used prior
to the availability of public sewers, such sewer lines shall be installed
according to specifications of the Authority and capped until the public
sanitary sewer lines become available for use. The holding tank must be
Authority or any other applicable governmental agency relating to or
governing holding tanks.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, including a written directive by
the Authority or the Township regarding a holding tank or corrective
action necessary to cure or eliminate a holding tank malfunction,
overflow or a public health hazard resulting from the operation or
existence of the holding tank, shall, upon conviction in summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day for each day that a violation occurs or continues to
occur.
B. Recognizing that the Township and the Authority ultimately are
responsible for the maintenance of holding tanks in order to prevent
public health hazards, any person violating any provision of this article,
the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto or any Authority
or Township written directive concerning holding tanks shall be liable
to the Township or the Authority, as applicable, for all costs, including
the reasonable attorney's fees, expended or incurred by the Township
or the Authority to enforce the terms of this article or to perform any
actions with regard to a holding tank which should have been
performed by any person to whom a holding tank permit has or should
have been issued under this article.
§ 153-7 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-10
151:295
disconnected and disposed of in accordance with the Township holding
tank permit, and the property owner shall make proper connection to
the sanitary sewer in accordance with the written notice to make such
connection sent by the Authority or the Township, as the case may be. The
schedule for connecting to public sewers shall be approved by the DEP.
§ 153-11. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to other remedies provided in this article, any violation of this
article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Township by
seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 153-12. Duration of permit; termination; application for renewal.
A. A holding tank permit shall be issued for a period of no longer than two
years but shall terminate immediately upon written notice from the
Township or the Authority in the event of any of the following:
(1) Availability of public sewers to the property for which a holding
tank permit has been issued.
(2) Any violation of the provisions of this article, the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant hereto or regulations of any
governmental agency having jurisdiction over the holding tank.
(3) Failure to correct or cure a malfunction in the operation, use or
care of the holding tank or to abate a public health hazard in
accordance with and after written notice thereof from the Authority
or the Township.
B. An application for the renewal of a holding tank permit shall be
submitted to the Township and the Authority at least 90 days prior to
the expiration of an existing holding tank permit in any case where the
holding tank permittee has not been directed to connect to public
sanitary sewer service prior to the expiration of the holding tank
permit. In such case, the determination of renewal of the holding tank
permit and the term thereof shall be determined by the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable
regulations of governmental agencies having jurisdiction over holding
tanks.
§ 153-10 WARWICK CODE § 153-12
151:296
ARTICLE II
On-Lot Sewage Management Facilities
[Adopted 10-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7]
§ 153-13. Title; authority; purpose.
§ 153-14. Definitions.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance
Providing for an On-Lot Sewage Management Program for Warwick
Township."
B. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (act of
June 27, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as "Act
537"), it is the power and the duty of Warwick Township to provide for
adequate sewage treatment and disposal facilities and for the
protection of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
Warwick Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and
abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further allow intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 — The act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A person with demonstrated knowledge and
experience regarding on-lot sewage disposal system design, operation,
and maintenance who is authorized by the Warwick Township Board of
Supervisors to carry out the provisions of this article. An authorized
agent must be a certified sewage enforcement officer.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Warwick Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which
serves two or more lots, or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and
uses a system of piping, tanks, or other facilities for collecting, treating,
and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area, retaining tank, or
cesspool.
§ 153-13 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-14
151:297
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which
serves a single lot and a single equivalent dwelling unit and uses a
system of piping, tanks, or other facilities for collecting, treating, and
disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area, spray field, retaining
tank, or cesspool.
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEM (IRSIS) —
An individual sewage system which serves a single dwelling and which
treats and disposes of sewage through using a system of piping,
treatment tanks, and soil renovation through spray irrigation.
INITIAL TREATMENT UNIT — A term used to describe the on-lot
disposal system receiving unit to which sewage is delivered from a
sewage generating facility. The term includes but is not limited to septic
tanks, aerobic treatment units, and cesspools.
LIQUID WASTE — Septage pumped from septic tanks, cesspools,
holding tanks, privies, or chemical toilets which does not include any
toxic, industrial, or hazardous wastes.
LIQUID WASTE HAULER — Any person engaged in the business of
pumping and transporting liquid waste within Bucks County. Each
vehicle used for such purpose shall be licensed by the Bucks County
Health Department and shall also be registered with Warwick
Township. Haulers are required to complete an inspection form every
time they service an on-lot system in Warwick Township. Haulers will
be provided with an inspection form upon registration with Warwick
Township.
LOT — A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the
site of one or more buildings and any building accessory thereto or for
any other purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor
including any land within the right-of-way of a public street upon which
said lot abuts, even if the ownership to such right-of-way is in the owner
of the lot. A "lot," for the purpose of this article may or may not coincide
with a lot of record. A lot shall front on a public street.
MAINTENANCE CONTRACTOR — A private independent contractor
who has been given training by the original equipment manufacturer
of applicable sewage system components, has been authorized by the
manufacturer to service said components, or has demonstrated
technical expertise in the field of on-lot sewage system maintenance.
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground,
into groundwaters of this Commonwealth, or into surface waters of
this commonwealth or in any manner causes a nuisance or hazard
to the public health or pollution of groundwater or surface water or
contamination of public or private drinking water wells.
§ 153-14 WARWICK CODE § 153-14
151:298
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES ACT 537 PLAN — A comprehensive
plan for the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted
by the Board and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any community on-lot sewage
system or individual on-lot sewage system, as defined herein.
PERSON — An individual or an unincorporated organization,
partnership, association, corporation, trust or estate.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate
disposal of the sewage at another site. This term is synomomous with
the term "holding tank."
SEPTAGE — The residual scum, sludge, and other materials pumped
from, but not limited to, initial treatment units, other treatment tanks,
retaining tanks, pump tanks, and the systems they serve.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
the "Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by the
Pa. DEP under Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 72, Subchapter D.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of the
Township adopted by the Board as an area for which a sewage
management program is to be implemented.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal
and administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of
this article, the Sewage Facilities Act, the Clean Streams Law, the
regulations promulgated thereunder and such other requirements
adopted by the Board to effectively enforce and administer this article.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or divisees, transfer of ownership or building lot
development.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warwick, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 153-14 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-14
151:299
§ 153-15. Applicability.
§ 153-16. Registration and permit requirements.
B. For the purposes of this article, any term which is not defined herein
shall have that meaning attributed to it under the Sewage Facilities Act
and regulations promulgated thereto.
A. From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply to all
portions of the Township served by on-lot sewage disposal systems. The
implementation of the provisions shall be in accordance with the
following time periods for the areas indicated on the most recent
version of the Sewage Management Districts Map:
(1) District I: one-year cycle to begin from the effective date of this
article.
(2) District II: one-year cycle to begin 365 days (one year) after the
effective date of this article.
(3) District III: one-year cycle to begin 730 days (two years) after the
effective date of this article.
B. Within such an area or areas, the provisions of this article shall apply to
all persons owning any property serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal
system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage
disposal systems. Beginning with District I and the remaining schedule
defined above, and within 90 days of written notification by Warwick
Township or its authorized agent, all persons with an on-lot sewage
disposal system shall be required to register with Warwick Township
and complete the required registration form and submit it to Warwick
Township. The Township may establish a fee for registration of on-lot
sewage disposal systems.
A. No building permit shall be issued for a new building which will utilize
an on-lot sewage disposal system until Act 537 planning approval has
been issued by the Department and the appropriate on-lot sewage
disposal system permit has been issued by the Bucks County Health
Department SEO. Proof of on-lot sewage disposal system permit
issuance shall be presented to the Township in the form of a properly
executed permit signed by the Bucks County Health Department SEO.
B. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building which will
utilize an on-lot sewage disposal system until the sewage disposal
system has been installed and the completed installation is approved by
the Bucks County Health Department SEO. Proof of on-lot sewage
disposal system final installation approval shall be presented to the
Township in the form of a properly executed permit signed by the Bucks
County Health Department SEO.
C. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
§ 153-14 WARWICK CODE § 153-16
151:300
§ 153-17. Inspections.
§ 153-18. Operation requirements.
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's owner
receives a permit from the Bucks County Health Department SEO for
alteration or replacement of the existing sewage disposal system or
until the structure's owner and the appropriate officials of the Township
receive written notification from the Bucks County Health Department
SEO that such a permit will not be required. The Bucks County Health
Department SEO shall determine whether the proposed alteration or
conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage flows.
D. Sewage permits may be issued only by a Sewage Enforcement Officer
employed by the Bucks County Health Department per the
requirements of Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 72.
A. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the Township or
its authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of
this article.
B. Such inspection may include a physical tour of the property and
examination of any or all on-lot sewage disposal system components for
the purpose of identifying maintenance needs and functional status.
C. An authorized agent, with the approval of the Township, and with
proper legal authority, shall have the right to enter upon land for the
purposes of inspections described in this section.
A. In accordance with the requirements of Pa. Code, Title 25, Chapter 73,
Standards for On-Lot Sewage Treatment Facilities, only normal
domestic wastes, including kitchen, bathroom, and laundry wastes and
water softner backwash water, shall be discharged to any on-lot sewage
disposal system. Examples of the types of wastes that may harm or
increase the need for pumping or repair of an on-lot sewage disposal
system include, but are not limited to, the following, which are
prohibited from being discharged to any on-lot sewage disposal system:
(1) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(2) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners),
acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other
solvents.
(3) Clean surface water or groundwater, including water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
(4) Wastewater resulting from hair treatment at beauty shops.
(5) Any nonbiodegradable materials.
§ 153-16 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-18
151:301
§ 153-19. Maintenance.
B. All new construction must comply with the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC) requirements for water-conserving plumbing fixtures and
fittings. The Township may require the installation of water-conserving
devices, consistent with the UCC, and other operation and/or
maintenance procedures to improve the performance of on-lot; sewage
disposal systems.
A. Beginning with District I, as defined in § 153-15, each person owning a
building served by an on-lot sewage disposal system shall have the
initial treatment unit pumped within one year of the effective date of
this article by a Bucks County Health Department and Township
registered liquid waste hauler. Thereafter, that person shall have the
system pumped at least once every three years or whenever an
inspection reveals that the initial treatment unit is filled with solids or
with scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth. Liquid waste haulers are
required to complete, on a standard form prepared by Warwick
Township, the results of a visual inspection pursuant to Subsection C(8)
of this section. These forms may be utilized by the Township to
document all pumping and maintenance requirements and remedies
described herein. Copies of the form shall be provided to the owner by
the licensed liquid waste hauler.
B. The required pumping frequency may be modified at the discretion of
the Township if the initial treatment unit is undersized, if an inspection
reveals solids or scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank, if
the hydraulic load on the system increases significantly above average,
if a garbage grinder is used in the building, if the system malfunctions
or for other good cause shown. If any person can prove that such
person's tank had been pumped within one year of the effective date of
this article, then that person's initial required pumping may be delayed
to conform to the general three-year frequency requirement, except
where an inspection reveals a need for shorter pumping intervals.
C. All on-lot sewage disposal system pumping shall be performed in
accordance with Bucks County Health Department regulations and
shall also conform to the following minimum standards, unless other
standards are specified by an equipment manufacturer:
(1) At all times, the pumper truck operator's personal safety, as well as
protection of the environment and the landowner's property, shall
receive the highest priority.
(2) Tanks shall only be pumped from or through the manhole or access
port (i.e., the largest tank opening).
(3) Tanks shall not be pumped from or through the observation or
inspection port.
§ 153-18 WARWICK CODE § 153-19
151:302
(4) When necessary to break up solids, backwashing with clean water
or material of a similar nature already on board the pumper truck
may be employed. Mechanical means (scraping, raking, etc.) are
not necessary but may be employed, provided that appropriate
safeguards are taken to prevent injury.
(5) When backwashing, care shall be taken not to fill or refill the tank
to a level greater than 12 inches below the elevation of the outlet
pipe.
(6) No liquids or solids are to be discharged into or through the outlet
pipe.
(7) Tanks shall be deemed to be cleaned when all organic solids are
removed and the total average liquid depth remaining in the tank is
less than one inch.
(8) Every pumping shall include a visual inspection by the maintenance
contractor or liquid waste hauler to determine the presence and
condition of treatment tank baffles, the physical condition of the
treatment tank, and the absorption field, as applicable. It shall be
the responsibility of each resident to submit this form to Warwick
Township within 30 days of the inspection.
(9) At all times, and in all phases of operations, the maintenance
contractor shall comply with all laws and regulations regarding the
activities associated with on-lot sewage disposal system
maintenance and disposal of materials removed therefrom.
D. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to the Township
within six months of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, service
receipts shall be submitted to the Township at the intervals specified by
the manufacturer's recommendations or by agreement.
E. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which utilizes any components or technologies deemed by DEP
to require more-detailed operation and maintenance requirements than
provided for in this article, including but not limited to individual
residential spray irrigation systems (IRSIS), alternate systems, or
experimental systems, shall be further subject to the maintenance
responsibilities recommended by DEP for said system. These
responsibilities shall be memorialized in individual operation and
maintenance agreements for each such use, to which both the Township
and the property owner shall be party. The Township may impose
additional requirements as deemed necessary, including but not limited
to collection of an annual fee and additional financial security.
§ 153-19 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-19
151:303
§ 153-20. System rehabilitation.
F. Surface contouring shall be required as necessary to direct surface
water and drainageways away from all components of on-lot sewage
disposal systems.
G. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed, including
but not limited to providing reasonable access to the initial treatment
unit, cleaning and unclogging of piping, servicing and the repair of
mechanical and electrical equipment, leveling of distribution boxes,
tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees, etc.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. Any person owning a building
served by an on-lot sewage disposal system determined to be in a state
of malfunction by the Township's authorized agent or the Bucks County
Health Department SEO shall, after authorization of the Township,
perform all corrective measures required by the authorized agent or
Bucks County Health Department SEO to abate the malfunction. The
authorized agent, with authorization of the Township, or Bucks County
Health Department SEO shall have the authority to require abatement
of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or
otherwise altering or replacing the system's initial treatment unit,
expanding the existing disposal areas, replacing the existing disposal
area, replacing the system with a retaining tank, frequent pumping, or
any other alternative appropriate for the specific site.
B. In lieu of or in combination with the remedies described in this section,
the Bucks County Health Department's Sewage Enforcement Officer
and/or the Township may require the installation of water-conservation
equipment and the institution of water-conservation practices in
structures served. Water-using devices and appliances in the structure
may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving appurtenances or
they may be required to be replaced by water-conserving devices.
C. Should none of the remedies described in this section be totally
effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The authorized agent, with authorization of the
Township or the Bucks County Health Department, may require
whatever action is necessary to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to
the extent necessary.
D. There may arise geographic areas where numerous on-lot sewage
disposal systems are known or are suspected to be malfunctioning. A
resolution of these area-wide problems may necessitate detailed
planning and a revision to the portion of the sewage facilities plan
pertaining to areas affected by such malfunctions. When a DEP
authorized official sewage facilities plan revision has been undertaken,
mandatory repair or replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage
§ 153-19 WARWICK CODE § 153-20
151:304
§ 153-21. Retaining tanks.
§ 153-22. Liens.
The Township, upon written notice from an authorized agent or from the
Bucks County Health Department's Sewage Enforcement Officer that an
imminent health hazard exists due to failure of property owner to maintain
an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided under the terms of this article,
shall have the authority to perform, or contract to have performed, the work
required by the authorized agent or the Bucks County Health Department's
Sewage Enforcement Officer. The owner shall be charged for the work
performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance
with law.
§ 153-23. Disposal of septage.
disposal systems within the area affected by the revision may be
delayed, pending the outcome of the plan revision process. However,
immediate corrective action may be compelled whenever a malfunction,
as determined by the Bucks County Health Department, Department, or
authorized agent, represents a serious public health or environmental
threat.
A. Retaining tanks shall only be utilized as needed to remedy a
malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal system when it has been
determined by the Bucks County Health Department SEO and the
Township that no other remedy is viable.
B. Retaining tank installation and use shall be subject to all the
requirements of Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 71.63 (relating to retaining
tanks) and the requirements of the Bucks County Health Department
and Warwick Township Ordinance 91-7.68
C. Any person owning a building served by a retaining tank shall annually
provide to the Township a copy of a maintenance contract with an
authorized maintenance contractor. For the purposes of this section, a
maintenance contractor shall be a Bucks County Health Department
licensed liquid waste hauler. The contract shall provide for regular
removal of the retaining tank contents in accordance with this section
and with a frequency sufficient to prevent the contents from
overflowing on the ground surface and shall further specify the Bucks
County Health Department license number of the maintenance
contractor.
A. All septage originating within the Sewage Management District shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
68.Editor's Note: See Art. I, Holding Tanks, of this chapter.
§ 153-20 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-23
151:305
§ 153-24. Administration.
§ 153-25. Appeals.
B. Liquid waste haulers operating within the Sewage Management District
shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101-6018.1003), all other applicable laws, and Bucks County
Health Department regulations.
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Township shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees may include an authorized
agent and may include an administrator and such other persons as may
be necessary. The Township may also contract with private qualified
persons or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. All records, reports, files and other written materials relating to the
inspection, operation and maintenance of on-lot sewage disposal
systems in the Sewage Management District shall become the property
of, and be maintained by the Township.
D. The Board or authorized agent, following authorization of the Board of
Supervisors, shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article.
E. The Board or authorized agent may establish a fee schedule, and
authorize the collection of fees, to cover the cost to the Township of
administering this article, consistent with the local municipal code.
A. Appeals from final decisions of the Township, including decisions of its
authorized agents, under this article shall be made to the Board of
Supervisors in writing within 30 days from the date of written
notification of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if a written appeal
is received at least 14 days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is
received within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the
appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The
municipality shall thereafter affirm, modify, or reverse the aforesaid
decision. The hearing may be postponed for a good cause shown by the
appellant or the Township. Additional evidence may be introduced at
the hearing provided that it is submitted with the written notice of
appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
§ 153-23 WARWICK CODE § 153-25
151:306
§ 153-26. Violations and penalties.
In addition to a proceeding under any other remedy available to the
Township at law or in equity for a violation of any provision of this article
or any rule or regulation promulgated under this article or any order or
permit issued by the Township pursuant to this article, the Township, after
notices and hearing, may assess a civil penalty of not less than $300 against
any person for that violation. All proceedings by the Township to impose
civil penalties pursuant to this section shall be governed in all respects by
the provisions of Section 13.1 of Act 537 (35 P.S. § 750.13a), which are
incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.
D. Hearings under this subsection shall be conducted pursuant to the act
of December 2, 1968 (P.L. 1133, No. 353) known as the "Pennsylvania
Local Agency Act".
§ 153-25 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-26
151:307

ARTICLE III
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-4]
§ 153-27. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORITY — The Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority or
any successor of said Authority.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature, or both, including various devices for the
treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes serving three or more
individual lots.
DEPARTMENT — Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person or agency appointed to perform
inspections and issue permits in connection with individual sewage
systems and community sewage systems, in this case the Bucks County
Health Department.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal
of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include, but are not limited
to, the following:
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge into
a holding tank.
(1)
PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water
under pressure is not available.
(2)
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed
by a water-carrying system.
(3)
HOLDING TANK CLEANER — An entity or person, including a
holding tank owner, who removes the contents of a holding tank for
purposes of disposing of the sewage at another site.
(4)
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
(1)
§ 153-27 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-27
151:309
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, or imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person"
shall include the members of an association and the officers of a
corporation.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM — The sewer system and the treatment
facility owned, operated, or maintained by the Authority approved by
the Department under a permit issued pursuant to The Clean Streams
Law, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrementitious or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals, and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use
of water for domestic water supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE — The Bucks County Health
Department.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Land development does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
(3)
§ 153-27 WARWICK CODE § 153-27
151:310
§ 153-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses wider the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 153-29. Requirement to connect to public sewer.
All property owners whose property lines are within 150 feet of any public
sewer line shall connect to the public sewer system upon approval by the
Township and subject to the rules and regulations of the Authority. The
Township Board of Supervisors may, as it deems appropriate, require or
exempt other property owners in the Township from connection to the
public sewer system, subject to the following guidelines:
STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries storm- and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
A. The Township Board of Supervisors may require property owners
whose property lines are not within 150 feet of any public sewer line to
connect to the public sewer system because of health, safety, and/or
welfare concerns.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors may, in its sole discretion and as it
deems appropriate, exempt residential property owners whose
property lines are within 150 feet of any public sewer line from
connection to the public sewer system upon proof that the existing
system on the site is functioning to the satisfaction of the Sewage
Enforcement Officer, and further provided that the property must
connect to the public sewer upon a change in ownership of the property.
Notice of the requirement to connect to the sewer line upon change in
ownership of the property shall be recorded with the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County in a form deemed satisfactory to the
Township Solicitor.
C. Connection to the public sewer line shall be mandatory to any new
development that qualifies for mandatory connection under this article.
The Township Board of Supervisors may also require new development
beyond 150 feet and/or not abutting the public sewer system to connect
to the public sewer as part of the subdivision and land development
process if the Township Board of Supervisors deems it appropriate.
§ 153-27 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-30
151:311
§ 153-30. Authority may make connections and collect costs.
If the owner of any property, after 90 days' notice from the Township or
Authority to make connection of such property with the public sewage
system, shall fail to make such connection, the Township or Authority may
make the connection and collect the costs thereof in the manner provided
by law.
§ 153-31. Owners required to connect upon expansion of system.
From time to time in the future, as public sewage services become available
to additional properties within the Township by reason of additions to the
public sewage system or improvements on abutting properties, each and
every owner of such property shall be required to make the necessary
connection to the abutting or adjoining sewer lines, and any septic tanks,
cesspools, holding tanks, and similar devices connected to an individual
sewage system shall be abandoned and filled with new material unless they
are exempt under § 153-29 of this article.
§ 153-32. Access to premises by agents.
The sewer inspector or his authorized agent, and agents of the Authority,
shall have access at all reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the
premises to which sewage service is supplied to make necessary
inspections.
§ 153-33. Permit required to connect to or open or disturb sewer.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any part of the public sewage system or
appurtenance thereto without first obtaining a permit from the Authority.
If work must be done in the right-of-way of a Township road or street, a
Township road opening permit will be required.
§ 153-34. Sewer permit fees.
Before making a connection with the sewer system, each property owner
shall make a written application therefor to the Authority and shall pay
all connection, tapping, facilities and other fees established pursuant to a
resolution of the Authority.
§ 153-35. Owner responsible for connection costs.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township and Authority from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 153-30 WARWICK CODE § 153-36
151:312
§ 153-36. Separate connections required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Exceptions to this provision shall be made where one building
stands to the rear of another on an interior lot and no sewer line is available
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard or driveway, in which case the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building only on approval by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. Such connection of the two buildings to the sewer
lines shall be considered as two building sewers.
§ 153-37. Status of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with a building only when
such connection is approved by the Authority and Bucks County Department
of Health, and they meet the requirements of this article or rules and
regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
§ 153-38. Material and specifications for sewer system and
connection.
The construction, materials used in the construction, and location of the
sewer and all sewer connections shall comply with specifications of the
Authority and the regulations of the Bucks County Department of Health.
§ 153-39. Notification prior to connection.
The permit holder shall notify the Authority when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection with the public sewer, and the
connection shall be made under his supervision.
§ 153-40. Guarding of hazards; restoration.
All excavations for building sewer installation and connection shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Township and the Authority.
§ 153-41. Imposition of sewer rental charges.
All owners of property connected or connecting with the sewer lines and
the public sewage system, and all of the owners of property who may
hereafter connect with and use the same, shall pay sewer rentals or charges
in installments as set forth in the fee schedule of the Authority.
§ 153-36 RENTAL PROPERTY § 153-41
151:313
Chapter 155
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 177.
§ 155-1. Use authorized.
The Township Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to
use any and all mechanical, electrical and electronic devices which have
been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the
timing of motor vehicle speeds.
§ 155-2. Applicability.
The authority hereby granted shall relate to all public roadways within the
Township.
§ 155-3. Devices authorized.
This chapter and the authority hereby granted shall pertain to present
speed-timing devices which have been approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, as well as to those developed in the future.
Chapter 157
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Erosion control — See Ch. 77.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 153-41 WARWICK CODE § 155-3
155:314
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 157-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Warwick Township
Stormwater Management and Grading Ordinance.”
§ 157-2. Statement of conditions.
The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors enacts this chapter upon
direction of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
which has determined that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development and redevelopment throughout a watershed
increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and
manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and floodreduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitats, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the
people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality. Impacts from stormwater
runoff can be minimized by using project designs that maintain the
natural hydraulic regime and sustain high water quality, groundwater
recharge, stream base flow and aquatic ecosystems. The cost-effective
and environmentally advantageous way to manage stormwater runoff is
through nonstructural project design that minimizes impervious
surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive areas, i.e., stream buffers,
floodplains, and steep slopes, and considers topography and soils to
maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
§ 157-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-2
155:315
§ 157-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the Township by maintaining the natural hydrologic regime
and by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in this
chapter, through provisions designed to:
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require Warwick Township to implement
a program of stormwater controls. Warwick Township is required to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from its separate storm
sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flows.
C. Minimize impervious surfaces.
D. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
F. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
G. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
H. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
I. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
J. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
K. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer System (MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
L. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are
implemented in the municipality.
§ 157-2 WARWICK CODE § 157-4
155:316
§ 157-4. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff, surface, and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
§ 157-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth-disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter. Regulated activities include but are not limited
to:
§ 157-6. Exemptions. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
A. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.69
B. The Second Class Township Code (Act 69 of 1933, P.L. 103; 53 P.S.
§ 65101, as amended).
A. Land development.
B. Subdivisions.
C. Prohibited or polluted discharges.
D. Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
E. Construction or reconstruction of, or addition of, new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.), except
for reconstruction of roads where there is no increase in impervious
surface.
F. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
G. Redevelopment.
H. Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
I. Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) or appurtenances thereto.
A. With the exception of swimming pools, regulated activities that create
impervious surfaces smaller than or equal to 1,000 square feet do not
have to apply the volume control requirements, peak rate control
requirements, or the SWM site plan preparation located in Article IV of
this chapter. If the activity is found to be a significant contributor of
pollution to the waters of the commonwealth, the municipality may
enforce any of the above requirements. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-3]
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 157-4 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-6
155:317
B. Regulated activities, except swimming pools, that create impervious
surfaces between 1,001 square feet up to and including 5,000 square
feet are exempt from the peak rate control requirements of this chapter.
Refer to Appendix I70 for detailed information regarding the small
project SWM site plan for regulated activities creating impervious
surface between 1,000 square feet up to and including 5,000 square
feet. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
Table 157-6
Impervious Surface Exemption Thresholds for Warwick
Township
Proposed Impervious Surface
Chapter Article
or Section
Type of
Project
0 to 1,000
square
feet
1,001 to
5,000
square feet
5,000+
square
feet
Article IV, SWM
site plan
requirements
Development Exempt,
except for
pools
Not exempt Not exempt
§ 157-12, volume
control
requirements
Development Not
applicable,
except for
in-ground
swimming
pools of any
size
Not exempt Not exempt
§ 157-13, peak
rate control
requirements
Development Exempt Exempt,
except for
pools
Not exempt
Erosion and
sediment
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pa.
Code and any other applicable state, county, and
municipal codes. PADEP requires an engineered
post-construction SWM plan for projects proposing
earth disturbance in excess of 1 acre.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the peak rate control requirements
and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided
that the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25
Pa. Code § 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the peak
rate control requirements and SWM site plan preparation requirements
of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed according to
the requirements of 25 Pa. Code § 102.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 157-6 WARWICK CODE § 157-6
155:318
§ 157-7. Compatibility with other requirements; conflict with other
provisions.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. To the
extent that this chapter imposes more-rigorous or more-stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
E. Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by Warwick
Township is exempt.
F. The use of land for gardening for home consumption is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
G. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 157-10D through L.
H. Earth-disturbance activities which disturb less than 1,000 square feet
of a lot or parcel are exempt from the requirement to prepare an SWM
site plan; however, for development taking place in stages, the entire
site must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
Activities disturbing in excess of 1,000 square feet must prepare an
erosion control plan, which shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township or Township Engineer.
I. Additional exemption criteria:
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) Drainage problems. Where drainage problems are documented or
known to exist downstream of or are expected from the proposed
activity, the municipality may deny exemptions.
(3) Exemptions are limited to specific portions of this chapter.
(4) HQ and EV streams. The municipality may deny exemptions in high
quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and source water
protection areas (SWPAs).
§ 157-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-7
155:319

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 157-8. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 157-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy-use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land
clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, and harvesting crops, or
pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious as the result of changing the land cover, including the water,
vegetation and bare soil.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activity defined in § 157-5 of this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 157-8 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:321
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the Township Engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater;
the sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from
water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human
activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, “nonstructural
BMPs or measures” refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas “structural BMPs or measures” are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include but are not limited to a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include but shall not be limited to natural and man-made
watercourses, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes that convey
continuously or periodically flowing water.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Bucks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure, with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
CURVE NUMBER — A value used in the Soil Cover Complex Method. It is
a measure of the percentage of precipitation which is expected to run off
from the watershed and is a function of the soil, vegetative cover, and tillage
method.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill or structure for
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:322
highway, railroad or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP).
DESIGNEE — The agent of Bucks County, the Bucks County Conservation
District, and/or the agent of Warwick Township involved with the
administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by
contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect or registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An area of land and/or structure designed to collect
and retard stormwater runoff, temporarily storing the runoff and releasing
it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development or, as used in this chapter, a
regulated activity.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land. As used in this chapter, “development” encompasses
both new development and redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity is planned, conducted or maintained.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix F, Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA).71
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or
other point of interest.
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water, such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second. See also "peak
discharge."
B.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:323
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth-disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by Warwick Township after the
SWM site plan has been approved.
EARTH-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
that disturbs the surface of land, including but not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials. Activity involving
earth disturbance is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code § 92, 25 Pa.
Code § 102, or the Clean Streams Law.72
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or
diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway
or body of water.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan
identifying BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. For
agricultural plowing or tilling activities, the erosion and sediment control
plan is that portion of a conservation plan identifying BMPs to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the groundwater.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the
commonwealth.
71.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:324
FLOODPLAIN —
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forestland. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GOVERNING BODY — The elected municipal officials of Warwick Township.
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers' Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This
model was used to model the Neshaminy Creek watershed during the Act
167 plan development and was the basis for the standards and criteria of
this chapter.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activity generates highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater. Typical pollutant loadings in stormwater may
be found in Chapter 8, Section 6, of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
FLOODWAY — That portion of the floodplain, including the watercourse
channel and adjacent land areas, which must be reserved to carry
the one-hundred-year-storm without cumulatively increasing the flood
elevation more than one foot.
A.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain which is outside the
floodway.
B.
APPROXIMATE ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FLOOD BOUNDARY — That
portion of the floodplain, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study, for
which no detailed flood profiles or one-hundred-year-flood elevations
have been provided.
C.
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of excavation.
B.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:325
Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006). Additional information
concerning hot spots may be found in § 157-15A of this chapter.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces which do not absorb water.
All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming pools,
and any areas in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be considered
impervious surfaces within the definition. In addition, other areas
determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning
of this definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INITIAL ABSTRACTION (IA) — The value used to calculate the volume or
peak rate of runoff in the Soil Cover Complex Method. It represents the
depth of rain retained on vegetation plus the depth of rain stored on the soil
surface plus the depth of rain infiltrated prior to the start of runoff.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:326
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
LOT — A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the site of
one or more buildings and any building accessory thereto or for any other
purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor including any
land within the right-of-way of a public street upon which said lot abuts,
even if the ownership to such right-of-way is in the owner of the lot. A lot,
for the purpose of this chapter, may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
A lot shall front on a public street.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will
minimize proposed conditions' runoff rates and volumes, which will
minimize needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
Warwick Township.
MUNICIPALITY — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number
of occupants or tenure, including any additions to existing
nonresidential buildings or conversions of residential to
nonresidential buildings with additions;
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features; or
(2)
(3) Any increase in impervious surface(s) on nonresidential properties.
B. A subdivision of land;
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by the direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil
mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fractures or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation other stratum or soil condition that is slowly
permeable so that it effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
C.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:327
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NONPOINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Methods of
controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site
planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site and other techniques.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to the PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — The Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service).
OUTFALL — "Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
model developed at the Pennsylvania State University.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream which contains water at all times except
during extreme drought.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that allows the infiltration of water into
the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Warwick
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from
which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations
at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — The period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
functioning and all proposed improvements in the approved land
development plan are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — See "existing conditions."
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:328
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before
they enter the system but not necessarily designed to meet the volume
requirements of this chapter.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer reviews the contractor's as-built drawings against his/her own
records for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or
transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the
client's permanent records. Record drawings are not the same as record
plans submitted for recording with the county in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).73
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to
be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not considered
redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width, including
shoulders, is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth-disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions' peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater storage area which has a controlled
release rate and maintains a constant water level while not in use for flood
storage.
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:329
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The probability an event will occur in any given year;
typically displayed as a whole number, e.g., twenty-five-year event, and
represents the inverse of the frequency of that event. For example, the
twenty-five-year return-period rainfall gives the probability, 1/25 or 4%,
which that size storm will occur in any given year.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth-disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAIN — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge after a fall of
rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SALDO — The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.74
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter
is deposited or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge of any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water. More information on seepage
pits may be found in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, December 2006,
Chapter 6, Section 4.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:330
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called “curve number (CN).”
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated in Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, as exceptional value (EV) or high
quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as “BMPs” or “SWM BMPs” throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include but are not limited to detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan, known as the
"Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan," for
managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff
quality and quantity and that would impact the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed, adopted by Bucks and Montgomery Counties as required by the
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER SWM SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant or
his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A flow of water in a natural channel or bed, as a brook, rivulet,
or a small river.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:331
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality.[Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess of
100 feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system to be used for a given development site, the contents of which are
established in § 157-19.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management/timber operations."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff
to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of
overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any. The Tc shall
be representative of the developed area, i.e., a long Tc shall not be used if
the majority of the proposed development is within close proximity to the
detention facility, as determined by the Township Engineer, for those sites
having unique circumstances.
TOP-OF-BANK — The highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
VEGETATED SWALE — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface
water.
§ 157-9 WARWICK CODE § 157-9
155:332
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — A pond for urban runoff management that is designed to
detain urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLANDS — These areas of hydric soils supporting wetland vegetation
where the water table is at or near the surface or where shallow water
covers the site due to permanent or seasonal inundation of surface water or
groundwater, including swamps, marshes, bogs or other areas meeting the
wetland criteria established by the Department of Environmental Protection
or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
§ 157-9 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-9
155:333

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 157-10. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the Township that do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 157-6 shall submit a
stormwater management (SWM) site plan consistent with the
requirements of this chapter to the municipality for review. The SWM
criteria of this chapter shall apply to the total proposed development
even if development is to take place in stages. Preparation and
implementation of an approved SWM site plan are required. No
regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues
written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall be
responsible for the control of surface runoff entering the development
or subdivision originating from an upstream drainage area. The future,
fully developed use of undeveloped areas upstream as shown on the
approved Township Comprehensive Plan shall be taken into account in
the calculation of pipe sizes for storm sewer system designs.
Calculations shall be provided that include the off-site runoff entering
the development site, as well as calculations indicating the capacity of
the receiving storm sewer or watercourse downstream of the proposed
development for the one-hundred-year storm.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with Article
IV, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP), approve measures for meeting the
state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not
conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean Streams
Law.75
D. For all regulated earth-disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during construction to meet
the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean
Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual; No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§ 157-12 of this chapter is required.
F. Impervious areas.
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 157-10 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-10
155:335
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Approval of the owners shall be obtained in writing and a copy filed with
the Township. Approval of plans by Warwick Township does not
authorize or sanction drainage affecting adjoining properties.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces [i.e., disconnected impervious
areas (DIAs)] by directing runoff to pervious areas wherever
possible. See Appendix F for detail on DIAs.76
(f) Provide corrective measures as deemed appropriate by the
Board of Supervisors to alleviate any off-site drainage problem
affected by the regulated activity. The costs for such measures
will be borne entirely by the developer.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees,
reducing area of impervious surface, cluster development, and
protecting open space) described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006). See
Appendix E for a summary description.77
76.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-10 WARWICK CODE § 157-10
155:336
§ 157-11. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 157-12. Volume control.
Volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect stream
channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and contribute to
water quality improvements. Stormwater runoff volume control methods
are based on the net change in runoff volume for the two-year storm event.
Volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated
activities equal to or less than one acre, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize the use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize the risk of adverse effects.
K. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not
more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
L. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
M. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Stormwater Management Act.78
N. A highway occupancy permit is required from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation if water is to be carried in any way onto
the state highway right-of-way or into the state highway storm drainage
system.
77.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P. S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 157-10 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-12
155:337
limitations of the procedures associated with each methodology, and other
factors. All regulated activities greater than one acre must use the Design
Storm Method.
A. Design Storm Method (any regulated activity). This method requires
detailed modeling based on site conditions. For modeling assumptions,
refer to § 157-14A.
(1) Post-development total runoff should not be increased from
predevelopment total runoff for all storms equal to or less than the
two-year, twenty-four-hour-duration precipitation.
(2) The following applies in order to estimate the increased volume of
runoff for the two-year, twenty-four-hour-duration precipitation
event: To calculate the runoff volume (cubic feet) for existing site
conditions (predevelopment) and for the proposed developed site
conditions (post-development), it is recommended to use the Soil
Cover Complex Method as shown as follows. The calculated volume
shall be either reused, evapotranspired, or infiltrated through
structural or nonstructural means. Other means of calculating the
runoff volume may be used if approved in advance by the Township
Engineer.
Soil Cover Complex Method
Step 1: Runoff (in) = Q = (P - 0.2S)2/(P + 0.8S)
Where:
P = 2-year rainfall (in)
S = (1,000/CN) -10
Step 2: Runoff Volume (cubic feet) = Q x Area x 1/12
Where:
Q = Runoff (in) (from Step 1)
Area = SWM area (square feet), i.e., the square-foot area of
the regulated activity
Step 3: Required Volume = Post-development Runoff Volume –
Predevelopment Runoff Volume
Once runoff volume is calculated for the site under both existing
and proposed developed conditions, the difference between the
two site conditions is the increase in runoff volume from
predevelopment conditions to post-development conditions for the
two-year, twenty-four-hour precipitation event.
The calculated volume shall be captured, reused, evapotranspired,
or infiltrated through nonstructural or structural means.
B. Simplified Method (regulated activities less than or equal to one acre).
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture the runoff volume from at least
the first two inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
§ 157-12 WARWICK CODE § 157-12
155:338
Volume (cubic feet) = (2-inch runoff/12 inches) * Impervious
Surface (square feet)
(2) At least the first inch of runoff volume from the new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it
shall not be released into the surface waters of the commonwealth.
The calculated volume shall be either reused, evapotranspired or
infiltrated through structural or nonstructural means.
Volume (cubic feet) = (1-inch runoff/12 inches) * Impervious
Surface (square feet)
(3) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate the first
0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff.
(4) No more than one inch of runoff volume from impervious surfaces
shall be released from the site. The release time must be over 24 to
72 hours.
C. Stormwater control measures. The applicant must demonstrate how the
required volume is controlled through stormwater best management
practices (BMPs), which shall provide the means necessary to capture,
reuse, evaporate, transpire or infiltrate the total runoff volume.
(1) If natural resources exist on the site, the plan shall indicate the
total acreage of protected area where no disturbance is proposed.
The acreage of the protected area should be subtracted from the
total site area and not included in the stormwater management site
area acreage used in determining the volume controls.
Stormwater Management Site Area = Total Site Area (for both
pre- and post-development conditions) – Protected Area
Natural resource areas should be calculated based upon the
municipality's own natural resource protection ordinance. If no
ordinance exists, see Table B-2 in Appendix B79 for guidance to
assess the total protected area. For additional reference, see
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.1, of the Pennsylvania BMP Manual.
(2) Calculate the volume controls provided through nonstructural
BMPs. Table B-5 in Appendix B is recommended as guidance.80
(3) Volume controls provided through nonstructural BMPs should be
subtracted from the required volume to determine the necessary
structural BMPs.
Required
Volume Control
(feet3)
– Nonstructural
Volume Control
(feet3)
= Structural Volume
Requirement (feet3)
79.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-12
155:339
(4) Calculate the volume controls provided through structural BMPs.
Table B-6 in Appendix B is recommended as guidance.81 See the
Pennsylvania BMP Manual, Chapter 6, for a description of the
BMPs.
(5) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions
(see Table B-6 in Appendix B for a list of Infiltration BMPs82).
Infiltration BMPs shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
(a) A minimum soil depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the
infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or seasonally high
water table.
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and dewater completely as determined by
field tests. A minimum of 0.2 inch per hour should be utilized,
and for acceptable rates a safety factor of 50% should be
applied for design purposes (e.g., for soil which measured 0.4
inch per hour, the BMP design should use 0.2 inch per hour to
ensure safe infiltration rates after construction).
(c) All open-air infiltration facilities shall be designed to
completely infiltrate runoff volume within three days (72
hours) from the start of the design storm. Subsurface systems
shall be designed to infiltrate the stored volume in 48 hours or
less with a minimum infiltration rate and percolation rate of
greater than 0.2 inch per hour.
(6) Soils. A soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. All regulated
activities are required to perform a detailed soils evaluation by a
qualified design professional which, at a minimum, addresses soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas of
suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where
development on fill material is under consideration, conduct
geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability; infiltration
may not be ruled out without conducting these tests.
(b) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not recommended for
81.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-12 WARWICK CODE § 157-12
155:340
§ 157-13. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
Peak rate controls for large storms, up to the one-hundred-year event, are
essential in order to protect against immediate downstream erosion and
flooding. The following peak rate controls have been determined through
hydrologic modeling of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed.
design purposes. The Township Engineer shall observe all field
testing of soils.
(c) Design the infiltration structure based on field-determined
capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface and
based on the safety factor of 50%.
(d) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be
demonstrated to the municipality that the soils are conducive
to infiltrate on the lots identified.
(e) An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins
where the possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A
detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the
municipality.
A. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and onehundred-
year design storms are shown in Table 157-13. Development
sites located in each of the management districts must control the
proposed development conditions' runoff rates to existing conditions'
runoff rates for the design storms in accordance with Table 157-13.
Table 157-13
Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by Stormwater
Management Districts in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
(includes Little Neshaminy Creek)
District
Design Storm Post-
Development (Proposed
Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment (Existing
Conditions)
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
§ 157-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-13
155:341
Table 157-13
Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by Stormwater
Management Districts in the Neshaminy Creek Watershed
(includes Little Neshaminy Creek)
District
Design Storm Post-
Development (Proposed
Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment (Existing
Conditions)
50-year 25-year
100-year 50-year
C 2-year 2-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B. General. Proposed conditions' rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map (Appendix D)83 and in this section
of this chapter.
C. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on official maps and are available for inspection at
the Municipal Office and County Planning Offices. A copy of the map at
a reduced scale, and four other maps with zoomed-in extents, are
included in Appendix D.84 The exact location of the stormwater
management district boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours (or most-accurate data required) provided as part
of the SWM site plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the
management district criteria for the district in which the discharge is
located.
E. Off-site areas. When calculating the allowable peak runoff rates,
developers do not have to account for runoff draining into the subject
development site from an off-site area. On-site drainage facilities shall
83.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter; the Management District
Maps are on file in the Township offices.
84.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter; the Management District
Maps are on file in the Township offices.
§ 157-13 WARWICK CODE § 157-13
155:342
§ 157-14. Calculation methodology.
be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development
site.
F. Site areas. The stormwater management site area is the only area
subject to the management district criteria. Nonimpacted areas or
nonregulated activities bypassing the stormwater management
facilities would not be subject to the management district criteria.
G. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions, as
determined by the Township:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 157-13 and § 157-13A
through F; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
A. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used to determine the existing conditions' runoff volume and
flow rate shall be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition."
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site, including agriculture,
bare earth, and fallow ground, shall be considered as "meadow
in good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve number (CN) or Rational "C" value (i.e., woods)
as listed in Table B-4 or B-7 in Appendix B of this chapter.85
(2) For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used
to determine the existing conditions' runoff volume and flow rate
for the developed portion of the site shall be based upon actual land
cover conditions. If the developed site contains impervious
surfaces, 20% of the impervious surface area shall be considered
“meadow” in the model for existing conditions.
B. Stormwater runoff peak discharges from all development sites with a
drainage area equal to or greater than 25 acres shall be calculated
using a generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the
NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method. Table 157-14 summarizes
acceptable computation methods. The method selected by the design
professional shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability
85.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-13 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-14
155:343
of each method for a particular site. The municipality may allow the
use of the Rational Method (Q=CIA) to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain less than 25 acres.
Q = Peak flow rate, in cubic feet per second (cfs)
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover
I = Design rainfall intensity, in inches per hour
A = Drainage area, in acres
C. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return-period storms according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 rain data corresponding
to the Doylestown rain gage, seen in Table B-1 in Appendix B.86 The SCS
Type II rainfall curve from NOAA is found on Figure B-1 in Appendix B.
This data may also be directly retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14
website: hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/orb/pa_pfds.html. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours.
Table 157-14
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
by Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use
of full hydrology
computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans
within limitations
described in TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use
of full hydrologic
computer model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State University Applicable where use
of a hydrologic
computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or
HEC-1
86.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-14 WARWICK CODE § 157-14
155:344
Table 157-14
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
by Applicability
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling (1889) For sites less than 200
acres or as approved
by the municipality
and/or Municipal
Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies
approved by the
municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1. Timesof-
concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be based on Table
B-4 in Appendix B.87
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be consistent with Table B-7 in Appendix
B.
G. Runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil will not have the same
runoff conditions as the site under existing conditions because of soil
compaction, even after topsoiling or seeding. The proposed condition
"CN" or "C" shall increase by 5% to better reflect proposed soil
conditions.
H. The Manning Equation is preferred for one-dimensional, gradually
varied, open-channel flow. In other cases, appropriate, applicable
methods should be applied; however, early coordination with the
municipality is necessary.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using the
87.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-14 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-14
155:345
§ 157-15. Other requirements.
§ 157-16. Storm sewers, drainage facilities and detention basins.
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method of the
municipality.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve
the use of any generally accepted full-hydrograph approximation
technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the
volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
A. Hot spots.
(1) The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use
areas. Examples of hot spots are listed in Appendix G.88
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In
no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of
pretreatment is located in Appendix G.
A. General provisions.
(1) A storm sewer system and all appurtenances shall be required to be
constructed by the applicant in any area from which the surface or
subsurface drainage could impair public safety or cause physical
damage to adjacent lands or public property. The system(s) shall be
designed to collect water at any point where three cubic feet per
second is accumulated, at the bottom of all vertical grades and
immediately upgrade from all street intersections. The system(s)
shall discharge to the nearest practical natural drainage channel or
storm system.
(2) When required, storm drains and appurtenances shall be
constructed by the developer to take surface water from the bottom
of vertical grades, to lead water away from springs, and to avoid
excessive use of cross-cutters at street intersections and
elsewhere.
(a) Open watercourses are encouraged where they exist naturally
and where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, they will
not interfere with public convenience or safety but in fact will
provide comparable or superior drainage. Where necessary,
stream corridor improvements, including rock stabilization and
88.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-14 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:346
gabions, shall be performed. Naturalized or "bioengineering"
methods of stabilization are preferred.
(b) Design of storm drainage facilities shall be prepared in
accordance with accepted engineering practices, subject to
approval by the Township Engineer.
(c) Any necessary corrective measures deemed appropriate by the
Board of Supervisors to alleviate any off-site drainage problem
affected by the subdivision or land development must be
undertaken by the developer. The costs for such measures will
be borne entirely by the developer.
(d) The developer may be required to participate in off-site storm
drainage improvements in the watershed within which the
proposed development is located. The specific off-site drainage
improvements required shall be those specified by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
(3) Storm sewer or drainage easements:
(a) Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be
provided in undedicated land to accommodate required storm
sewer facilities and drainage swales. Such easements shall be
offered for dedication to Warwick Township and shall be
provided where storm sewers, drainage swales, culverts, or
other structures traverse, enter or discharge onto private
property. On private property, the owner shall maintain ground
cover and landscaping within the easement. The Township
shall not maintain and/or repair any improvements within that
easement unless stormwater runoff from public roads or public
lands crosses through the easement. If stormwater runoff from
public roads or public lands crosses through the easement, the
Township shall, upon satisfactory installation of improvements
as specified in a land development agreement with Warwick
Township, maintain and repair only the structural
improvements within the easement, if any, such as piping,
inlets, stormwater manholes, headwalls/endwalls, and energydissipation
structures or facilities. Warwick Township will not
be responsible for any other repair/maintenance, vermin
control, removal of obstructions from drainage swales, removal
of accumulated sediment or vegetation from drainage swales,
removal of litter or garbage, repair of erosion, and restoration
of vegetation/ground cover.
(b) The record plan and development approved agreement for the
approved land development shall define easement ownership,
maintenance responsibilities, and access. Specifically, the
record plan shall contain a provision permitting access to such
easement(s), at any reasonable time, for inspection and/or
emergency repair/maintenance, by Warwick Township or its
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:347
designee, of all facilities deemed critical to public welfare. In
the event that the lot owner or homeowners' association fails
to honor their maintenance responsibilities set forth herein, in
any manner, Warwick Township shall have the right of entry
upon and within the area of the easement to undertake any
required corrective or maintenance effort. The total cost of
such, including administrative, engineering, and legal costs
for enforcement, may be imposed upon the responsible party
as determined by Warwick Township. Failure to remedy all
associated costs described above may be subject of the
imposition of a lien by the Township against the owner(s) in
question, in the same manner as the Township might otherwise
be empowered by law to assess or impose a lien against a
property for municipal improvements. The record plan size
shall meet the requirements for recording at the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County.
(4) Also see the Warwick Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, § 163-67, for additional storm sewer, detention basin
and erosion control requirements.
B. Design criteria.
(1) Open channels and swales.
(a) Open channels should have a triangular or trapezoidal cross
section in compliance with accepted engineering practices.
(b) Existing stream channels should be maintained in their natural
state. Only under unusual circumstances will it be permitted to
line, straighten, or relocate an existing stream, with approval
of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the
Bucks County Conservation District.
(c) Permissible channel velocities, slopes, and cover shall be in
accordance with the Natural Resources Conservation Service
Engineering Field Manual, Chapter 7, Grassed Waterways and
Outlets.
(d) Acceptable energy-dissipation devices shall be installed to
bring discharge velocities down to limits specified in the DEP
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual,
latest edition.
(e) Riprap and/or gabions may be required by the Township
Engineer where erosion potential is great.
(f) Swales and open channels shall be designed to convey the onehundred-
year storm event. Capacity shall be determined by
Manning's Equation.
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:348
(g) Curbed sections. The maximum encroachment of runoff on the
roadway pavement shall not exceed 1/2 of the traveled lane
during a one-hundred-year design storm of five minute's
duration. Inlets shall be provided to control the encroachment
of water on the traveled lane.
(h) On-lot drainage swales shall be designed to provide positive
conveyance of surface water from the individual lot. Each
swale lot shall convey stormwater from the lot to a storm sewer
system, street, open space area, or stormwater management
easement without crossing or combining with stormwater from
more than the adjacent lot.
(i) Whenever swales are necessary, they shall be centered on a
property line and at a location approved by the Township
Engineer.
(j) Vegetated swales proposed to satisfy water quality
requirements shall be designed to be consistent with the
following:
[1] The maximum flow velocity in the grass swale for runoff
from the water quality design storm (one-year, twentyfour-
hour) shall not exceed 1.5 feet per second (fps).
[2] The average slope of the swale shall not exceed 4%, unless
the swale is designed and protected to provide adequate
erosion control.
(k) The maximum velocity of flow, as determined by Manning's
Equation, shall not exceed the allowable velocities as shown in
the following table for the specific type of material, unless
otherwise approved by the Township Engineer and the Bucks
County Conservation District or as otherwise updated in the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau
of Soil and Water Conservation publication, Erosion and
Sediment Control Program Manual, latest revision.
Material
Allowable Velocity
[feet per second (fps)]
Well-established grass on good
soil:
Short, pliant, bladed grass 4.0 to 5.0
Bunch grass, soil exposed 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff-stemmed grass 3.0 to 4.0
Earth without vegetation:
Fine sand or silt 1.0
Ordinary firm loam 2.0 to 3.0
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:349
Material
Allowable Velocity
[feet per second (fps)]
Stiff clay 3.0 to 5.0
Clay and gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Coarse gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Soft shale 5.0 to 6.0
Shoulders:
Earth (as defined above)
Stabilized 6.0
Paved 10.0 to 15.0
(2) Storm sewer design.
(a) Design flow rate.
[1] The storm drain collection system shall be designed to
carry a one-hundred-year peak flow rate. In addition, the
interior street and storm drain system should be designed
in such a manner to control runoff in excess of the onehundred-
year peak inflow rate by directing the excess
runoff through the use of proper grading techniques and
permanent stormwater runoff control structures into
drainage channels or detention basins. The peak flow rate
shall be determined by the Rational Method formula:
Q = CIA
Where:
Q = Peak runoff rate, measured in cubic feet per
second (cfs)
C = Runoff coefficient
I = Intensity (average rainfall intensity, in inches
per hour)
A = Area (drainage area, in acres)
[2] Appropriate values for the rainfall intensity can be found
in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design
Manual, Part 2. Appropriate values for the runoff
coefficient shall be as presented in Table B-7 in Appendix
B.89
[3] More-specific runoff coefficients, as stated in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Deign Manual, Part 2, or as
stated in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection publication, Recommended Hydrologic
89.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:350
Procedures for Computing Urban Runoff from Small
Watersheds in Pennsylvania, may be used upon
consultation with the Township Engineer.
(b) Consideration shall be given to future land use changes in the
drainage area in selecting the "C" coefficient. For drainage
areas containing several different types of ground cover, a
weighted value of "C" shall be used. In no case shall a weighted
value of "C" be less than 0.45 for an area to be changed from its
natural state.
(c) In determining the peak flow rate to individual storm sewer
inlets (or other collection structures), the time-ofconcentration
method shall be used for inlet drainage areas in
excess of 1.25 acres, unless otherwise specified by the
Township Engineer, and a five-minute time of concentration
shall be used for all other drainage areas, unless otherwise
approved by the Township Engineer.
(d) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, a five-minute time of concentration shall
be used if the five-minute time of concentration does not result
in a maximum expected discharge that exceeds the capacity of
a thirty-inch-diameter pipe (or equivalent flow area of 4.9
square feet).
(e) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration
results in a pipe size exceeding a thirty-inch-diameter pipe (or
equivalent flow area of 4.9 square feet), the calculated time of
concentration shall be used in determining storm duration.
(f) All pipes shall, at a minimum, provide required carrying
capacity as determined by the United States Department of
Commerce, Hydraulic Design Series No. 5, Hydraulic Design of
Highway Culverts. Where pressure flow is anticipated in storm
sewer pipes (non-open-channel flow), the designer shall be
required to calculate the elevation of the hydraulic grade line
through the storm sewer system.
(g) All pipe and structures utilized for the storm sewer system
shall conform to the design standards of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Publications 408 and
72M (Road Construction Standards), as amended. All inlet
grates shall be "bicycle safe" structural steel.
(h) Pipe requirements.
[1] The minimum diameter of all storm sewer piping shall be
18 inches (or other with an equivalent flow area of 1.76
square feet), including detention basin barrel pipes. Piping
shall be laid on a four-inch-minimum bed of PennDOT Type
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:351
2A coarse aggregate and shall be designed with a slope
not less than 0.50%. All storm drains located within the
right-of-way of a street shall be protected by a cover of
at least 18 inches. No pipe shall exceed a slope that will
permit full-flow velocity in excess of 15 feet per second.
Cover over HDPE and corrugated metal pipe (CMP) shall
be as per manufacturer's specifications, but not less than
12 inches.
[2] Storm sewer piping shall be reinforced concrete pipe
(RCP); however, in areas that are not to be dedicated for
public use, smooth-bore, high-density corrugated
polyethylene (HDPE) or aluminum corrugated pipe may be
permitted as approved by the Township Engineer. All
outlet pipes through detention basin and retention basin
berms shall be reinforced concrete pipe with watertight Oring
joints (O-ring RCP).
[3] Stormwater runoff shall not be permitted to surcharge
from the storm sewer structures for the required design
storm. Hydraulic grade line calculations should be
submitted to confirm compliance.
[4] Curved pipe sections shall not be permitted. This includes
horizontal deflections exceeding 1°.
(3) Manholes.
(a) Storm sewer manholes shall be spaced as necessitated by the
proposed piping alignment; however, in no case shall manhole
spacing exceed 450 feet. Manholes shall be located at all
abrupt changes of grade, at all locations where a transition in
pipe sizing is required and at all points of convergence of two
or more storm sewer mains, where inlets are not warranted.
(b) Manhole castings and covers shall conform to the
requirements of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publications 72M and 408, as amended. Manhole covers shall
have the word "STORM" cast in two-inch-high letters on the
top of the cover.
(4) Inlets.
(a) Storm sewer inlet spacing shall not exceed 250 feet, except
between inlets connected by pipe with a diameter of 48 inches
or greater, where spacing shall then not exceed 450 feet. Inlets
shall be located at all abrupt changes of grade, at all locations
where a transition in pipe sizing is required and at all points of
convergence of two or more storm sewer mains.
(b) At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent and
not in the curved portion of the curbing. The gutter adjacent to
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:352
and immediately upgrade from the inlet shall be so warped as
to direct the water into the inlet. Inlets shall be required on
the upslope side of all approaches to an intersection when the
design flow rate is in excess of 1.0 cfs.
(c) The crowns of all pipes tying into an inlet or manhole shall be
set at equal elevations when pipe inverts are within 12 inches
(vertical separation) of each other. A minimum of two inches
shall be provided between the inlet pipe invert elevation and
the invert elevation of the outlet pipe.
(d) The capacity of inlets shall be based on a maximum surface
flow to the inlet of three cfs. The maximum flow to inlets
located in low points of paved areas (vertical curves) shall
include the overland flow directed to the inlet, as well as the
cumulative bypass surface runoff from the inlets upstream. The
bypass runoff from each upstream inlet shall be calculated
using inlet efficiently curves found in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual, Part 2, latest
revision. An inlet at a low point of a paved area maybe
designed to accept a maximum of five cubic feet per second
(cfs). Type M inlets shall be designed to accept a maximum of
six cfs, unless otherwise approved by the Township Engineer.
(e) Inlet spacing in paved areas shall be arranged so that a
minimum of 95% of the gutter flow tributary to the inlet will be
captured. The designer shall be required to verify that bypass
surface runoff from the one-hundred-year design storm will
enter the storm sewer piping system at some point prior to
discharge into a detention basin or other approved outlet
point. Inlet capacity shall be based on inlet efficiency curves
provided in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Design Manual, Part 2.
(f) All inlets shall be stenciled by the developer to indicate that
"No Dumping Allowed — This inlet flows to . . . Creek," or other
approved wording by Warwick Township. Specifications for
stenciling are to be provided by Warwick Township.
(5) Headwalls and endwalls.
(a) An endwall shall be provided at the end of all pipe runs.
Headwalls shall be provided at the beginning of all pipe runs.
Headwalls/endwalls with a height greater than three feet may
be required to have a safety fence or guiderail if determined by
the Township Engineer. Rock aprons (riprap) or other approved
velocity-dissipation devices shall be placed at all pipe outlets
(endwalls) to reduce flow velocity and prevent erosion.
(b) All headwalls and endwalls shall be stenciled by the developer
to indicate that "No Dumping Allowed — This inlet flows to . . .
Creek," or other approved wording by Warwick Township.
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:353
Specifications for stenciling are to be provided by Warwick
Township.
(6) Bridges, culverts, and drainage channels.
(a) Bridges and culverts shall be designed and constructed to
meet current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
construction and loading standards (HS-25 loading standards).
They shall be constructed to the full width of the right-of-way
or to an adequate dimension to accommodate special grade
conditions. Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection is required for all improvements in
and along all waters of the commonwealth. The applicant shall
provide verification of Department of Environmental
Protection approval for all such proposed bridges and culverts.
(b) Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection is required for all improvements in and along waters
of the commonwealth. Where applicable, stormwater
management facilities or programs shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 102 (Erosion Control), Chapter 105
(Dam Safety and Waterway Management), and Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
Rules and Regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(c) All bridges, culverts and drainage channels shall be designed
to convey a flow rate equal to a one-hundred-year, twenty-fourhour
storm, as defined by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conversation Services, Technical Release No.
55. All bridges and culverts shall be designed to pass the onehundred-
year design storm without increasing the extent and
depth of the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(d) The capacity of all culverts and drainage channels shall, as a
minimum, provide the required carrying capacity. Capacity and
stabilization shall be as determined by the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Hydraulic Design Series No. 5, Hydraulic
Charts for the Selection of Highway Culverts; United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 15, Design
of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings, as amended;
Federal Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering
Circular No. 13, Hydraulic Design for Improved Inlets for
Culverts; United States Department of Transportation, Design
of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings, as amended; and
the United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Visual Urban (HY-22) Drainage
Design Programs. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:354
(e) Drainage channels shall be designed to convey the design
discharge at a stable, nonerosive velocity. Channel linings that
are assumed in the design must be established before the
channel is utilized for its stated objective. Diversions or
alternate channel linings may be necessary to provide channel
conditions in the field to match design assumptions. Where
storm sewers discharge into existing drainage channels at an
angle greater than 30° from parallel with the downstream
channel flow, the far side bank shall be stabilized by the use of
riprap or masonry and/or concrete walls. The stabilization shall
be designed to prevent erosion and frost heave under and
behind the stabilizing media.
(f) Maximum channel velocities for vegetated and rock-lined
channels shall be as set forth in the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water
Conversation publication, Erosion and Sediment Control
Program Manual, latest revision.
(g) Any vegetated drainage channel requiring mowing of the
vegetation shall have a maximum grade of four horizontal to
one vertical (4:1 or 25%) on those areas to be mowed.
(7) Stormwater detention/retention basins.
(a) Calculation methodology shall be utilized as noted in this
chapter.
(b) Detention areas shall be designed so that the total rate of
runoff from the entire site, after complete development, will
not exceed the specified percentage of total predeveloped
runoff rate form the entire site. Individual points of
concentrated runoff discharge from the site may be designed
for up to a 100% release rate so long as the total runoff from
the entire site, after development, is controlled to the
applicable release rate.
(c) Discharge piping from detention areas shall be designed to
control the rate of runoff for a one-year through one-hundredyear-
frequency design storm.
(d) If permanent ponds (retention basin) are proposed, the
developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed to
protect the public's health and safety.
(e) Ownership and maintenance of detention or retention basin
easements. Prior to the grant of final approval of any
subdivision or land development, the owner and developer of
the property which is the subject of the subdivision or land
development shall execute agreements, in a form satisfactory
to the Township, which state that all stormwater management
facilities, including detention or retention basins, will be
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:355
properly maintained. If all or a portion of the facilities are on a
property which will be conveyed to an individual, homeowners'
association or any other eventual owner, the guaranties must
be in such a form that they will carry through to the new
owners. Warwick Township will not accept dedication
maintenance responsibilities for any detention or retention
basin or similar facility located on private grounds, unless
otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
[1] When a private entity (homeowners' association) retains
ownership of any stormwater management facility, such
entity shall be responsible for maintenance of the facility.
In such case, approval of the stormwater management
facility plans shall be conditioned upon the private entity
agreeing to be responsible for all maintenance of the
stormwater management facility. This agreement shall be
in writing, shall be in recordable form and shall contain a
provision permitting access to such facilities deemed
critical to the public welfare for inspection at any
reasonable time by Warwick Township or its designee.
[2] When any stormwater management facility is located on
an individual lot, and when maintenance thereof is the
responsibility of that landowner, a description of the
facility or systems and terms of the required maintenance
shall be incorporated on a plat of the property. The plat
shall be recorded with the Bucks County Recorder of
Deeds within 90 days following Township approval. The
plat of the property shall also contain a provision
permitting access to such facilities deemed critical to
public welfare for inspection at any reasonable time by
Warwick Township or its designee.
[3] Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of Warwick Township may enter at any
reasonable time upon any property within the Township to
investigate or to ascertain the condition of the subject
property.
[4] The failure of any person, individual lot owner or private
entity to properly maintain any stormwater management
facility shall be construed to be a violation of this section
and is declared to be a public nuisance, subjecting the
violator to any and all penalties provided by law.
Specifically, in the event that the entity responsible for
maintenance fails to honor those responsibilities set forth
herein, in any manner, Warwick Township shall have the
right of entry upon the area of such facilities to undertake
any required corrective or maintenance effort. The total
cost of such, including administrative, engineering, and
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:356
legal costs for enforcement, may be imposed upon the
responsible party as determined by Warwick Township.
Failure to remedy all associated costs described above
may be subject to the imposition of a lien by the Township
against the owner(s) in question, in the same manner as
the Township might otherwise be empowered by law to
assess or impose a lien against a property for municipal
improvements.
(f) When basins are provided, they shall be designed to utilize the
natural contours of the land whenever possible. When such
design is not practical, the construction of the basin shall
utilize slopes as flat as possible to blend the structure into the
terrain. Detention basins shall be designed to facilitate regular
maintenance, mowing and periodic desilting and reseeding. In
residential developments, shallow, broad basins shall be
provided for recreational use. The maximum depth of the onehundred-
year water surface in a detention basin shall be five
feet.
(g) Except with the one-year design storm, permanent detention
basins shall be designed so that they return to normal
conditions within approximately 24 hours after the termination
of the storm, unless the Township Engineer finds that
downstream conditions may warrant other design criteria for
stormwater release.
(h) Detention basins shall not be located on more than one lot.
(i) Basins shall not be located within floodplains.
(j) Landscaping and grading of detention basins. All landscaping
and grading of detention basins shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Naturalized basins are required.
Planting and seeding designs shall be prepared by appropriate
professionals and approved by the Township.
[1] The portion of the basin which is dry most of the time shall
be landscaped in a combination of the following. Plantings
and/or seed mixes shall be as listed in the Army Corps of
Engineers Wetlands Manual as FACW or FAC plants, or the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, as amended.
[a] Dense ground cover, birdsfoot trefoil or approved
equal.
[b] Naturalized grasses.
[c] Wildflower/grass mix.
[d] Other methods approved by the Township.
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:357
[2] The portion of the basin which will be wet most of the time
shall be landscaped in a combination of the following.
Plantings and/or seed mixes shall be as listed in the Army
Corps of Engineers Wetlands Manual as FACW or FAC
plants, or the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended.
[a] Naturalized grasses, switchgrass or approved equal.
[b] Wildflower seed mix.
[c] FACW wetland meadow mix.
[d] Live plugs.
[e] Other methods approved by the Township.
(k) If a stormwater management basin will serve as a temporary
sediment control device, the temporary sediment control
measures shall be shown, including perforated riser pipes or
standboxes, filter berms, cleanout stakes and other measures
as may be required by Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Chapter 102 regulations.
Sedimentation basins shall be installed and functional prior to
any earthmoving activities within their tributary drainage
areas. A perforated riser, sized in accordance with Bucks
County Conservation District requirements, shall be provided
at each basin outlet structure for sediment control. Risers shall
not be removed until such time as the entire area tributary to
the basin has been permanently stabilized and until approved
by the Bucks County Conservation District and/or the Township
Engineer.
(l) Stormwater management basins shall be in place before the
creation of any additional impervious surfaces on the site.
Runoff shall not be directed to an infiltration structure until all
tributary drainage areas are stabilized.
(m) Where permanent retention (pond) facilities are proposed,
there shall be a safety ledge, three feet wide at the maximum
water surface level. If the pond is to be stocked, the
Pennsylvania Fish and Game Commission shall approve the
stocking plan.
(n) All basin berms shall have slopes of four horizontal to one
vertical (4:1), or less. The top or toe of any slope shall be
located a minimum of five feet from any property line.
(o) Basin embankment. The fill material shall be taken from
selected borrow areas. It shall be free of roots, woody
vegetation, oversized stones, rocks or other objectionable
material. Areas on which fill is to be placed shall be scarified
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:358
prior to placement of fill. The fill material should contain
sufficient moisture so that it can be formed by hand into a ball
without crumbling. If water can be squeezed out of the ball, it
is too wet for proper compaction. Fill material shall be placed
with lifts not exceeding one foot and shall be continuous over
the entire length of the fill. Fill material must be compacted to
a minimum of 95% of modified proctor density as established
by ASTM D-1557. Compaction testing by a certified soils
engineer/geologist must be completed as directed by the
Township Engineer to verify that adequate compaction has
been achieved.
(p) Emergency overflow facilities/spillway shall be provided with
basins in order to convey basin inflow in excess of design flows,
out of the basin, or in the event the outlet structure becomes
blocked and is unable to convey flow. Emergency spillways
discharging over embankments shall be lined. Lining for
emergency spillways shall incorporate native colors and
materials where possible. The lining shall extend to the toe of
the embankment on the outside of the berm and shall extend to
an elevation of three feet below the spillway crest on the inside
of the berm. Vegetated spillways may be utilized for spillways
constructed entirely on undisturbed ground if the designer can
demonstrate that flow velocities through the spillway will not
cause erosion of the spillway. A dense cover of vegetation shall
be rapidly established in such spillways by sodding or seeding
with geotextile anchor. Such a vegetated spillway must be
stabilized before runoff is directed to the basin. All spillway
velocities shall be based upon flows during an assumed
clogged primary outlet condition. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be equivalent to the peak flow rate
of the one-hundred-year, post-development design storm with
the primary outlet structure blocked.
(q) For all permanent detention basins, the permanent outlet
control structure shall be a Type M inlet, grate and box, or
similar structure as approved by the Township Engineer. The
inlet grate elevation shall be at least six inches below the
emergency spillway elevation.
(r) The minimum top-of-basin berm width shall be 10 feet. A cutoff
trench (keyway) of impervious material shall be provided
under all embankments that require fill material. The cutoff
trench shall be a minimum of eight feet wide, two feet deep
below virgin ground and have side slopes of one horizontal to
one vertical.
(s) The minimum freeboard through the emergency spillway shall
be one foot. "Freeboard" is defined as the difference between
the design flow elevation through the spillway and the
elevation of the top of the settled basin berm. In addition, there
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:359
shall be one foot of freeboard provided between the onehundred-
year routed water surface elevation and the invert of
the emergency spillway.
(t) Anti-seep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel and
shall be centered within the normal saturation zone of the
berm. The anti-seep collars shall be cast-in-place and extend a
minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal pipe
barrel. Precast collars may be permitted only when approved
by the Township Engineer. A minimum of two collars shall be
installed on each outlet pipe.
(u) Energy-dissipating devices (rock lining/riprap) shall be
provided at all basin outlets and shall be sized in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Erosion and Sediment Control Program Manual, latest
revision.
(v) An access easement (minimum 20 feet in width) and stabilized
drive to stormwater detention facilities shall be provided for
maintenance and operation. Proximity of detention facilities to
the public right-of-way shall be encouraged in order to
minimize the length of accessways. Multiple accesses shall be
encouraged for major facilities. Accessways to basins shall be a
minimum of 12 feet in width and be no steeper in slope than 12
feet horizontal to one foot vertical. In addition, depressed curb
shall be provided where the accessway enters a street/
driveway. The stabilized driveway shall extend from the bottom
of the interior basin berm embankment to the point of access to
the basin. The access easement shall be owned and maintained
by the individual lot owner(s) or a homeowners' association but
shall be established to permit access by Warwick Township or
its designee for emergency inspection and/or maintenance at
any reasonable time.
(w) The minimum distance between a proposed basin discharge
point and a downstream property boundary shall be 50 feet.
(x) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path
through the basin.
(8) Underground detention basins and infiltration facilities.
Underground detention basins and infiltration facilities shall meet
the following minimum design standards:
(a) A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided between
the one-hundred-year water surface elevation and the top of all
inlet grates or manhole rims.
(b) Inlets or storm manhole structures with steps shall be located
at each corner of the underground detention basin to provide
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-16
155:360
access for maintenance. If the pipe diameter is less than 24
inches, cleanout ports shall be provided at appropriate
locations to permit flushing of the system as necessary.
(c) The infiltration system shall be set back at least 15 feet from all
structures with subgrade elements (i.e., basements) and
outside all public rights-of-way.
(d) Infiltration rates shall not be used in computing the storage
volume of the infiltration system.
(e) Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge
of sediment. Accordingly, pretreatment shall be provided prior
to infiltration.
(f) Underground detention basins shall be constructed of
perforated high-density corrugated polyethylene pipe or
approved equal. The required volume shall be provided
utilizing only underground pipe capacity. Each pipe shall have
a minimum slope of 0.5%.
(g) An emergency overflow weir shall be provided for the outlet
structure in order to convey basin inflow in excess of design
flows or in the event that the outlet structure becomes blocked
and is unable to convey the design flow. The minimum capacity
of the emergency overflow weir shall be equivalent to the onehundred-
year peak inflow rate for the post-development design
storm. Site improvements and grading downstream of the
underground detention basin shall be designed to convey the
one-hundred-year peak inflow rate to a natural outfall, storm
sewer system or other drainage facility without adversely
affecting downstream properties.
(9) Wet basins. Existing ponds or permanent pool basins can be used,
provided that they meet the following minimum standards in
addition to providing the required release rate and volume control
requirements:
(a) The minimum permanent pool basins can be maintained to
allow sufficient depth throughout the year to reduce the
growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes.
(b) The pond must be of sufficient size and depth to allow the
appropriate aquatic community needed to maintain healthy
pond ecology.
(c) An outlet structure shall be designed to allow complete
drainage of the pond for maintenance.
(d) The design of a wet basin shall include the determination of the
proposed site's ability to support a viable permanent pool. The
design should take into account such factors as the required
§ 157-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-16
155:361
§ 157-17. Grading, erosion and sedimentation controls.
rate and quality of dry-weather inflow, the quality of
stormwater inflow, seasonal and longer-term variations in the
groundwater table, and effects of suspected pollutant loadings.
The Pennsylvania Fish Commission and Natural Resources
Conservation Service should be consulted during the design of
facilities.
(10) Riparian buffers proposed to meet the water quality standards shall
meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) The minimum overland flow length through the buffer shall be
25 feet.
(b) The maximum overland flow length contributing runoff to the
boundary of the riparian buffer shall be 150 feet for pervious
surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces.
(c) The average contributing overland slope shall not exceed 5%.
(d) Runoff shall enter the riparian buffer as sheet flow. A levelspreading
device shall be utilized where sheet can no longer be
maintained.
(e) The riparian buffer shall be specifically designated on the final
subdivision and/or land development plan and shall be
landscaped in accordance with the requirements of and as
recommended by the Township Engineer. Plan notes should
also indicate the portions of the riparian buffer being used to
satisfy the requirements. Generally, the riparian buffer should
be increased in effectiveness while maintaining a natural state
as much as possible to maximize water quality benefits.
A. Grading.
(1) Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away
from buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools,
except as approved by the Township Engineer. Grading at buildings
shall conform to Township Building Codes, as amended. The
minimum allowable slope in lawn areas shall not be less than 2%.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface
water to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural
watercourse.
(3) The owner shall construct and/or install such drainage structures
and/or pipes necessary to prevent erosion damage and to
satisfactorily carry off such surface waters.
(4) No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than
three horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions, as approved by the Township Engineer:
§ 157-16 WARWICK CODE § 157-17
155:362
(a) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical, and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer
and approved by him. The statement shall state that the site
has been inspected and that the deviation from the slope
specified hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or
damage to property.
(b) A concrete or stone masonry wall, or modular block wall,
constructed in accordance with approved standards is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(c) Design drawings and supporting calculations, both prepared
by an engineer registered to practice in Pennsylvania, shall be
submitted to the Township for review prior to construction of
retaining walls.
(5) No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in
slope than three horizontal to one vertical, except under one or
more of the following conditions, as approved by the Township
Engineer:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
commonwealth and experienced in erosion control, certifying
that he has inspected the site and that the proposed deviation
from the slope specified above will not endanger any property
or result in property damage, is submitted to and approved by
the Township Engineer.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall or modular block wall
constructed in accordance with approved standards is
provided to support the face of the fill.
(6) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of five feet
from property or right-of-way lines of streets or alleys in order to
permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the
abutting property.
(7) Grading equipment shall not be allowed to cross any wetlands,
watercourses, floodplains, etc., without prior approval by the
appropriate Township, state and federal agencies.
(8) Within all subdivisions and land developments, and all singlefamily,
multifamily residential, commercial or noncommercial
buildings, additions or developments, expansion or changes of any
impervious areas or surfaces, the owner, agent, builder or builders
§ 157-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-17
155:363
shall be required to fine grade and seed each individual lot within a
subdivision or the lot within the land development. Each lot shall be
fine graded to its boundary lines and adjusted accordingly to meet
existing grades adjacent to the boundary lines prior to issuance
of any use and occupancy permits for any dwelling or building
within any subdivision or land development. In the event that the
developer cannot complete the required grading and seeding due
to mitigating circumstances, the developer shall escrow with
Warwick Township the appropriate sums as determined by the
Warwick Township Engineer to guarantee the grading or
adjustments to any grades in any areas which shall impair
stormwater runoff on any adjacent lot in any way.
(9) “Fine grading” shall be defined as that work which is required to
remove all large lumps, particles and debris within the lot area.
This shall be accomplished by hand-raking or mechanical
equipment mounted with a fine-tooth rake. Dragging with a trackmounted
tractor or wheel-mounted tractor will not be considered
as fine grading. Fine grading shall also include the installation of a
minimum of a four-inch thickness of topsoil.
(10) Limits of grading and seeding within a wooded lot shall be the
same as any other type of lot; and all lots, whether wooded or not,
within a subdivision and/or a land development shall be graded and
seeded from boundary to boundary unless it is specifically agreed
by the subdivider, owner, builder or builders and the purchaser of
the lot or lots in writing to the contrary. Evidence of this
arrangement must be submitted to the Township Building
Inspector for his review prior to the issuance of any use and
occupancy permit being issued for the structure on the lot where
located, unless waived by Warwick Township. Grading and seeding
shall also be a requirement between all areas of sidewalk and curb
subject to all the hereinbefore-stated requirements and conditions,
except where the same may be waived by Warwick Township.
(11) Where stormwater drainage swales are installed, if, in the opinion
of the Township Engineer, there may be erosion prior to
establishment of vegetation, he may require the installation of sod,
geotextile matting, or other methods to ensure stabilization.
(12) Lawn areas shall be considered to be poorly drained if they contain
standing water for longer than a twelve-hour period following the
cessation of precipitation, which determination may be subject to
the consideration of antecedent moisture conditions.
(13) All fill material utilized shall be clean and free from rock, refuse,
debris, stone, concrete, brick, building material scraps, blacktop,
organic material or other foreign material.
(14) All debris, such as but not limited to concrete, blacktop, wood,
wood chips, stumps, refuse, building material or other material as
§ 157-17 WARWICK CODE § 157-17
155:364
determined inappropriate by the Township Engineer, shall be
removed from the site and disposed of according to the governing
regulations.
(15) All building foundations, grade slabs and cellar floors located in
soils that have a community development limitation degree of
moderate to severe seasonal high-water table (as defined in the
Bucks County Soil Survey) shall be provided with an underdrain
system. This system shall provide for drainage of the enclosed
volume above the slab and relief of subsurface water to a depth not
less than 18 inches below the slab or foundation bottom. The
system will consist of a perforated pipe field of the herringbone or
gridiron configuration in coarse gravel-filled trenches that are in
direct contact with the slab or foundation subbase. The excavation
shall provide a minimum of 0.05 foot/foot slope to the gravel-filled
trenches. Foundation drains shall discharge to a storm sewer
system or into a natural watercourse as directed by the Township
or Township Engineer.
B. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) No regulated earth-disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval of an erosion and sediment control plan
by the Township. In addition, the Bucks County Conservation
District requires submission of an erosion and sediment control
plan for any earth-disturbance activity of 1,000 square feet or
more.
(2) Pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.5, a DEP NPDES permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activities is
required for any earth-disturbance activity that involves equal to or
greater than one acre of earth disturbance prior to commencing
the earth-disturbance activity. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion or part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development or sale.
(3) Detailed construction schedules shall be included in all erosion and
sedimentation plans and stormwater management plans for sites
disturbing in excess of 1,000 square feet of site area.
(4) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated activities from
the appropriate DEP regional office or County Conservation
District must be provided to the municipality. The issuance of an
NPDES construction permit or permit coverage under the
statewide general permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements of
Subsection B(1). A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan
and any required permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be
available at the project site at all times.
(5) General performance principles. The following shall be adhered to
where applicable during design and construction of approved
plans:
§ 157-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-17
155:365
(a) Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development shall
be done in a way that will minimize erosion.
(b) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features,
keep cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity
with topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water
runoff.
(c) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected, and supplemented.
(d) Disturbed areas shall be stabilized immediately or, at a
minimum, at the end of the day. In addition, any dirt tracked
onto roadways outside the subject property shall be cleaned
prior to the end of the workday or as directed by the Township
Engineer.
(e) Temporary seeding and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(f) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion
control and drainage shall be installed as soon as practical in
the development.
(g) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the
disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins,
sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures.
(h) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control must be exercised.
(i) Installation and maintenance of all erosion control facilities
shall be the responsibility of the applicant until all disturbed
areas have been stabilized to the satisfaction of the Township
and the Bucks County Conservation District.
(j) In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade
prior to recording plans without satisfying conditions of plan
approval, the Warwick Township Board of Supervisors may
revoke its approval of the preliminary plan.
(k) Tire-cleaning areas shall be provided at each point of access to
the development site.
(l) No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the
flow of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or
thing or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow
in any communal stream or watercourse without having
obtained prior approval from the Township or Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), whichever
is applicable.
§ 157-17 WARWICK CODE § 157-17
155:366
(6) Responsibility.
(a) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of
the applicant and/or person, corporation or other entity
causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any
damage at his expense as quickly as possible.
(b) Maintenance of all temporary erosion and sedimentation
control facilities within any subdivision or land development is
the responsibility of the developer until they are accepted by
the Township or some other official agency, after which they
become the responsibility of the accepting agency.
§ 157-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-17
155:367

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 157-18. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance or activity may not proceed until the property owner or
applicant or his/her agent has received written approval of an SWM site
plan from the Township and approval of an adequate erosion and sediment
(E&S) control plan from the Township or County Conservation District.
§ 157-19. SWM Site plan requirements.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project,
including calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall
be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat, and well-organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be
accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following
items shall be included with the SWM site plan:
A. General.
(1) A general description of the project, including plan contents
described in § 157-19B. The narrative should include references to
all applicable items as noted in the SWM Site Plan Checklist
(Appendix C-1).90 It is not necessary to submit the checklist if a
comprehensive narrative has been submitted.
(2) The overall stormwater management concept for the project and a
general description of proposed SWM techniques to be used for
SWM facilities.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 157-10. All calculations shall be
prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Computations of the stormwater runoff for all
points of runoff concentration, before and after development,
including all supporting data, including but not limited to:
(a) Design computations for the sizing of the basin pipe barrel and
outlet structure as well as the perforated riser.
(b) A stage storage curve for the basin(s).
90.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-18 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-19
155:369
(c) Basin routing calculations, including stage versus storage
versus outflow rating curve.
(d) A plan depicting the basin(s) berm embankment and outlet
structure, including the top of berm, berm side slopes,
emergency spillway elevation, width, lining material type, size,
number and spacing of the anti-seep collars, and size and
location of the basin berm cutoff trench, etc.
(e) A detailed plan of all proposed off-site improvements (if any).
(4) A general description of proposed nonpoint-source pollution
controls and erosion control measures.
(5) A post-construction stormwater management plan to identify the
ownership and maintenance responsibilities for all stormwater
management facilities. At a minimum, the maintenance plan shall
include the following:
(a) Any obligations concerning perpetuation and/or maintenance
of natural drainage or infiltration facilities and other facilities
identified within the stormwater management plan.
(b) A description of the facilities and systems on the lot, as called
for above, setting forth in deed restrictions binding on the
landowner's successors in interest.
(c) Assurances that no action will be taken by any lot owner to
disrupt or in any way impair the effectiveness of any
stormwater management system, setting forth in deed
restrictions the ability of the Township, in the event that
stormwater management facilities have been eliminated,
altered, or improperly maintained, to enter the property,
complete the necessary work to restore or maintain the
stormwater management facilities and file a lien against the
property to recover the expenses of the Township in gaining
entry to the property and performing the necessary repairs and
maintenance. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
(6) The SWM site plan application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee for all regulated activities not already paying
fees under the SALDO regulations91 (Appendix C-192).
(7) Appropriate sections from the Warwick Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance,93 and other applicable local
ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
B. Plans. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
92.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 157-19 WARWICK CODE § 157-19
155:370
(1) A determination of natural site conditions and stormwater
management needs. This shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Site features:
[1] The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
[2] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines on site and to within 100 feet of
property lines. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-10]
[3] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
[4] The total tract boundary and size, with distances marked
to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
[5] Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including
drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales. At
a minimum, this should include pre- and post-drainage
area maps, an overall post-construction stormwater
management plan, stormwater detail sheets, and
landscape plans (if proposing bioretention facilities, lowimpact
development, bioretention, or vegetative basins).
[6] The locations and minimum setback distances of existing
and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply
wells.
[7] The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
[8] The location of proposed septic tank infiltration areas and
wells in cases where groundwater recharge measures
such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are proposed.
(b) Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to:
steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
stream buffers, open channels, existing recharge areas and
floodplains. The area of each of these sensitive areas shall be
calculated and should be consistent with the runoff volume
calculation in § 157-12C(1).
(c) As applicable, a detailed site evaluation for projects proposed
in areas of frequent flooding, karst topography, and other
environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields and
source water protection areas.
(d) Existing and proposed contour lines (two feet minimum).
(e) The total extent of the drainage area upstream from the site
and all downgradient receiving channels, swales and waters to
which stormwater runoff or drainage will be discharged.
§ 157-19 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-19
155:371
(f) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(2) The format of the plan shall include the following:
(a) The expected project time schedule and proposed sequence of
construction.
(b) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(c) The date of submission.
(d) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet. For tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale can be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet, provided that areas of proposed
grading shall be shown at no less than one inch equals 50 feet.
(e) A North arrow.
(f) An access easement around all stormwater management
facilities is required that will provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way. The size of the easement shall
commensurate with the maintenance and access requirements
determined in the design of the BMP.
(g) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(h) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities. All facilities
shall meet the performance standards and design criteria
specified in this chapter.
(i) The following signature block for the design engineer: "I,
(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of Warwick Township."
(j) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan must be approved by
the municipality and that a revised E&S plan must be
submitted to the Conservation District.
(3) An erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable. The
erosion control plan shall be prepared to ensure that the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, will be met.
(4) The plan shall contain the following notes:
§ 157-19 WARWICK CODE § 157-19
155:372
§ 157-20. Plan submission.
The municipality requires submission of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter. If the project is also being submitted as a
subdivision and land development plan, the required submittal materials
may be combined with the subdivision and land development application
requirements.
(a) No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any
stormwater management (SWM) best management practices
(BMPs), facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program and written approval of the
Township has been obtained.
(b) No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or
vegetation into a stormwater facility or BMP or within a
drainage easement which would limit or alter the functioning
of the stormwater facility or BMP without the written approval
of the Township.
(c) All disturbed topsoil on site is to be redistributed on site in
areas not covered by impervious surfaces. No removal of
topsoil from a site is allowed unless approved by Warwick
Township.
(5) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete stormwater
management design for the proposed subdivision and land
development shall be submitted. The proposed design must include
the entire tract and not just a portion. If only a section of a
subdivision or land development is contemplated for construction,
the design engineer shall show how he proposes to handle
stormwater from this section in order to prevent damage to
adjacent properties. If temporary construction is required, the
design engineer shall include such structures in the plan(s)
submitted.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. Six copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted to the following
agencies:
(1) Two copies to the municipality, accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
§ 157-19 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-20
155:373
§ 157-21. Stormwater Management (SWM) site plan review.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer (where applicable).
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department if the
regulated activity is also required to submit a subdivision and/or
land development plan to the County Planning Commission in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.94
C. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification, in writing, of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
D. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
PADEP.
A. The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by a qualified professional on
behalf of the municipality for consistency with the provisions of this
chapter. After review, the qualified professional shall provide a written
recommendation for the municipality to approve or disapprove the
SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM site plan,
the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval in
writing. The qualified professional also may recommend approval of the
SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable
conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and
recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code for reviewing subdivision plans.
B. The municipality will notify the applicant, in writing, within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
period is 90 days. The time limits for notification may be waived or
extended by the applicant. If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan,
the municipality shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.
C. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the SWM site plan, as determined by the municipality,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in
accordance with this article.
D. A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in
accordance with this article.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 157-20 WARWICK CODE § 157-21
155:374
§ 157-22. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan
is not completed according to this section within the term of validity, the
Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 157-20 of this
chapter.
E. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for providing asbuilt
plans of all SWM BMPs and grading changes included in the
approved SWM site plan and/or small project SWM site plan for
projects which include the installation of an in-ground swimming pool.
The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies, which were
reviewed and received approval by the municipality, shall be submitted
to the municipality. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-3]
F. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional land surveyor licensed in the State of
Pennsylvania verifying that all SWM BMPs have been constructed
according to the approved plans and specifications (or subsequently
approved revision thereof). If any qualified professionals contributed to
the construction plans, they must sign and seal the completion
certificate. As-built plans shall be submitted to Warwick Township for
review and approval upon completion of construction of all facilities
and prior to offer of dedication of any public facilities and/or submission
of financial security for the required maintenance period. Public
facilities will be not be accepted by Warwick Township until such time
the as-constructed plans have been reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer.
G. Upon approval of the as-built plan, the applicant shall provide the
Township with copies of the plan in paper and digital (.dwg) formats.
§ 157-21 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-22
155:375

ARTICLE V
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 157-23. Inspections.
§ 157-24. Right of entry.
A. The municipality shall inspect all phases of the installation of the best
management practices (BMPs) and/or stormwater management (SWM)
facilities as deemed appropriate by the municipality.
B. During any stage of the work, if the municipality determines that the
BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the municipality shall
revoke any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease and
desist order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved,
as specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
may be conducted by the municipality to confirm compliance with the
approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater facilities or
best management practices (BMPs) in regard to any aspect governed by
this chapter.
B. Landowners with stormwater facilities and BMPs on their property
shall allow persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance
with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater facility or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater facilities or BMPs.
§ 157-23 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-24
155:377

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 157-25. Municipal stormwater management (SWM) site plan
review and inspection fees.
Fees shall be established by the municipality to cover plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. The municipality
shall periodically update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure
that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 157-26. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter (unless otherwise waived by the
municipality) shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the stormwater (SWM) site plan by the Township or
Township Engineer, including the review of as-built drawings.
C. Site inspections, including but not limited to preconstruction meetings,
inspection of SWM facilities and drainage improvements during
construction, and final inspections upon completion of the stormwater
facilities and BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
E. Legal fees for preparation of agreements and correspondence
necessary or appropriate to comply with this chapter.
§ 157-25 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-26
155:379

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 157-27. Performance guaranty.
§ 157-28. Responsibilities for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
stormwater facilities and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guaranty to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management (SWM) facilities as
required by the Municipalities Planning Code.95 The funds provided
shall be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the
required SWM facilities.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a financial
guaranty from the applicant to ensure timely installation and proper
construction of the SWM facilities as approved.
C. The owner of stormwater management facilities shall be responsible for
their proper maintenance during and after development.
A. On or before completion of subdivision or land development
improvements, the permanent stormwater management system for a
tract shall be fully installed and functional in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan. Temporary sediment-trapping
facilities in detention basins under the management plan, upon
inspection and approval by the Township Engineer and Bucks County
Conservation District, shall be converted into permanent stormwater
management basins; additional facilities designed to serve more than
an individual lot shall begin operation. All such work shall be specified
in the approved stormwater management plans.
B. The owner of any land upon which stormwater facilities and BMPs will
be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site
plan, shall record the following documents in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds for Bucks County, contemporaneously with Township approval
of the stormwater facility and stormwater management site plan:
[Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
(1) Stormwater management agreement.
(2) Stormwater management/drainage easements.
C. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
95.Editor's Note; See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 157-27 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-28
155:381
§ 157-29. Operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement for
privately owned stormwater facilities and BMPs.
§ 157-30. Stormwater management easements.
D. The SWM site plan for the project site shall establish responsibilities for
the continuing operation and maintenance (O&M) of all stormwater
facilities and BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater facilities and
BMPs may also be offered for dedication to and maintained by the
municipality.
(2) If a plan includes O&M by single ownership, or if sewers and other
public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, the
O&M of stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility
of the owner or private management entity.
E. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
O&M responsibilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or
reject the O&M responsibility for any or all of the stormwater facilities
and BMPs.
F. Facilities, areas, or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or conservation easements that run with the land.
G. The SWM site plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
H. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article and this chapter.
A. The owner shall sign an O&M agreement with the municipality covering
all stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The
O&M agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership.
B. The O&M agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the
municipality.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform
the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
A. The owner must obtain all necessary real estate rights to install,
operate, and maintain all stormwater facilities in the SWM site plan.
B. The owner must provide the municipal easements, or other appropriate
real estate rights, to perform inspections and maintenance for the
§ 157-28 WARWICK CODE § 157-30
155:382
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas.
C. Stormwater management facilities ownership and maintenance. All
stormwater management facilities identified within an approved
stormwater management site plan shall be owned and maintained by
one, or a combination, of the following entities:
(1) Individual lot stormwater facilities. Stormwater management
facilities and systems that are located on an individual lot are the
responsibility of that landowner to maintain. All deeds shall
incorporate the maintenance responsibilities specified in the
approved maintenance plan, making explicit individual owner's
responsibilities for stormwater management measures and for the
common property.
(2) Homeowners' or condominium association ownership (other
stormwater facilities located on individually owned lots). A single
entity taking the form of a private corporation, partnership, firm,
estate or other legal entity empowered to own real estate, exclusive
of individual lot owners, shall be set up to manage stormwater
management facilities that are suitable for such management and
to perform other functions defined in this section. Maintenance
responsibilities specified in the approved maintenance plan should
be referenced on the plan and recorded into lot deeds,
homeowners' or condominium association articles of incorporation,
or some other permanent legal document.
(3) Municipal ownership. Where Warwick Township has accepted an
offer of dedication of the permanent stormwater management
facilities, Warwick Township shall be responsible for maintenance.
Municipal ownership notwithstanding, the applicant is required to
prepare a stormwater management plan including a maintenance
component, as defined above. Upon approval of the stormwater
management facilities by Warwick Township, the applicant shall
provide a financial security, in a form approved by the Warwick
Township Solicitor, for maintenance guaranties, as follows:
(a) Long-term maintenance bond. The long-term maintenance
bond shall be in an amount and for a time period as determined
by Warwick Township. The estimated annual maintenance cost
for the facilities shall be based on a reasonable fee schedule
provided by the Township Engineer and adopted by the
Warwick Commissioners.
(b) Documentation. The terms of the maintenance guaranties shall
be documented as part of the stormwater management plan
and the maintenance plan.
§ 157-30 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-30
155:383

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 157-31. Prohibited discharges.
§ 157-32. Roof drains.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of the commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except as provided in Subsection C below and discharges allowed under
a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized, unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(9) Lawn watering.
(10) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges [per Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) requirements].
(11) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(12)Water from individual residential car washing.
(13) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or
PADEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 157-31 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-32
155:385
§ 157-33. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs and, to the maximum extent practicable, satisfy the
criteria for disconnected impervious areas (DIAs). When it is more
advantageous to connect directly to storm sewers, such connections
may be permitted by the Township. Roof drains and sump pumps shall
not discharge directly to streets.
B. Roof drain and sump pump discharge locations shall be a minimum of
20 feet from an adjacent property, subject to Township approval.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any stormwater
management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs), facilities,
areas, or structures, unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program, without the written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater facility or BMP or within a drainage easement which
would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater facility or BMP
without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 157-32 WARWICK CODE § 157-33
155:386
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 157-34. Enforcement.
§ 157-35. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals;
reinstatement.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fee to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater facilities and best management
practices (BMPs); and
(7) Operation and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township, and the expense may be charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified may subject a violator to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and
all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by
the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
§ 157-34 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-35
155:387
§ 157-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 157-37. Appeals.
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life, health, or
property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater facilities and BMPs or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and
(2) The Township is satisfied that all applicable violations in this
chapter have been corrected.
C. Any permit or approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. All inspections regarding compliance with the stormwater management
(SWM) site plan and this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
municipality.
B. Whenever a landowner fails to comply with the written notice of
violation described in § 157-34, the municipality may secure compliance
with the terms of this chapter through all available legal remedies. The
Township may proceed in a court of equity and/or file a summary
citation with a court having jurisdiction of violations of this chapter. Any
landowner, person or entity, upon a finding or conviction by a court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be sentenced to pay a judgment of not
more than $500 for each violation. Each day the violation continues
shall be a separate violation. All remedies shall be cumulative.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action pursuant to this chapter may
appeal to the Warwick Township Board of Supervisors within 30 days of
that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Warwick Township Board of
Supervisors under this chapter may appeal the decision to the Bucks
County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the decision.
[Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
§ 157-35 WARWICK CODE § 157-37
155:388
Chapter 159
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 57.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Littering — See Ch. 111.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Towing — See Ch. 174.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 177.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 157-37 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 157-37
155:389

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 3:100 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code]
§ 159-1. Official Road Map. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
The Board hereby adopts as the Official Road Map of the Township the
street index map dated August 1989.
§ 159-2. Road widths.
§ 159-3. Construction plans required.
No person, partnership, association or corporation shall construct, open or
dedicate any road or street or any sewer or drainage facilities in connection
therewith for public use or travel in the Township without first submitting
plans therefor to the Board for its approval, and no road or street or
sewer or drainage facilities in connection therewith shall be opened, laid or
constructed except in strict accordance with plans approved by the Board.
§ 159-4. Contents of road and street plans.
Such plans shall show the profiles of such roads or streets, the course,
structure and capacity of any drainage facilities, the method of drainage of
the adjacent or contiguous territory, a drainage profile of the streets and a
plan showing drainage of the whole property. All roads and streets shall be
A. The total width of the following roads shown on said Official Road Map,
in equal distances from the present established center lines thereof,
shall for the entire lengths thereof be 100 feet.96
B. The total widths of the following roads shown on such Official Road
Map, in equal distances from the present established center lines
thereof, shall for the entire lengths thereof be 80 feet.97
C. The total widths of the following roads shown on such Official Road
Map, in equal distances from the present established center lines
thereof, shall for the entire lengths thereof be 60 feet.98
D. The total widths of the following roads shown on such Official Road
Map, in equal distances from the present established center lines
thereof, shall for the entire lengths thereof be 50 feet.99
96.Editor's Note: The current lists of roads of various widths are on file in the Township
offices.
97.Editor's Note: The current lists of roads of various widths are on file in the Township
offices.
98.Editor's Note: The current lists of roads of various widths are on file in the Township
offices.
99.Editor's Note: The current lists of roads of various widths are on file in the Township
offices.
§ 159-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-4
155:391
of a width of not less than 50 feet, the cartway shall be not less than 20
feet and shoulders adjacent to said road not less than eight feet, allowing
nine feet for sidewalk area and the erection of utility poles. All roads and
streets shall connect with dedicated roads and streets or proposed roads
and streets so as to form as nearly as possible through roads and streets and
a harmonious and systematic development of the Township. The proposed
names of the roads and streets shall not conflict with the names of existing
roads and streets, and all roads and streets shall be designated by the
names of existing roads and streets with which they connect as extensions
thereof.
§ 159-5. Road and street shoulders.
Supporting shoulders shall be constructed on all sections where a base
course or pavement is to be constructed without other permanent support
along the sides. Shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with
drawings, cross sections and as directed of suitable material firmly
compacted. Shoulders shall be trimmed and compacted with a power roller
weighing not less than 10 tons or as specified in the then current
Pennsylvania State Highway Specifications, whichever is more restrictive.
The inside edges shall be cut to neat lines and to grade prior to the
placing of the material for the base course of pavement. This work will
not be considered as final completion of the shoulders but they shall be
satisfactorily completed after the surface course of pavement is placed.
Where a surface course is to be constructed on a base course of greater
width than the surface course, approved forms shall be used for holding
the surface course material in the correct position, unless other satisfactory
methods are specified or permitted. Subgrade drains shall be installed in
and through the shoulders at the discretion of the Township Engineer. The
finished grade on the shoulders shall be 3/4 inch to the foot.
§ 159-6. Submission of plans to Board of Supervisors.
Three copies of such plans shall be filed with the Secretary to the Board.
The Board shall not consider any plan which is required to be approved
under subject regulations by the Bucks County Planning Commission until
such approval has been obtained. Before acting upon any plan submitted
pursuant to §§ 159-3 and 159-4, the Board may, at its discretion, arrange for
a public hearing, after giving such notice as it may deem desirable.
§ 159-7. Alteration of plans.
The Board reserves the right to alter plans and to specify any changes or
modifications of any kind which it may deem necessary with respect thereto
and to make its approval of such plans subject to any such alterations,
changes or modifications.
§ 159-4 WARWICK CODE § 159-8
155:392
§ 159-8. Signing and filing of plans.
Any and all plans when so approved shall be signed by the Supervisors and
shall be filed in the office of the Secretary to the Board, where the same
shall be available for public inspection.
§ 159-9. Recording of plans.
The action of the Board in approving any such plans, and such plans
themselves, shall be recorded by the person applying for such approval in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County.
§ 159-10. Minimum specifications.
All roads and streets shown on said plans shall be improved in accordance
with such plans. Minimum specifications for road construction shall be
prescribed by the Board.
§ 159-11. Sewer, gas and water pipes.
All sewers, sewer laterals and sewer connections shall be laid in all
improved streets before paving where connection with a sewer is
practicable and shall be required by the Board, and all gas and water mains
and all service connections shall be laid before the paving of the streets
where gas and water are available. All other mains, pipes, conduits and the
like shall be installed before paving the cartway where it is proposed to
install any such service mains in the streets.
§ 159-12. Applications for approval of plans.
All applications for the approval of such plans shall be in writing and signed
by the owners of the property. Applications must be filed with the Secretary
to the Board; they shall set forth in detail the character of the improvements
to be made on the property shown on said plan, in accordance with the
provisions of this Article; and in such application, the applicant shall agree
to open, lay out and improve the roads or streets and to construct all of the
improvements, including sewers and drainage facilities upon the property
shown on the plan, within the time or times therein specified.
§ 159-13. Contract and bond required.
The Board may require the applicant to enter into a contract, in writing,
to install, erect and construct said improvements. In addition, the applicant
shall be required to furnish a certificate of a reputable title insurance
company, satisfactory to the Board, which, as of the date of approval,
shall set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of all property
covered by such plans and shall show and contain a list of all mortgages,
judgments, liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County, which shall affect the
property covered by such plans. If said certificates of title insurance shall
disclose that any such property shall be subject to any mortgage, judgment,
§ 159-8 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-13
155:393
easement, lien, contract or agreement or other matters of record, then, at
the option of the Board, the holders of such mortgages, judgments, liens,
easements, contracts or agreements shall be required to join in and approve
said application before the same shall be acted upon by the Board. The
applicant shall be required to furnish a bond in such amount, under such
conditions and form and with surety as shall be approved by the Board to
guarantee the performance of said contract and to secure the completion of
said improvements within the times therein specified. In lieu of a bond, the
applicant may deposit cash to guarantee performance of said contract and
to secure completion of the improvements upon an escrow agreement to be
prepared by the Township Solicitor and approved by the Board. The escrow
agent for the deposits of such cash shall be designated and selected by the
Board.
§ 159-14. Inspection and filing fees.
All applicants shall bear all costs of inspection of such roads or streets, and
such costs shall include the expense of the supervision of the work by the
Warwick Township Engineer. Additionally, all applicants shall pay a filing fee
as set forth in the Warwick Township Fee Schedule when the application is
filed.100
§ 159-15. Acceptance of road not mandatory.
No action taken by the Board pursuant to this article shall be construed to
require the Township to accept dedication of any road, street, lane or alley.
100. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 159-13 WARWICK CODE § 159-15
155:394
ARTICLE II
Street Excavations
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 3:500 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code]
§ 159-16. Permit required.
No railroad or street railway shall hereafter be constructed upon any
Township road, nor shall any railroad or street railway crossings or any gas
pipe, water pipe, electric conduits or other piping be laid upon or in, nor
shall any telephone, telegraph, cable television or electric light or power
poles or any coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected upon or in any
portion of a Township road except under such conditions, restrictions and
regulations relating to the installation and maintenance thereof as may be
prescribed in permits granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 159-17. Application for permit.
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township
and submitted to the Township in triplicate. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee set forth in the Warwick Township Fee Schedule. 101
In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of a sketch plan showing
such dimensions as the location of the intended facility, width of the traveled
roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension of the nearest intersecting
street.
§ 159-18. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been fulfilled.
§ 159-19. Notice of completion.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 159-20. Inspection and correction of defects.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify any such settlement or other defect within 60 days after written
notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall
impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%
of such cost.
101. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 159-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-21
155:395
§ 159-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-6; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon summary conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$600, plus the costs of prosecution. In default of the payment of such fine
and costs, said person or the principals of said firm or the officers and
directors of said corporation shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in
the Bucks County Prison for a period of not more than five days.
§ 159-21 WARWICK CODE § 159-21
155:396
ARTICLE III
Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5; amended in its entirety
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-2]
§ 159-22. Sidewalk repair required.
The Township may require owners of the property abutting on any street,
including state highways, to repair the sidewalk along such property, at
such grades and under such regulations as may be prescribed by the
Township.
§ 159-23. Curb repair required.
The Township may require owners of property abutting state highways
and owners of any nonresidential property to repair the curbs along such
property, at such grades and under such regulations as may be prescribed
by the Township.
§ 159-24. Notice to do work.
Notice to repair sidewalks and/or curbs shall be given by registered or
certified mail to abutting property owners, at the address to which tax bills
are sent, and the owners shall have 30 days to comply with the notice in
conformity with any specifications prescribed by the Township Engineer.
§ 159-24.1. Inspections.
At any time during the performance of the required work, the Township
Engineer may inspect the work to determine whether construction
specifications are being observed.
§ 159-24.2. Township may do work and collect costs.
Upon the failure of any property owner to maintain any sidewalk or curb in
compliance with notice to do so, the Township may do the same or cause
the same to be done and may levy the cost of its work on such owner as
a property lien, to be collected in the manner provided by the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act, Act of May 16, 1923, as amended.102
§ 159-24.3. Duty to keep sidewalks and curbs in good repair.
Every owner of property which abuts sidewalks shall at all times keep in
good repair all sidewalks abutting said property. Every owner of property,
the principal use of which is not residential, and every owner of property
along state highways shall at all times keep in good repair the curbs
abutting said property.
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 159-22 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-24.4
155:397
§ 159-24.4. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice from
sidewalks. [Amended 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-2]
Every person in charge or control of any building or any land fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,
or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and
cleared away, snow and/or ice from the sidewalk in front of or abutting said
building or lot of land. Snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks within
36 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain.
§ 159-24.5. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk or road or street
within the Township.
§ 159-24.6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-2]
Any person, firm, corporation, or utility which shall violate §§ 159-24.3,
159-24.4 and 159-24.5 shall be issued a citation by Warwick Township. The
citation shall provide that the responsible party may pay the fine by paying
the sum of $50 at the Township Building within 48 hours of receiving the
fine. If the fine is not paid, a summons shall be issued, and upon conviction
of the violation before a District Justice, the responsible party shall be
assessed a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300, plus the costs
of prosecution. Each thirty-six-hour period within which snow or ice is not
removed from the sidewalk shall constitute a new and separate violation,
punishable as described above.
§ 159-24.4 WARWICK CODE § 159-24.6
155:398
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6]
§ 159-25. Definition.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.
AFFILIATE — A person with a direct or indirect ownership interest in the
subject entity of 5% or more or which controls such interest, including
forms of ownership such as general, limited or other partnership interests,
direct ownership interests, limited liability companies and other forms of
business organizations and entities, but not including corporations; with a
stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a corporation
and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director of the grantee
or who directly or indirectly owns or controls 5% or more of the outstanding
stock, whether voting or nonvoting; or which controls the grantee and/or is
controlled by or is under common control with such person or entity.
CABLE SERVICE — Has the same meaning as used in the Communications
Act.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as amended
as of the time of enactment of this article.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain a
facility in the public way.
EXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses within
the service area but which is exempt from the provisions of this article
under § 157-27B of this article.
FACILITY — Any tangible asset in the public way used or required to
provide a nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service
area. The following are not a facility: a railroad, street railway, gas pipe,
water pipe, electric conduit, electric piping, telephone pole, telegraph pole,
electric light pole, electric power pole, coal tipple or obstruction to the
public way.
GRANTEE — A person who enjoys a nonexclusive privilege to occupy or use
a public way to provide nonexempt service under this article and who is in
continuous compliance with this article.
GROSS REVENUE — All gross revenue of the grantee or any affiliate of the
grantee derived from the use or occupancy of public ways for the provision
of nonexempt services to persons having a residence or place of business in
the service area. Gross revenue shall include amounts earned, regardless of
whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade or by means of some other
benefit to the grantee or its affiliates; whether the services with which the
revenue is associated are provided at cost or the revenue amount can be
§ 159-25 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-25
155:399
matched against an equivalent expenditure; and/or how the amounts are
initially recorded by the grantee or its affiliates. Gross revenue shall not be
a net of expense, including but not limited to any operating expense, capital
expense, sales expense or commission; any accrual, including, without
limitation, any accrual for commissions; or any other expenditure,
regardless of whether such expense, deduction, accrual or expenditure
reflects a cash payment. Gross revenue shall not be double counted, viz.,
gross revenue which has been included as gross revenue of both the grantee
and an affiliate but which sum is included in gross revenue due solely to a
transfer of funds between the grantee and the affiliate shall not be counted
for purposes of determining gross revenue.
NONEXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses
within the service area but which is not exempt from the provisions of this
article under § 159-27B of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, limited liability company, corporation or other form of
organization authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and which provides or seeks to provide one or more
nonexempt services to residences or businesses in the service area. A
governmental entity or a municipal authority is not a person.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, unopened right-of-way, highway, bridge, land, path, alley, court,
boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other
public right-of-way held by the Township in the service area. “Public way”
shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Township within
the service area for the purpose of public travel and/or for utility and/or
public service use dedicated for compatible uses.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the Township and
shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warwick, County of Bucks, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
§ 159-26. Registration.
Each person, other than on a transitory basis, who occupies or uses or
seeks to occupy or use a public way to provide a nonexempt service to
residences or businesses within the service area or places any equipment or
facility in a public way other than on a transitory basis, including persons
with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or
assignment, must register with the Township. Registration is accomplished
by filing with the Township a completed provider certification in the form
shown at Appendix A to this article.103
§ 159-27. Grant; exemptions.
103. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-25 WARWICK CODE § 159-27
155:400
A. Grant. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, remove,
relocate or perform any work on or use any facilities or any part thereof
in a public way unless in compliance with this article. Continuous
compliance with this article grants to grantee a nonexclusive privilege
to construct, repair, remove, relocate or perform any work on or use any
facilities or any part thereof in the public ways within the service area
and to occupy or use the public ways for the purpose of providing
nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service area
B. Exemptions. This article shall not apply to occupation or use of the
public ways to provide:
(1) The transportation of passengers or property, or both, as a common
carrier by means of elevated street railway, inclined plane railway,
railroad, street railway or underground street railway, tracklesstrolley
omnibus or by any combination of such means.
(2) The transportation of artificial or natural gas, electricity, petroleum
or petroleum products or water or any combination of such
substances for the public
(3) The production, generation, manufacture, transmission, storage,
distribution or furnishing of natural or artificial gas, electricity,
steam, air-conditioning or refrigerating service or any combination
thereof to or for the public,
(4) The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or
furnishing of water from either surface or subsurface sources to or
for the public.
(5) The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage for the public.
(6) The conveyance or transmission of messages or communications by
telephone or telegraph for the public.
(7) The diverting, pumping or impounding of water for the
development or furnishing of hydroelectric power to or for the
public.
(8) The transportation of oxygen or nitrogen, or both, by pipeline or
conduit for the public.
(9) Any ancillary service reasonably necessary or appropriate for the
accomplishment of services specified in Subsections B(1) through
(8).
(10) Cable service.
C. Not a cable system. This article does not authorize a person to provide
cable service. A person seeking to provide cable service must obtain
permission from the Township under separate legislation of the
Township.
§ 159-27 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-27
155:401
§ 159-28. Standards of service.
D. Not a pole attachment agreement. This article does not authorize the
grantee to attach to any pole or other structure in a public way devices
for the intentional transmission or radiation of radio frequency
emissions or energy through the ether by any means now known or
hereafter developed.
A. Conditions of street occupancy. All facilities and equipment installed or
erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so
as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public
ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
B. Restoration of public ways. If during the course of grantee's
construction, operation, and/or maintenance of its facilities and
equipment there occurs a disturbance of any public way by grantee,
grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a
condition which existed immediately prior to such disturbance. If
grantee excavates the surface of any public way, grantee shall be
responsible for restoration of the public way and its surface within the
area affected by the excavation. The Township reserves the right, after
providing notice to grantee, to remove and/or repair any work done by
grantee which is inadequate. The reasonable cost thereof, including the
cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the grantee. All
excavations made by grantee in the public way shall be properly
safeguarded for the prevention of accidents.
C. Trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall notify Township and all affected
property owners regarding grantee's need to trim trees or other natural
growth upon and overhanging public ways so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its facilities or
equipment. Trimming shall be limited to the area required to clear its
facilities or equipment.
D. Safety requirements. All such work in the public ways shall be
performed in accordance with applicable safety codes and technical
requirements.
E. Maps. Prior to beginning any construction of facilities, grantee shall
provide the Township with a construction schedule for work in the
Public Ways, which schedule shall be updated as changed. Upon
completion of initial construction and upon completion of construction
of any modification to its facilities, grantee shall provide the Township
with a map showing the location of its installed facilities in the public
ways. Such maps shall be provided in both paper form as well as in an
electronic format for placement on the Township's GIS system. Annually
thereafter, grantee shall provide a map to the Township showing the
location of grantee's facilities in the public ways on a scale of one
hundred fifty feet (150') per inch or whatever standard scale the
Township adopts for general use.
§ 159-27 WARWICK CODE § 159-28
155:402
§ 159-29. Rental.
F. Excavations. grantee may make excavations in public ways for any
facility subject to obtaining excavation permits from the Township.
Prior to doing such work, grantee must apply for, and obtain,
appropriate permits from the Township and give appropriate notices to
any other licensees and/or permittees of the Township and/or other
units of government owning or maintaining facilities which may be
affected by the proposed excavation.
G. Reservation of Township public ways. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to prevent the Township or other agency of government or
municipal authority from constructing sewers, grading, paving,
repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying down, repairing and/
or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or establishing any
other public work or improvement. If any of the grantee's facilities or
equipment interferes with the construction or repair of any sheet or
public improvement, including construction, repair or removal of a
sewer or water main, the grantee's facilities or equipment shall be
removed or replaced in the manner the respective Township or other
agency of government or municipal authority shall direct. Any and all
such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee.
Should grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate its facilities by the
date established by the Township or other agency of government or
municipal authority, the Township or other agency of government or
municipal authority may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment
or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid by grantee,
including all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Township
or other agency of government or municipal authority due to grantee's
delay.
A. In consideration of occupying or using the public ways under this
article, grantee shall pay to Township a rental equal to 5% of gross
revenue.
B. The rental shall be assessed on a calendar quarterly basis and shall be
payable to the Township no later than 45 days after the expiration of the
calendar quarter for which payment is due. grantee shall file with the
Township a complete and accurate statement, under notarial oral, at
the end of each calendar year quarter certified as true and correct by a
representative of grantee, authorized to make such certification,
explaining how the payment was calculated. In connection with the
rental payment due on February 14, the grantee shall also submit to the
Township, on that date or no later than six months thereafter, a detailed
statement by an officer of the grantee certified by the grantee's
independent certified public accountant verifying the accuracy of the
Gross Revenue and rental payments for the previous calendar year,
with a detailed breakdown and explanation of the calculation by each
month.
§ 159-28 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-29
155:403
§ 159-30. Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety.
C. Grantee shall keep accurate books of account which shall clearly
support the calculation of rentals and describe in sufficient detail the
amounts attributable to each specific component of gross revenue.
Such books of account and all supplemental information and source
documents in support thereof, including, but not limited to, third-party
remittances and contract documents, shall be made available to the
Township and its authorized representatives for examination at a
location in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, at any time during regular
business hours on 10 days' prior written notice and from time to time
for the purpose of verifying or identifying rentals owed to the Township.
Grantee shall exercise its best efforts to obtain financial records of
affiliates for the Township for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of
the rental payments. Township shall have the right to examine and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this article;
provided, however, that such examination shall take place within 48
months following the close of each year. Any additional amount due to
Township as a result of the examination and recomputation shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to grantee by the
Township, which notice shall include a copy of the examination report.
In the event that said examination determines that funds are owed to
the Township in an amount in excess of 2%, the cost of said examination
shall be borne by the grantee and reimbursed to Township within 30
days following written notice to grantee.
D. In the event that any rental or other payment is not made or the
requisite documentation and certification is not provided on or before
the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be compounded
daily and set at the one-year United States Treasury Bill rate existent on
the date payment was due, plus thee (3) percentage points. Any amount
recomputed to reflect correct payment due shall bear interest as
described from the date such payment was originally due.
A. Grantee shall save the Township, its agents, employees and elected and
appointed officials harmless from and against all claims, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, sustained on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever
arising out of the construction, leasing, operation or maintenance of the
grantee's equipment, facilities and services specified by this article,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed
and/or prohibited by this article and the rights granted thereunder.
B. Insurance.
(1) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of this article insurance with an insurance
company licensed to do business and doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Township.
All companies will be required to be rated A-VH or better by A.M.
§ 159-29 WARWICK CODE § 159-30
155:404
Best or A or better by Standard and Poors. Grantee shall provide
Township with proof of such insurance so required.
(2) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at
grantee's sole expense, insurance coverage in the following types
and minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and
statutory employers liability
$ 100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public)
liability to include coverage for
the following where exposure
exists: premises operations,
independent contractors,
products/completed operations,
personal injury, contractual
liability and explosion, collapse
and underground property
damage
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damages:
$2,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Comprehensive vehicle
insurance coverage for loading
and unloading hazards for:
owned/leased vehicles,
nonowned vehicles and hired a
vehicles
Combined single limit of bodily
injury and property damage $
1,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
(3) The Township shall receive without expense copies of certificates of
insurance evidencing coverage stated above.
(4) Grantee agrees that with respect to the above-required insurance,
all insurance certificates will contain the following required
provisions.
(a) Name the Township and its officers, employees, board
members and elected and appointed officials as additional
insured parties (as the interests of each insured may appear)
as to all applicable coverage (except worker's compensation).
(b) Provide for 60 days' written notice to the Township for
cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change.
(c) Provide that all provisions of this article concerning liability,
duty and standard of care, including the indemnity provisions,
shall be underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to
include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to
policy terms and conditions.
(5) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse
against the Township for payment of any premiums or assessments
which all are set at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies
§ 159-30 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-30
155:405
§ 159-31. Enforcement and termination; violations and penalties.
obtained by grantee shall provide that the issuing company waives
all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the Township in
connection with any damage covered by these policies.
C. Grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and file
with the Township, a corporate surety bond with a surety company
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the
amount of 15% of grantee's estimated costs to secure grantee's
performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all
requirements of this article.
(1) No action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such
bond shall affect the Township's rights to demand full and faithful
performance under this article or limit grantee's liability for
damages.
(2) The bond shall contain the following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be
cancelled by the surety nor any intention not to renew be
exercised by the surety until 60 days after receipt by the
Township of Warwick, by registered mail, of written notice of
such intent."
D. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the
grantee.
E. The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement
stating the following:
"Should any policies of insurance be cancelled or coverages be
reduced, before the expiration date of said policies of insurance, the
issuer shall deliver 60 days advance written notice to the Township."
F. Neither the provisions of this article nor any insurance accepted by the
Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
grantee and/or limit the liability of the grantee under this article issued
hereunder and/or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or
otherwise.
A. General. In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserved
and/or retained by the Township under this article or otherwise, the
Township reserves the right to bring a civil action to collect any sums
due to Township by grantee and/or forfeit or revoke all privileges of
grantee under this article in the event of willful or repeated violation of
this article.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person which commits or suffers the
violation of this article shall, upon being found liable in a civil
§ 159-30 WARWICK CODE § 159-31
155:406
§ 159-32. Miscellaneous provisions.
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a fine of
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
incurred by the Township. A separate offense shall arise for each day or
portion thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section
of this article which is found to have been violated. In addition, the
Township also may enforce this article by an action brought in equity.
A. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. The grantee shall at
all times be subject to the exercise of the police power of the Township.
The grantee shall comply with all lawful ordinances, codes, laws, rules
and regulations of the Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States of America which are now in effect
or hereafter enacted.
B. Conflict. Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with
other requirements of the ordinances of the Township of Warwick, the
most restrictive or those imposing the highest standards shall govern.
Privileges granted by this article do not constitute a waiver or
impairment of the rights of the Township at law or equity now or
henceforth existing to proceed versus grantee for enforcement of this
article or violation of this article or ordinances of the Township.
§ 159-31 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 159-32
155:407
Chapter 163
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 57.
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
61.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Erosion control — See Ch. 77.
Fees — See Ch. 81.
Impact disclosure statement — See Ch. 101.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 159-32 WARWICK CODE § 159-32
155:408
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 163-1. Long title.
The title of this chapter is “An ordinance establishing the rules, regulations,
and standards governing subdivision and land development within the
Township, setting forth the procedures to be followed by the Township
Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors in administering these
rules, regulations and standards, and setting forth the penalties for the
violation thereof as established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.”
§ 163-2. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Warwick Township Subdivision
Regulations."
§ 163-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division and
development of land within Warwick Township, in order to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 163-4. Intent, purpose and scope.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter are to protect and
promote the safety, health, and welfare of Warwick Township; to accomplish
a coordinated development of Warwick Township; to provide for the general
welfare by guiding and protecting amenity, convenience, future
governmental, economic, practical and social and cultural facilities,
development and growth, as well as improvement of governmental
processes and functions; to guide uses of land and structures, type and
location of streets, placement of public grounds and other facilities; and
to permit the Township to minimize such problems as may presently exist
or which may be foreseen and to specifically regulate the division and
development of land as to:
A. Regulate the flow of traffic in the streets and highways.
B. Further the orderly and appropriate use of land.
C. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
D. Facilitate adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities.
E. Ensure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
provide for the harmonious development of Warwick Township.
F. Coordinate existing streets with proposed streets, parks or other
features of the Township.
G. Ensure adequate open space, traffic, recreation, light and air.
§ 163-1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-4
155:409
§ 163-5. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any other statute, ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 163-6. Approval required; exception.
H. Provide proper distribution of population.
I. Give effect to the policies and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan for
Warwick Township.104
A. Subdivision and land development control. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any land in the Township or any other person, firm or
corporation to subdivide any lot, tract or parcel of land or to lay out,
construct, open or dedicate for public use or travel any street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, drainage facilities or other facilities in connection
therewith or for the common use of occupants of buildings within the
subdivision or land development unless and until final plans of such
subdivision or development have been prepared by a registered land
surveyor, submitted to and approved, in writing, by the Township Board
of Supervisors and recorded in the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds'
office in Doylestown, Pennsylvania.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits, and erection of buildings.
(1) No lot in a subdivision may be sold and no permit to erect, alter or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land development
may be issued unless and until the municipal improvements
required by the Board of Supervisors in connection therewith have
either been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter provided.
(2) No building in a subdivision or land development depending for
ingress and egress upon the improvement of any street or streets
herein provided for shall be permitted to be occupied before
improvements are fully completed from a now-existing paved street
to and across the front of the lot on which the building is located
and/or to a sufficient depth along the side of the lot to service any
driveway, driveways or parking spaces.
(3) No building depending upon public water and sewer facilities shall
be permitted to be occupied before such facilities are fully provided
and operational.
104. Editor’s Note: Former Subsections J, K and L, all of which concerned regulation of land
within any designated floodplain district and which immediately followed this subsection,
were deleted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
§ 163-4 WARWICK CODE § 163-6
155:410
§ 163-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who or which, being the owner of or agent of the
owner of any lot, tracts or parcel of land, shall lay out, construct, open
or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
improvements for public use, travel or other purposes of or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon; or who sells, transfers or
agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or
land development, whether by reference to or by other use of a plot of
such subdivision or land development; or who commences site grading or
construction of improvements prior to recording of a final plan, unless and
until a final plan has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and has been recorded as proposed herein; or who in any
way is in violation of or violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the following:
C. Fractional proportions of lots shown on a subdivision plan which has
received final approval in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter may be conveyed without the approval of a minor subdivision
plan, provided that:
(1) The portions of such lots are added to the contiguous lot or lots for
the purpose of such conveyances.
(2) No lot will thereby be reduced or changed in size or shape in such a
way as not to conform to any provision of the Township's Zoning
Ordinance.105
(3) Prior to such conveyance, the owner of the subject property files
with the Township Secretary's office for review and approval by the
Zoning Officer at least three prints of a survey plan prepared by a
registered surveyor showing all lots affected and the new
subdivision lines in such a way as to indicate conformance to
Subsection C(1) and (2) hereof; the plan shall be recorded in
accordance with § 163-24C(7) of this chapter.
(4) The lot line adjustments will still require the submission of the plan
to the Bucks County Planning Commission for review.
A. Any landowner, person or the members of such partnership or the
officers of such corporation or the agent of any of them who or which
shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for such
violation upon the conviction thereof in a civil judgment and shall be
sentenced to pay a judgment of not more than $500 per lot or parcel or
per dwelling within each lot or parcel, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Township. The Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the District Justice determining that there has been a violation further
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-6 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-7
155:411
§ 163-8. Preventive remedies.
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice; and thereafter, each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter.
(1) This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any
of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation,
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(e) An equitable owner who has an agreement to purchase the
property from a person, partnership, corporation, or other
entity falling under one of the previous four categories of
applicants.
§ 163-7 WARWICK CODE § 163-8
155:412
§ 163-9. Jurisdiction.
The District Justice shall have original jurisdiction for all proceedings
initiated pursuant to § 163-7A of this chapter. Jurisdiction for all other
enforcement actions, including all forms of equitable relief, shall rest with
the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County or such other court as directed
by federal or state law.
§ 163-10. Municipal liability.
The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision
and/or land development shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or
warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official, consultant, agent,
or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and
shall impose no liability upon the Township, its officials or employees.
(2) As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the
granting of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee
or lessee for the development of any such real property, the
Township may require compliance with the conditions that would
have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant
acquired an interest in such real property.
§ 163-8 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-10
155:413

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 163-11. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, unless a contrary intention clearly
appears, the words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural; words used in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(3) The words "person," "subdivider" and "owner" include a
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership or other legal
entity as well as an individual engaged in the subdivision of land
and/or land development.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The word "Commission," the words "Planning Commission" and the
words "Township Planning Commission" always mean the Warwick
Township Planning Commission.
(6) The words "Township," "Supervisors" and "Board of Supervisors"
always mean the Warwick Township Board of Supervisors.
(7) The words "Zoning Ordinance" always mean the Warwick Township
Zoning Ordinance.106
(8) The words "County Planning Commission" always mean the Bucks
County Planning Commission.
(9) The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory and directive.
(10) References to "Form 408" and "PennDOT Specifications" shall
include, as applicable, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation's Form 408 Specifications, as amended, Form 409
Specifications, as amended, and PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M (Pub. 72 M), as amended.
(11) The word "plan" includes the word "plat."
(12) The word "municipality" shall always mean Warwick Township/
Warwick Supervisors.
(13) The word "Engineer" shall always mean the Warwick Township
Engineer.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:415
B. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to have common English standard usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings herein indicated:
AASHTO — The American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land available for agricultural purposes that
contains soils with a land capability classification of Class 1 or Class
2 or listed as “prime farmland” in the Official Soil Survey provided
by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, web soil survey
(http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/). In addition, other lands available
for agricultural purposes identified in the Official Soil Survey with
a land capability classification of Class 3 or listed as “farmlands of
statewide importance” in the Official Soil Survey are considered
agricultural land for the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise
specified.
ALTERNATE BUFFER AREAS — Areas adjacent to existing streams or
other water bodies which do not display the characteristics specified
under "stream protection areas" but require some degree of protection
as specified or required under the terms of this chapter.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the
start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit or for the approval of a development
plan.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) COUNT — The vehicular traffic
generated on a particular street by the uses on that street, plus any
through traffic. Average daily traffic counts should be considered in a
cumulative effect.
BLOCK — A parcel of land bounded on all sides by one or any
combination of the following: streets, public parks, railroad rights-ofway
(excluding sidings and spurs), and the corporate boundaries of
Warwick Township.
BOLLARD — A fixed vertical column of wood or concrete extending
no less than 3 1/2 feet above parking grade and five feet below grade,
placed for purposes of controlling vehicular traffic and protecting
pedestrians.
BUFFER — An area of a lot, of a length and width as specified in this
chapter or other applicable ordinances, which is primarily intended as
a visual and/or physical separation between two or more land uses or
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:416
activities. The separation can be created by distance, landforms, walls,
fences, plant material or other means.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof of any construction supported
by columns, piers, walls or other supports, including but not limited
to tents and awnings, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars,
mobile homes or other structures on wheels having a fixed location.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The building envelope shall be defined by the
required setbacks. The building envelope shall not include the area of
any required front, side or rear yard setbacks (except for driveways
which would cross yards), buffer yards, natural features with 100%
protection standard and the portion of those natural features that may
not be developed or intruded upon as specified in the natural resource
protection standards of the Zoning Ordinance.107
BUILDING LINE — A line across the front of a property if measured
from the location of the forwardmost point of the primary structure on
the property.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum front yard,
as herein designated for each use and each district, measured at a
distance equal to and no greater than the minimum front yard from
the street line or at the minimum lot width, whichever is greater. For
exceptions, see "lane lot" definition. A line parallel to the lot line a
distance measured perpendicular therefrom as prescribed by Chapter
195, the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance, for a required side and
rear yard.
CARTWAY — The improved or unimproved traveling surface commonly
understood as that area set aside for the passage of motor vehicles.
The edge of a cartway where no curb exists shall be defined as the
"curbline."
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at
intersections, defined by horizontal and vertical lines of sight between
points at a given distance from the intersection. Intersections may be
comprised of two streets, two driveways or a street and a driveway.
COMMON PARKING AREAS — Designated parking areas for more than
five cars, located and intended for use by multiple tenants or owners,
which shall be subject to all applicable design, location, setback,
landscaping and construction standards contained in this chapter or
any other applicable Township ordinances.
CONTRACTOR — The subdivision developer, his agent or authorized
representative, the contractor employed by the developer and all
subcontractors associated with the work; contractors employed by the
municipality or municipal authority, including local, state or federal
governments; and in all cases shall be the individual, partnership or
corporation who is charged with the responsibility of constructing the
improvements.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:417
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with one end open for vehicular
and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
DATE OF FILING — The date any document is received by the
Secretary.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance, either by reason of the grant
of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations.108
DETENTION BASIN — An area of land and/or structure designed to
collect and retard stormwater runoff, temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and
the subdivision of land.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, swale, pipe, culvert, storm sewer
or structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of
diverting surface water from or carrying surface waters from streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, lots or any part of any
subdivision or land development.[Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-11]
DRAWINGS — All drawings or reproductions of drawings pertaining to
the construction of the improvements, structures, and buildings.
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms or a single room, occupied or
intended for occupancy as a single habitable unit by a family or other
group of persons living together or by a person living alone.
EASEMENT — See "right-of-way."
ENGINEER — A professional engineer, licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed by the governing body
as the Engineer for the Township.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
FLOODPLAIN — See the definition of "identified floodplain
area."109[Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
108. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “designated floodplain districts,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
109. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “floodplain soils,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:418
FOREST/TREE PROTECTION GUIDELINES —
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township.
GROSS SITE AREA (GSA) — The gross lot area as defined by the deed
line.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — Any areas of Warwick Township,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated March 16, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the FIS and areas
abutting streams and watercourses where the base flood elevation has
not been delineated by a FIS but is inundated by the base flood.[Added
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Those surfaces which do not absorb water.
All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming
pools, and any areas in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be
considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, other
areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of use of a
piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces within the site (or lot) by the base site area (or lot area, if
applicable).
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township,
county or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which has
an approved surface.
FOREST — An area comprised of largely mature trees in which
the largest trees measure at least six inches dbh (diameter at
breast height, or 4 1/2 feet above the ground). The forest shall be
measured from the dripline of the outer trees. Forests are also 10
or more individual trees which measure at least 10 inches dbh and
form a contiguous canopy. Note that a forest is defined in a manner
which is identical to a woodland. For the purpose of this chapter,
the two terms shall be interchangeable.
(1)
TREE DRIPLINE — The line marking the outer edges of the
branches of the tree.
(2)
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ) — An area that is radial to the
trunk of a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The
tree protection zone shall be 15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be
retained or the distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever
is greater. Where there is a group of trees or forest, the tree
protection zone shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for
the individual trees.
(3)
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:419
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations and
changes, such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sewers,
drainage facilities, public utilities, parking facilities and other
appropriate items, required by this chapter or the Zoning Ordinance.110
LAKE AND POND SHORELINES — Areas around lakes and ponds,
measured 100 feet from the permanent pool elevation.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water 1/10 acre or
larger which retain water year round. Artificial ponds may be created
by dams or result from excavation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
any other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) — A qualitative term that characterizes
the operating conditions of a roadway in terms of traffic performance
measures related to speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic
interruptions, and comfort and convenience, as described in the
AASHTO Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, as amended.
LOT — A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the
site of one or more buildings and any building accessory thereto or for
any other purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor
including any land within the right-of-way of a public street upon which
said lot abuts, even if the ownership to such right-of-way is in the owner
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure, including any additions to
existing nonresidential buildings or conversions of residential
to nonresidential buildings with additions;
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; or
(b)
Any increase in impervious surface(s) on nonresidential
properties.
(c)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:420
of the lot. A lot, for the purpose of this chapter, may or may not coincide
with a lot of record. A lot shall front on a public street.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the
individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan or required
by this chapter, excluding any area within an existing or designated
future street right-of-way, or any area required as open space under
this chapter, and including the area of any easements.
(1)
CORNER LOT — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135°
at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved
street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to
the curve at the point beginning within the lot or at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines curves at the
point beginning within the lot or at the points that intersect at an
angle of less than 135°. A corner lot shall be considered to be a lot
having no rear yard but having two front yards and two side yards.
(2)
LANE LOT — A lot which meets the criteria for an exception to
the minimum lot width requirements. See § 195-76, regarding the
minimum lot width for lane lots.
(3)
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel
or approximately parallel streets.
(4)
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance from the street right-of-way of
the lot to its opposite rear line, measured in the general direction
of the side lines of the lot.
(5)
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines
at the specified distance of the required building setback line. In
a case where there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be
measured between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot line
or street line.
(6)
(7) LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel or within 45° of
being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a
street line and except that, in the case of a corner lot, the owner
shall have the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are
not street lines is to be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a
lot having no street frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one
lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
(8)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear
lot line.
(9)
LOT, DOUBLE — FRONTAGE — A lot fronting on two adjacent or
parallel streets.
(10)
LOT LINE CHANGE — Any change, revision or modification to an
existing lot property boundary line which results in a change to
(11)
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:421
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection where traffic generated
by the proposal will have a significant impact on the operation of the
intersection. Where doubt exists, the transportation engineer shall seek
guidance from the Warwick Township Engineer prior to the submission
of the transportation impact study.
MINIMUM AVERAGE FOOTCANDLE — The lowest permitted average
measurement of illumination falling on a horizontal surface at ground
elevation.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling unit intended
for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly, contained in one
unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this chapter,
any inhabited mobile home shall be considered a detached dwelling unit
and as such shall be subject to all applicable regulations in this chapter
or other municipal ordinances. As a structure, a mobile home shall be
used only in conformance with the applicable zoning.111
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances (accessory attachments) necessary for the erection
thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park owner to
the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — See the Zoning Ordinance.112
MOBILE HOME PERMIT — Written approval issued by the Township
authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home or a mobile
home park under the provisions of this chapter.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit erected on a foundation and made
of one or more sections built in a factory. The completed unit shall meet
the building code in effect.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate
living quarters for two or more families.
NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA (NBSA) — That portion of the gross
buildable site area remaining after subtracting the partly unusable land
areas. It is the area on which the common open space requirement is
calculated.
OBSERVER, CONSTRUCTION — The authorized representative of the
Township Engineer.113
the legal deed description and lot area and does not result in the
creation of a new lot.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:422
OPEN SPACE — Land which is used or reserved for recreation,
agriculture, resource protection, or amenity; is freely accessible to all
residents of the development, except in the case of agricultural lands
where access may be restricted; and is protected by the provisions of
this chapter and Chapter 195, Zoning, to ensure that it remains in such
uses. Open space does not include land occupied by nonrecreational
or nonagricultural buildings, roads or road rights-of-way, or stormwater
management facilities, nor does it include the yards or lots of dwelling
units or parking areas as required by the provisions of this chapter.
Open space for recreational uses may contain impervious surfaces (for
recreational, cultural, or agricultural purposes), and such surfaces shall
be included in the calculation of the impervious surface ratio. Refer
to § 195-62, Open space and recreation facilities, for definitions of
common and active open space and for limitations on the use of open
space for buffer yards, utility easements, community sewage systems
and/or stormwater management improvements.
PARKING BAY — A length of parking stalls, measured along the narrow
dimension, whether contiguous or not, along which residents or patrons
must walk to get to residential or commercial uses.
PARKING SPACE — That area, defined by paint stripes or some other
means of delineation, which is meant solely for the occupation of a
motor vehicle.
PARTIALLY UNUSABLE LAND (PUL) — That portion of the gross
buildable site area containing land which has environmental features,
making it only partially usable for development, and including the
following:
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS — All walkways and sidewalks.
PERSON — An individual or an unincorporated organization,
partnership, association, corporation, trust or estate.
PLAN — The map, plat or drawing of a subdivision or land development,
whether feasibility sketch, preliminary or final.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Planning Commission appointed by the
governing body, known as the "Planning Commission of Warwick
Township."
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PONDS — See the definition of "lakes and ponds."
(1) Areas with slopes greater than 8%; and
(2) Forested areas.
113. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “one-hundred-year flood,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:423
PRIVATE PARKING AREAS — Designated parking areas for five or
fewer vehicles located and intended for the use of specific lot owners or
residents.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.114
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice and in
accordance with the Act of July 3, 1986, P.L. 388, No. 84, as amended,
known as the "Sunshine Act."115
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Transportation service for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally on a
regular-route basis by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation
Authority or a private operator offering service to the public.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A private or municipal corporation organized and
existing for the distribution and sale of water, electricity, telephone
or gas or the collection and disposal of sanitary waste or sewage in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
other appropriate governing body.116
RESERVED LAND (RL) — That portion of the gross site area consisting
of existing road and utility rights-of-way and easements, all ultimate
rights-of-way for existing streets as specified in Appendix E of this
chapter117 and/or all future street rights-of-way and other land reserved
by virtue of the Official Township Map and all land shown on previously
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
116. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “regulatory flood elevation,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:424
recorded subdivision and/or development plans as reserved from
development for use as open space or resource protection.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater storage area which has a
controlled release rate and maintains a constant water level while not
in use for flood storage.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land to be designated by law or on the
public record as occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, sanitary or storm sewer, stream, drainage ditch or for
another special use.
ROADWAY — That portion of the road or street included between
the gutters, side ditch lines, back of curbs or outside shoulder lines,
reserved for the accommodation of the traveling public and providing
vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge after a
fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface
of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The
surface water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of an area of the watershed located upstream from any
subject tract, as permitted by current or proposed zoning or the
Township Comprehensive Plan.
SECRETARY — The appointed Secretary of Warwick Township or his/
her designee.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter
is deposited or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SIDEWALK — A walkway, primarily concrete, along Township streets
intended to provide pedestrian access, connecting the street network
within a development, and also connecting a new development to an
existing street network.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. "Slopes" are
usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical distance in feet
per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SPECIFICATIONS — The directions, provisions and requirements
contained herein, bulletins referred to herein and any supplements,
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate
governing body or agency and currently in existence.
(1)
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area along the right-of-way of
a public street deemed necessary to provide adequate width for
future street improvements.
(2)
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:425
bulletins, special provisions or special requirements referred to in or
bound with the contract, together with all written agreements made
or to be made, pertaining to the method and manner of performing
the work or to the quantities and qualities of materials to be furnished
under the contract.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, land, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private, and also
providing access to abutting properties.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the ultimate rightof-
way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not permanently
affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted. Subdivisions shall be considered in two
categories, as follows:
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final
approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan,
so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its
intended use.
TOPOGRAPHICALLY UNSUITABLE LAND — Land areas which, due to
excessively steep slopes or flat slopes where there may be no drainage,
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or
parcel of land by any means into three or more lots, tracts, parcels
or other division of land. Any additional subdivision of a tract
from which a minor subdivision has already been approved shall
be deemed a major subdivision and shall follow the procedures
applying thereto if the additional subdivision is submitted for
review within five years of the approval date of the previous minor
subdivision.
(1)
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The division or redivision of a lot, tract
or parcel of land by any means into two tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land.
(2)
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:426
are unsuitable for construction and/or habitation, whether occasional
or permanent.
TOTALLY UNUSABLE LAND (TUL) — That portion of the gross site
area containing land which is not developable, including the
following:[Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of trips to and from a
study site per unit of land use, as measured by parameters like dwelling
units, acres, etc.
UNIFORMITY RATIO (STREETLIGHTING) — The term normally applies
to streetlighting uniformity by the Illuminating Engineering Society.
Given in a ratio, e.g., of 3:1, it means that the point of lowest footcandle
measurement cannot be less than 1/3 of the specified minimum average
footcandle level established in this chapter.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract
of land.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — This procedure compares the volume
of a roadway or intersection approach to its capacity (the maximum
number of vehicles that can use a given point during a given time
period). The procedures outlined in the current Highway Capacity
Manual shall be followed.
WATER BODIES — Includes lakes, ponds and streams, as defined
herein.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface water resources within a municipality.
WETLANDS — These areas of hydric soils supporting wetland
vegetation where the water table is at or near the surface or where
shallow water covers the site due to permanent or seasonal inundation
of surface water or groundwater, including swamps, marshes, bogs or
other areas meeting the wetland criteria established by the Department
of Environmental Protection or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.
WOODLANDS — An area comprised of largely mature trees in which
the largest trees measure at least six inches dbh (diameter at breast
height, or 4 1/2 feet above the ground). The woodlands shall be
measured from the dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also 10 or
more individual trees which measure at least 10 inches dbh and form a
contiguous canopy. Note that a woodland is defined in a manner which
(1) Identified floodplain areas.
(2) Stream protection areas.
(3) Streams and water bodies, including lakes, ponds, and wetlands.
(4) Alternate buffer areas.
§ 163-11 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-11
155:427
is identical to a forest. For the purpose of this chapter, the two terms
are interchangeable.
YARD — An open space, unobstructed from the ground up, on the same
lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or street line and inward
to the nearest structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging
eaves, gutters or cornices and chimneys which protrude less than two
feet from the foundation. The size of a required yard shall be measured
as the shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street
line.
FRONT YARD — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner
lot, the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In the case
of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street,
the yards extending along all streets are front yards.
(1)
SIDE YARD — A yard between a structure and a side lot line,
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot
having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not
a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side yard.
(2)
REAR YARD — A yard between a structure and rear lot line and
extending the entire length of the rear lot line.
(3)
§ 163-11 WARWICK CODE § 163-11
155:428
ARTICLE III
Subdivision and Land Development Impact Statements
§ 163-12. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide the Township Supervisors sufficient
information to determine the type and degree of impacts from each
proposed subdivision or land development and to assure that the impacts
are adequately addressed.
§ 163-13. Statements, studies, and assessments required.
The following statements are required for all land developments, all
nonresidential subdivisions, and residential subdivisions of 10 or more
dwellings or parcels, except as noted below. The Township retains the right
to require the statements listed above in the event that the combination
of adjacent subdivisions results in a total project of 10 or more lots.
Subdivisions shall be considered adjacent if or when facilities such as
detention basins, open space, roads or other public improvements or
facilities will be shared.
NOTE: All statements must be submitted in both paper and electronic
format.
Type of Impact Statement
Type of
Subdivision
or Land
Development
Developer
Financial
Disclosure
Statement
Educational
Impact
Study
Transportation
Impact
Study
Impact
Assessment*
Residential
subdivision of
less than 10
dwellings or
parcels
Residential
subdivision of
10 or more
Required Required Required Required
Land
development
Required Required Required Required
Nonresidential
subdivision
Required Required Required Required
Zoning change Required
Conditional
use
Required
Special
exception
Required
§ 163-12 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-13
155:429
NOTES:
*Includes scope, compatibility, location, photographs, description of
project, physical resources inventory, biological resources inventory, land
use inventory, surface water inventory, subsurface water inventory, existing
features inventory, historic features inventory, visual resources inventory,
community needs inventory, utility needs inventory, transportation system
inventory, fiscal impact, existing conditions, licenses and permits, and
design analysis.
§ 163-14. Developer financial disclosure statement.
A. Application.
(1) A developer may not file a preliminary plan or a final plan for any
land development or subdivision unless accompanied by this
statement.
(2) A developer may not offer to sell or lease lots in a land development
or major subdivision unless a statement is in effect in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Disclosure statement; form and filing; amendments. The requirements
for filing a statement with the Township Secretary are as follows:
(1) Filing. A statement relating to a subdivision or land development
shall be filed with the Township Secretary by personal delivery.
(2) Form of statement. The statement of record shall be filed in the
form and shall be supported by the documentation required by this
section.
(3) An amendment to an effective statement shall be filed with the
Township Secretary if any change occurs in any representation of
fact made in such statement. An amendment shall be filed within 15
days of the date on which the developer knows or should have
known that there has been a material change.
(4) An amendment to a statement shall incorporate by reference the
prior statement, except for any material change which may have
occurred. A material change shall be specifically described and
shall be supported by such documentation as would be required in
connection with an initial filing.
C. Disclosure statement of record; format and instructions. The statement
shall be prepared in accordance with the format and instructions as
follows:
(1) Format:
Developer Name:
e-mail:
§ 163-13 WARWICK CODE § 163-14
155:430
Owner:
e-mail:
Statement of disclosures
Name of subdivision:
Location:
Name of developer:
Developer's address:
Authorized agent:
Authorized agent's address:
Developers and holders of ownership interests in violations,
bankruptcies and litigation.
(a) Holder of ownership interest:
Type of legal entity:
List of corporate officers and business associations of each
officer:
Extent and type of interest:
(b) Holder of interest in land:
Type of legal entity:
List of corporate officers:
List of corporate officers and business associations of each
officer:
Extent and type of interest:
(c) Violations, bankruptcies and litigation:
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d) Supporting documentation:
[1]
[2]
Affirmation
I hereby affirm that I am the senior executive officer of the
developer of the lots herein described or will be the senior
executive officer of the developer at the time lots are offered
for sale or lease to the public or that I am the agent
authorized by the senior executive officer of such developer to
complete this statement (if agent, submit written
authorization to act as agent);
§ 163-14 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-14
155:431
That the statements contained in this disclosure statement,
together with any documents submitted herewith, are full,
true, complete and correct;
That the developer is bound to carry out the promise and
obligations set forth in this disclosure statement or that I have
clearly delineated the proposals for which the developer is not
bound and stated who is or will be responsible, if anyone.
(Date) (Signature)
(Corporate Seal if
applicable)
(Title)
(2) Instructions for completion of statement.
(a) All space in the specified format must be completed. The
format must not be changed in any respect, except as follows:
[1] Spaces provided in the format may be enlarged or
extended for the purpose of providing a comprehensive
explanation.
[2] In addition to the information expressly required to be
stated in the statement of record, there shall be added
such further material information, documentation and
certifications, if any, as may be necessary to make the
statements, in the light of the circumstances under which
they are made, not misleading.
[3] Amendments to the statement shall be prepared and filed
in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter.
(b) Hard-copy statements of record shall be bound on good-quality,
unglazed, white paper, approximately 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches
in size. They shall be readable, clear and able to be reproduced
easily. Supporting documents may be on different size paper.
Statements shall be properly signed and dated.
(c) Electronic statements should be in a format compatible with
Township computer and software programs. The application
must be complete with all pertinent information and
signatures.
(d) The name at the heading of the statement shall be the common
promotional name used for the subdivision. The name and
address of the authorized agent shall be the name and address
of the party designated by the developer to receive
correspondence.
§ 163-14 WARWICK CODE § 163-14
155:432
(e) The supporting documents required by these instructions shall
be attached as exhibits to the statement.
(f) If an item in the statement is supported by information in an
exhibit, place the appropriate exhibit and page number in the
right margin immediately adjacent to the item. Whenever the
statement requires a summary or statement of terms or items,
such summary or statement must be presented in a clear and
concise manner.
(g) The following instructions correspond to the part and subpart
letters and numbers set forth in the statement format under
“Developers and holders of ownership interests in land,
violations, bankruptcies and litigation”:
[1] For Subpart (a): List the name and address and the type
and extent of interest of each holder of any ownership
interest in the land included in this offering. (Individual lot
owners or lessees who have purchased or leased lots from
the developer need not be listed.) If the holder is other
than an individual, name the type of legal entity and list
the interest and the extent thereof of each principal. For
the purposes hereof, "principal" shall mean any person or
entity having a ten-percent or more financial interest.
[2] For Subpart (b): If the developer does not own an interest
in the land, list the name and address of each individual or
entity having an ownership interest in the development. If
the developer is other than an individual, name the type of
legal entity and list the interest and the extent thereof of
each principal. For the purposes hereof, "principal" shall
mean any person or entity having a ten-percent or more
financial interest.
[3] For Subpart (c), Violations, bankruptcies and litigation:
[a] State whether any of the persons named in (a) or (b)
have been disciplined, debarred or suspended by any
governmental body or agency or indicted or convicted
by any court for violation of a federal, state or local
law or regulation in connection with activities relating
to land sales, land investment, securities sales,
construction or sale of homes or home improvements
or any other similar or related activity for which such
official action was charged. If so, describe the action.
Include in your description the names and addresses
of the parties involved, the type and date of the action
and the status and disposition thereof.
[b] State whether within the last 13 years any of the
persons named in (a) or (b) has filed a petition in
bankruptcy or has had an involuntary petition in
§ 163-14 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-14
155:433
§ 163-15. Impact assessment.
bankruptcy filed against him or has been an officer or
director of a company which has become insolvent or
has voluntarily or involuntarily filed in bankruptcy. If
so, describe the action. Include in your description the
petition number, names and addresses of petitioners,
trustees and counsel, the name and address of any
other parties involved, the date of the action, the
name and location of the court where the proceeding
took place or is being held and the status or
disposition thereof.
[c] List all current litigation of which the developer is
aware which, individually or in the aggregate, may
have a material effect upon the developer or
subdivision. Describe each such action with
particularity. Every development during the course of
such litigation which may effect a material adverse
change with respect to the developer or subdivision
promptly should become the subject of an
amendment.
[4] For Subpart (d), Supporting documentation:
[a] If the developer is a corporation, submit a copy of the
articles of incorporation, with all amendments, and a
list of the officers and directors of the corporation. If
the developer is a partnership, unincorporated
associates, joint-stock company or any other form of
organization, submit copies of articles of partnership
or association and all other documents relating to its
organization. If the holder of any ownership interest in
the land being offered is a person or entity other than
the developer, submit copies of the above documents
for such holder. [For purposes of this Subsection C(1),
it is not necessary to include the sales agent if the
sales agent is a legal entity other than a holder of an
ownership interest in the land.]
[b] Submit a copy of the documents involved in the
litigation or other action listed in
§ 163-14C(2)(g)[3][c], if any. This includes but is not
limited to copies of the following:
[c] The complaint.
[d] The answer.
[e] The decision or other disposition.
A. Applicability of impact assessment:
§ 163-14 WARWICK CODE § 163-15
155:434
(1) The impact on the environment created by subdivisions and land
developments necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the variety
of problems that may result and actions that can be taken to
minimize these problems. To effectively evaluate the environmental
consequences or effects of certain projects proposed in the
Township, an applicant shall submit an impact assessment (IA)
report that meets all of the requirements of this section. The
information provided in the IA report must mirror the information
provided upon the plans submitted to the Township and vice versa.
(2) An IA report shall be submitted concurrently with the preliminary
plan, unless waived by the Township due to the limited scope of the
application or plan. An updated IA report shall be submitted
concurrently with the final plan for the Township's review and
approval if the project scope has undergone a significant change
since the preliminary plan submission. The approved IA shall
become a part of the approved final plan, and the subdivision/land
development shall be constructed in accordance with the
information set forth within the report.
(3) Twenty copies and an electronic copy of the IA report shall be
submitted to the Township. Within the IA report, specific emphasis
shall be directed toward the proposed project's effects on and
relationship to applicable site, neighborhood (including areas in
adjacent municipalities, where applicable), and Township-wide
resources, conditions or characteristics. The IA report shall be
divided into two sections: “site analysis” and “design analysis.” The
report shall include text, tables, maps, and analyses describing the
project site, proposed use(s), environmental characteristics, and
the environmental effects of the proposal.
B. Site analysis. This section of the IA report shall contain the following:
(1) In a narrative format, indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which will
result from the proposed project, and describe the suitability of the
site for the intended use. The description of the proposed project
shall indicate the extent to which the site must be altered, the kinds
of facilities to be constructed, how they are to be considered and
the uses intended. The resident population, working population,
and visitor population shall be projected. The basis of the
projections shall be clearly stated in the report.
(2) Compatibility. The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed
project shall be described in relation to the following, and should
be accomplished in narrative form, with references to the plan as
submitted:
(a) Surrounding properties and uses, including, where applicable,
local villages.
§ 163-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-15
155:435
(b) The Township Comprehensive Plan, especially the land use and
open space elements.
(c) The Comprehensive Plan of adjacent municipalities whenever a
project is located along or within 2,000 feet of the municipal
boundaries.
(d) The Bucks County Comprehensive Plan.
(e) Regional and state planning guides.
(f) Other pertinent planning documents.
(3) Location. The location map shall depict all streets, adjoining
properties, zoning district boundaries, and municipal boundaries
within 2,500 feet of any part of the site. In the case of development
of only a portion of the entire site, the location map shall also show
the relationship of the proposed development area to the entire
site.
(4) Photographs: an identification of the character and appearance of
the site through the presentation of color photographs or color
copies thereof. Such photographs shall provide a representation of
what the site looks like from ground level. Photographs shall be
properly identified/captioned and shall be keyed to a map of the
site.
(5) Description of the project: an identification of the nature of the
proposal through the presentation of the following:
(a) The subdivision/land development plan filed with the Township
shall be referenced as an attachment to the report.
(b) Except for single-family dwellings, floor plans and elevations
depicting the proposed size, square footage, height, and
number of rooms (where applicable) of buildings and/or other
structures.
(c) A statement indicating the existing and proposed ownership of
the site and, where applicable, the type of ownership,
operation, and maintenance proposed for areas devoted to
open space or otherwise not under the control of a single lot
owner. For areas to be owned and maintained by property
owners' associations or condominium associations, all relevant
documents regarding the formation and operation of the
association(s) shall be submitted to the Township with final
plans.
(d) A statement indicating the proposed staging or phasing of the
project and a map depicting the boundaries of each stage or
phase of the project. Such boundaries shall be superimposed
on a version of the site development plan.
§ 163-15 WARWICK CODE § 163-15
155:436
(6) Physical resources inventory: an identification of physical
resources associated with the natural environment of the tract,
including such features as geology, topography, soils, hydrology,
and the like. The identification of physical resources shall include a
narrative description of the qualitative aspects of each of the
resources mentioned above and shall reference the sheets of the
subdivision/land development plan showing these resources.
(7) Biological resources inventory: an identification of biological
resources associated with the natural environment of the site,
including such features as vegetation and wildlife. The
identification of biological resources shall include a narrative
description of each of the resources mentioned above. In addition,
these resources shall be mapped at a scale of not smaller than 100
feet to the inch, as specified below.
(a) A map depicting the vegetation characteristics of the site. Such
map shall define the locations and boundaries of the woodland,
forest, and hedgerow areas of the site and shall note the types
of vegetation associations which exist in terms of their species,
types, and sizes. In addition, all trees 12 inches in diameter or
greater, measured at breast height (dbh), shall be accurately
located and identified on the map whether they are
freestanding trees or tree masses.
(b) A map depicting characteristics associated with wildlife
habitats. Such may draw upon vegetation, hydrology, and soil
maps in order to express habitat characteristics associated
with terrestrial and aquatic wildlife on the tract and the
relationship of the overall habitat(s).
(8) Land use inventory: an identification of the land use conditions and
characteristics associated with the site, such as current and past
use, land cover, and encumbrances, and the relationship of these to
adjacent tracts. The identification of land use conditions and
characteristics shall include a narrative description of the above
and shall reference the sheets of the subdivision/land development
plan showing these conditions and characteristics.
(9) Surface water inventory. Describe existing watercourses and
bodies of water that are partially or totally on the site and their
relationship to the area of land disturbance. Calculate existing
surface runoff from the site and the associated watershed,
including the potential development of the remainder of the
watershed. When the natural drainage pattern will be altered, an
analysis shall be provided that investigates the flow, depth,
capacity, and water quality of the receiving waters. Floodplain
areas shall be mapped. Existing drainage structures shall be
mapped, and the capacity of the drainage network shall be
determined. Additionally, wetland areas, as defined by the
§ 163-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-15
155:437
Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, shall be delineated.
(10) Subsurface water inventory. Describe the subsurface water
conditions on the site, in terms of depth to groundwater, recharge
capabilities, and water supply capabilities. Where existing
conditions warrant, provide detailed information regarding
existing wells within 0.5 mile of the perimeter of the site relative to
depth, capacity, and water quality. The recharge and water supply
capabilities of properties within one mile of the perimeter of the
site shall be provided. This requirement can be met by referencing
the water resources impact study for the project.
(11) Existing features inventory. Describe any existing features on the
site that are not considered to be part of the natural environment,
including but not limited to roads, housing units, accessory
structures, utility lines, etc.
(12) Historic resources inventory: an identification of the man-made
resources associated with or within 500 feet of the perimeter of the
site that are older than 50 years. Areas, structures, routes, and/or
trails included on or identified by the National Register of Historic
Places, the Pennsylvania Inventory of Historic Places, the Historic
American Building Survey, the Heritage Conservancy, the
Township's Historic Survey, and/or in the Comprehensive Plan shall
be listed. This listing shall include a narrative description of the
resource and its historical importance and shall reference the
sheets of the subdivision/land development plan showing these
resources.
(13) Visual resources inventory: an identification of the visual resources
associated with the site, such as areas that have a particular
amenity value or that offer views of special or particular interest.
The identification of visual resources shall include a narrative
description and a map drawn at a scale of not smaller than 100 feet
to the inch depicting these visual resources. This inventory shall
also reference the Township's Open Space Map and how the site is
treated within that map.
(14) Community needs inventory: an identification of the community
facility needs associated with the users and/or residents of the
proposed project. The community facility needs assessment shall
indicate, in narrative form, the type of services which will be in
demand. Where applicable, community facilities (such as parks,
recreation areas, playing fields, playgrounds, pools, libraries,
community centers and outreach facilities, places of worship,
hospitals and other health care facilities, fire protection, police
protection, ambulance and rescue service, and postal service) shall
be discussed in terms of the ability of existing facilities and services
to accommodate the demands of future users and/or residents of
the site and the need for additional or expanded community
§ 163-15 WARWICK CODE § 163-15
155:438
facilities. Copies of all reference and source material shall be
submitted as part of the required narratives. In particular, the
report shall note the projected needs of the following:
(a) Demographics: an identification of the demographic
characteristics of the project, presented in narrative form, that
shall include a profile and numbers of the future users and/or
residents of the project. Information shall also be provided
regarding how the demographic characteristics may change
over time. For residential projects, the report shall include the
total population projection, based on total dwellings proposed,
the breakdown of dwelling unit types and bedrooms.
(b) Police protection. Based upon the most-recent standards
presented in the Municipal Yearbook by the International City
Managers' Association (ICMA), or similar current publications
or by survey of at least five similar Bucks County
municipalities, the police personnel requirements resulting
from the proposed development must be projected.
(c) Fire protection. In that fire protection in Warwick Township is
provided by a totally volunteer department, the standard by
which new development impacts will be measured is based on
an equivalency ratio. The Insurance Office of Pennsylvania
calculates that 1/4 of the volunteer membership is equal to
regular paid employees. This ratio should then be used to
calculate the required fire personnel based on a standard of
1.4 full-time, paid firemen per 1,000 of the population, as
shown in a survey of municipal services prepared by the
International City Managers' Association (ICMA) in the 1979
Yearbook (ICMA Comparative Performance Measurement Data
Report, dated within two years of the application). Special
consideration should be made of the proposed development
and dwelling unit types and recommendations included as to
requirements for special personnel or additional equipment.
Ultimate determination of the personnel and equipment needs
required to provide fire protection for each new proposed
development will be made by the Township Fire Marshal and
Board of Supervisors.
(d) Township maintenance personnel, facilities and equipment. In
general, a standard of 1.90 Roads Department personnel per
1,000 of the population as per the Fiscal Impact Handbook,
Burchell and Listokin, Rutgers University, New Jersey, or
similar current publications by the ICMA, should be utilized to
evaluate the proposed development impacts on the Township's
ability to maintain and repair Township roads. Additional
considerations should be given to additional or replacement
maintenance equipment required as a result of the new
development. Ultimate determination of impacts and needs
will be made by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 163-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-15
155:439
(15) Utility needs inventory: an identification of the utility needs
associated with the users and/or residents of the proposed project
and a statement whether the project is within the area to be served
by public sewers under the Township's Act 537 Plan. The utility
needs assessment shall indicate, in narrative form, the type of
installations which will be in demand. Utilities (such as those used
for water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications, and electrical transmission) shall be discussed in
terms of: the ability of existing utility installations to accommodate
the demands of the future users and/or residents of the lot(s) and/
or tract; the need for additional or expanded utility installations;
the ability to achieve an adequate, potable quantity of water; the
ability to achieve an adequate system for sewage disposal; and the
ability to achieve an adequate system for storm drainage and
stormwater management. Certificates from the utilities confirming
that adequate capacity exists to service the proposed development
shall be included. The utility needs and proposed improvements
shall be shown graphically on the plan as well as discussed in
narrative form.
(16) Transportation system inventory: an identification of the
relationship of the transportation and circulation system needs of
the proposed project to the existing street or highway network. A
discussion of this relationship shall be in narrative form and shall
include, among other things, methods to be used for traffic control
within the tract; points of ingress and egress; expected peak and
nonpeak traffic volumes generated from the project; peak and
nonpeak traffic volumes on existing streets; the physical condition
of the existing streets that will service the project; and proposed
improvements to existing streets. This requirement can be met by
referencing the traffic impact study for the project.
(17) Fiscal impact: an identification of the economic and fiscal
characteristics related to the project, presented in narrative form,
that shall include a profile of Township, county, and school district
revenues expected to be generated by the project and the
Township, county, and school district costs expected to be imposed
by the project. Information shall also be provided regarding how
the fiscal impact of the project may change over time. In particular,
the report shall note the projected needs of the following:
(a) List all of the services which will be required and a description
and documentation of the total annual estimated cost of the
services.
(b) List all of the capital improvements or purchases which will be
required as a result of the proposed development and the total
and/or annual estimated cost for providing each. Facilities or
equipment purchases which are the responsibility, either
partially or totally, of the developer/owner should be itemized
§ 163-15 WARWICK CODE § 163-15
155:440
separately. Other improvements or purchases should be listed
separately for the Township and other agencies or authorities.
(c) List all revenues by source, including those of a proposed
homeowners' or condominium association. Revenues which go
directly to the Township and those which go to other agencies
or authorities should be clearly differentiated. It must be
clearly documented how each of the revenue sources was
estimated.
(d) Prepare an analysis and comparison of the costs for services,
improvements and equipment versus the anticipated revenues.
A final determination must be presented as to whether the
analysis will result in a financial surplus or deficiency. The
analysis should differentiate the financial impacts for the
Township, other agencies or boards and the school district.
(18) Existing conditions: an identification of existing, constructionrelated,
and future characteristics and conditions associated with
air and water quality, noise and vibration levels, toxic and
radioactive materials, electrical interference, odor, fumes, vapors
and gases, glare and heat, fire and explosion risks, smoke, and/or
dust.
(19) Licenses and permits: a projection of permits and/or other
approvals that may be required for the project.
C. Design analysis. This section of the IA report shall contain a separate
discussion of the project and its design. This discussion shall focus on
the beneficial or adverse effects that may result from the project and
their duration. This section shall also review the impact the project will
have on the resources, conditions, and characteristics described in the
foregoing subsections. The design analysis shall include the following:
(1) Impacts map: a map, drawn at a scale of not smaller than 100 feet
to the inch, displaying where the project adversely affects the site's
resources, conditions, or characteristics. The subdivision/land
development plan can be substituted for an impacts map, on the
condition that all proposed improvements have been identified in
such a way as to depict both the proposed features and impact to
the existing features. Smaller-scale plans or enlargements should
be added as necessary.
(2) Impacts/effects inventory: a list of all the potential adverse impacts
and beneficial effects of the project. For each impact or effect, the
report shall include a discussion of possible alternatives and
mitigating measures that conforms to the proceeding subsections
and shall describe the impact or effect as being direct or indirect.
This list shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Water quality and quantity.
§ 163-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-15
155:441
(b) Air quality.
(c) Noise.
(d) Undesirable land use patterns.
(e) Damage or destruction of significant plant or wildlife systems.
(f) Aesthetic values.
(g) Destruction of natural resources.
(h) Displacement of people and businesses.
(i) Displacement of viable farms.
(j) Employment and property taxes.
(k) Destruction of man-made resources.
(l) Disruption of desirable community and regional growth.
(m) Health, safety and well-being of the public.
(n) Disposition of existing structures (to remain, to be removed,
and to be renovated) and proposed uses for each.
(3) Alternatives analysis. The report shall include a discussion of
alternative designs, locations, uses, structures, grading, layout,
siting of structures, changes in size or numbers of uses or
structures, etc., of the project that would preclude, reduce, or
eliminate potential adverse impacts or produce, expand, or create
potential beneficial effects. This discussion shall consist of a
narrative with accompanying exhibits, illustrations, diagrams, and/
or maps depicting the various possible alternatives.
(4) Mitigation measures: measures to mitigate adverse effects. To
indicate such measures, the applicant shall submit exhibits or
diagrams which will depict the type of remedial, protective, and
mitigative measures described in narrative form. These measures
shall include those required through existing procedures and
standards and those unique to a specific project, as follows:
(a) Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and
standards are those related to current requirements of the
state, county and/or Township for remedial or protective
action, such as sedimentation and erosion control, stormwater
runoff control, water quality control, and air quality control.
(b) Mitigation measures related to impacts which may be unique
to a specific project are those related to efforts such as
revegetation, screening, fencing, creation of wetlands
mitigation/replacement in accordance with the standards of
the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
§ 163-15 WARWICK CODE § 163-15
155:442
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
emission control, traffic control, noise control, relocation of
people and/or businesses, and land acquisition.
(5) Further, the applicant must demonstrate and specify in the IA
report how and where the findings in the IA report and its
attachments are reflected in the project.
(6) Irreversible impacts: any irreversible environmental changes
which would occur due to the proposed project should it be
implemented. To indicate such changes, the use of nonrenewable
resources during the initial and continued phases of the project
shall be discussed. Further, the loss of environmental resources
shall be indicated through a presentation of the quantity of loss and
related qualitative effects.
D. General standards and conditions:
(1) In making its evaluation, the Board of Supervisors and/or the
Planning Commission may request any additional information it
deems necessary to adequately assess potential environmental
impacts. Whenever any information required in this section is
assumed not directly applicable to the proposed project, the
applicant shall indicate such assumed inapplicability in the
narrative of the IA report and state why such information is
considered to be inapplicable in the case of the particular project in
question.
(2) The IA report shall be prepared by a planner certified by the
American Institute of Certified Planners or its equivalent, in
collaboration with other licensed professionals. All persons who
participate in preparing the report shall be identified and their
qualifications stated. All sources of information shall be identified
when presented, and a bibliography shall be attached to the report.
All work in the report shall be in conformity with recognized
engineering, architectural and planning practices and principles.
(3) The Township may retain its own expert to evaluate the IA report.
The cost of this expert shall be borne by the applicant.
(4) The Board of Supervisors shall not approve the project unless it
determines and finds that the proposed development:
(a) Will not result in appreciable harmful effects to the Township
at large.
(b) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of the resources.
(c) Will not, individually or collectively, place a disproportionate or
excessive demand upon the total resources available for such
proposal and for any future proposals.
§ 163-15 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-15
155:443
§ 163-16. Educational impact study.
In narrative format, indicate the scope of the proposed project and its
impact on the educational system in the Township, based on the criteria
below. The report shall indicate the extent to which the site may require
additional educational services and/or facilities and a means to mitigate
these impacts. Enumerate the benefits to the public which will result from
the proposed project and describe the suitability of the project. The resident
population, working population, and, as appropriate, projections for
population changes shall be considered. The basis of the projections shall
be clearly stated in the report.
(5) The Supervisors may waive the requirement of an IA report if they
determine that the anticipated impact of the proposed project is
minimal.
A. Required information for the educational impact study:
(1) Operating cost per student using the Pennsylvania Department of
Education Form PD2-2058, Instructional Expense Computation,
obtained from the Central Bucks School District.
(2) School district millage rate (obtained from the Township Tax
Collector).
(3) Assessment factor (100% of the total assessment value).
(4) Current available capacity for elementary school(s) possibly
serving the site (obtained from the Central Bucks School District).
(5) Current available capacity for secondary school(s) possibly serving
the site (obtained from the Central Bucks School District).
(6) Capital cost per student for providing new education facilities
(obtained from the Central Bucks School District).
(7) Debt constant to determined annual cost of borrowed capital funds
(obtained from the Central Bucks School District).
(8) The developer shall generate projections for the number of new
students anticipated by the proposed development from five
projects of similar size and type from the Central Bucks School
District. The projects utilized shall have been constructed within
five years of the application date of the project under
consideration. At a minimum, the following shall be provided: for
estimating the average costs of a proposed residential
development, the number of school aged residents and the total
number of residents expected to reside in the new development are
calculated using statewide per-unit multipliers.
B. Method of determining fiscal impact on educational system.
§ 163-15 WARWICK CODE § 163-16
155:444
§ 163-17. Transportation impact study.
(1) School district tax revenue generation. Multiply the total dollar
value of the development by the assessment factor; multiply the
result by the school district millage rate.
(2) Development-generated operating costs. Multiply the number of
school-age children to be generated by the project by the operating
cost per student.
(3) Development-generated capital costs. Multiply the number of
school-age children to be generated by the project by the capital
costs per student for the new facilities. Multiply the result by the
debt constant. This gives the annual debt service cost.
(4) Net impact assessment. Add the operating costs and capital costs
generated by the project, and subtract that number from the school
district tax revenue generation to determine the educational cost
impact of the development proposal.
C. Standards and criteria for determining additional educational system
impact.
(1) The following standards shall be used in determining the operating
costs per student:
(a) Classroom size of 20 students per classroom.
(b) Site size to conform to the standards mandated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Education.
(2) The existing school system (total elementary and secondary
classroom and site size) shall be compared to the anticipated
enrollment of the entire enrollment estimated from the proposed
development and other approved but unbuilt developments.
(3) The Township shall not accept any educational impact statement
prepared directly or indirectly for a developer by an employee or
official of the local school district or Township.
A. Purpose. A transportation impact study, provided by the developer, shall
be required for all nonresidential subdivisions, land developments,
zoning changes, special exceptions, or residential subdivisions of 10
lots or more as defined in Subsection C. This study will enable Warwick
Township to assess the impact of an application on the transportation
system, both highways and public transportation, in Warwick Township.
Its purpose is to ensure that proposed developments or zoning changes
do not adversely affect the transportation network and to identify any
traffic problems associated with access from the site to the existing
transportation network. The study's purpose is also to delineate
solutions to potential problems and to present improvements to be
incorporated into the proposed development. The study shall assist in
§ 163-16 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-17
155:445
the protection of air quality, the conservation of energy and the
encouragement of public transportation use.
B. Conduct of the transportation impact study. The transportation impact
study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or
transportation planner with previous traffic study experience. The
procedures and standards for the transportation impact study are set
forth in Subsection C.
C. General requirements and standards. A transportation impact study
shall contain the following information:
(1) General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion
date of the proposed land development. If the development is
residential, the types of dwelling units and number of bedrooms
shall also be included. A brief description of other major existing
and proposed land developments within a two-mile radius of the
site shall be provided. The general site description shall also
include probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential site
users to the extent that they may affect the transportation needs of
the site (e.g., the number of senior citizens).
(2) Transportation facilities description.
(a) The description shall contain a full documentation of the
proposed internal and existing external transportation system.
This description shall include proposed internal vehicular,
bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and
egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way,
parking conditions, traffic channelizations and any traffic
signals or other intersection control devices at all intersections
within the site. The site design shall be shown to maximize
potential public transportation usage to and from the
development, such as providing adequate turning radius at all
access points to allow a bus to enter the development. Bus
shelter and sign locations shall be designated, where
appropriate.
(b) The report shall describe the entire external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study area
shall be identified and sketched. All existing and proposed
public transportation shall be documented. All future highway
improvements, including proposed construction and traffic
signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be obtained
from the Twelve-Year High Capital Program for the Delaware
Valley Region (DVRPC) and from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation. Any proposed roadway improvements due to
proposed surrounding developments shall be recorded. The
study area will extend approximately 1/2 mile along the
adjacent roadway in both directions from all access points or to
§ 163-17 WARWICK CODE § 163-17
155:446
a major intersection along these roadways. Where doubt
exists, the transportation engineer shall seek guidance from
the Warwick Township Engineer prior to the submission of the
transportation impact study.
(3) Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be
measured and documented for all roadways and intersections in
the study area. Existing traffic volumes for average daily traffic,
peak highway hour(s) traffic and peak development-generated
hour(s) traffic shall be recorded. Manual traffic counts at major
intersections in the study area shall be conducted, encompassing
the peak highway and development-generated hour(s), and
documentation shall be included in the report. A volume/capacity
analysis based upon existing volumes shall be performed during
the peak highway hour(s) and the peak development-generated
hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the study area.
Levels of service shall be determined for each location. This
analysis will determine the adequacy of the existing roadway
system to serve the current traffic demand. Roadways and/or
intersections experiencing levels of service "E" or "F" shall be
noted as congestion locations.
(4) Transportation impact of the development. An estimation of
vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for
the average daily peak highway hour(s) and peak developmentgenerated
hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for
this calculation shall be obtained from the Bucks County Planning
Commission's Trip Generation Rates, as amended. These
development-generated traffic volumes shall be provided for the
inbound and outbound traffic movements as estimated, and the
reference source(s) and methodology followed shall be
documented. All turning movements shall be calculated. These
generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and
assigned to the existing roadways and intersections throughout the
study area. Documentation of all assumptions used in the
distribution and assignment phase shall be provided. Traffic
volumes shall be assigned to individual access points. Pedestrian
volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If school crossings
are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each
crossing. Any characteristics of the site that will cause particular
trip-generation problems shall be noted.
(5) Analysis of transportation impact.
(a) The total future traffic demand shall be calculated. This
demand shall consist of the combination of the existing traffic
expanded to the completion year (using an annual traffic rate
available from the Delaware Valley Regional Planning
Commission), the development-generated traffic and the traffic
generated by other proposed developments in the study area. A
second volume/capacity analysis shall be conducted using the
§ 163-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-17
155:447
total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If the
phasing of the proposed development is anticipated,
calculations for each phase of completion shall be made. This
analysis shall be performed during the peak highway hour(s)
and peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and
major intersections in the study area. Volume/capacity
calculations shall be completed for all major intersections. It is
usually at these locations that capacity is most restricted.
(b) All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined
as to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation
shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to
the warrants for traffic signal installation.
(6) Conclusions and recommended improvements.
(a) Levels of service for all roadways and intersections shall be
listed. All roadways and/or intersections showing a level of
service below "C" shall be considered deficient, and specific
recommendations for the elimination of these problems shall
be listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall
include but not be limited to the following elements: internal
circulation design; site access location and design; external
roadway and intersection design and improvements; traffic
signal installation and operation, including signal timing; and
transit design improvements. All physical roadway
improvements shall be shown in sketches.
(b) Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also
be addressed. A listing of all actions to be undertaken to
increase present public transportation usage and improve
service, if applicable, shall be included. An analysis based on
the guidelines contained in the Bucks County Public
Transportation Study Phase I Report shall be undertaken to
indicate whether or not future public transportation service
should be provided to the development.
(c) The listing of recommended improvements for both roadways
and transit shall include, for each improvement, the party
responsible for the improvement and the completion date for
the improvement.
D. Time of submission.
(1) The transportation impact study shall be submitted to Warwick
Township and the Bucks County Planning Commission with the
preliminary plan submittal.
(2) The improvement plans shall not be submitted to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) until after review by the
Warwick Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County
Planning Commission. This submittal to PennDOT shall be
§ 163-17 WARWICK CODE § 163-17
155:448
§ 163-18. (Reserved)
§ 163-19. (Reserved)
§ 163-20. (Reserved)
accompanied by comments of the Warwick Township Planning
Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission.
E. Implementation.
(1) Warwick Township shall review the transportation impact study to
analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur
due to the land development or subdivision. To bring about a
rational evaluation of the transportation impact study, Warwick
Township may retain a consultant (the Bucks County Planning
Commission, Township Engineer, or other), responsible to the
Township, to perform evaluation services. The cost of such
evaluation shall be borne solely by the developer.
(2) The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors may decide that
certain improvements contained in the study on or adjacent to the
site are mandatory for development or subdivision plan approval
and may attach these conditions to the approval. If Warwick
Township concludes that additional improvements are necessary,
the developer shall have the opportunity to resubmit alternative
improvement designs to obtain plan approval.
§ 163-17 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-20
155:449

ARTICLE IV
Submission Procedures
§ 163-21. General procedure.
A. Classification of subdivision. Whenever any subdivision of land or land
development is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of
any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in
such proposed subdivision or land development shall be granted, the
owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of
such proposed subdivision or land development in accordance with the
following procedures for subdivision and land development.
B. Preapplication DEP consultation. Prior to the preparation of any plans,
prospective developers shall consult with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and/or Bucks County Health Department
concerning soil suitability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are
proposed, including secondary sites.
C. Preapplication Conservation District consultation. Prospective
developers shall consult with the Bucks County Conservation District
representative concerning erosion and sediment control and geologic
conditions at the proposed development.
D. Preapplication PennDOT consultation. When the development site has
frontage on a state highway and/or proposes access to a state highway,
the developer shall consult with PennDOT concerning design
requirements which may be imposed in addition to the requirements of
this chapter.
E. Official filing.
(1) All applications shall be filed at the Township office during regular
business hours at a previously scheduled appointment with the
Township Secretary or his or her designee. An application will not
be deemed complete unless all applicable fees have been paid by
the applicant and the application and plans conform with the plan
requirements set forth in Article V of this chapter.
(2) Plans will be reviewed by the Planning Commission and the Board
of Supervisors when the Township Secretary or his or her designee
deems review appropriate. The plan application record shall be
closed 30 days before the Planning Commission meeting at which
the plan will be considered. The Township will not accept changes
or amendments to the application or its supporting document
within 30 days of consideration by the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors.
F. Bucks County Planning Commission review. All plans shall be submitted
to and reviewed by the Bucks County Planning Commission in
accordance with its then-prevailing rules and regulations.
§ 163-21 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-22
155:451
§ 163-22. Fee schedule.
§ 163-23. Minor subdivisions and lot line changes.
A. All filing, inspection and professional (engineering/legal) fees shall be
submitted to Warwick Township.
B. Plan filing fee. A filing fee shall accompany all applications. No
application shall be accepted or acted upon unless payment is made to
Warwick Township. The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors shall
establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees to be paid by the subdivider
or land developer to defray the cost of administering and processing of
plans. The schedule of fees may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township.
C. Review fees. Review fees shall include reasonable and necessary
charges by the Township's professional consultants or Engineer for
review and report to the Township.
D. The applicant shall execute a professional service contract
guaranteeing paying of fees of the Township consultants, including but
not limited to legal, planning, engineering, lighting, and landscape
consultants.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a simplified
procedure by which the plans for minor subdivisions and lot line
changes may be submitted and approved.
B. General. In the event that the proposed subdivision shall involve a
change in the location of streets, sanitary or storm sewers, water
mains, culverts and other municipal improvements, the provisions of
this section on minor subdivision shall not be applicable, and the owner
shall be required to comply with the requirements for major
subdivisions as defined herein.
C. Additional subdivision. Any additional subdivision of a tract from which
a minor subdivision has already been approved shall be deemed to be a
major subdivision for the purposes of this chapter and shall follow the
procedure applying thereto, based on the entire original site, including
the previously subdivided site, assuming the additional subdivision is
submitted for review within 10 years of the recording of the minor
subdivision.
D. Submission requirements. The minor subdivision or lot line change plan
and electronic version shall meet the following standards and include or
be accompanied by the following information:
(1) Drafting standards:
(a) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
50 feet or 100 feet.
§ 163-22 WARWICK CODE § 163-23
155:452
(b) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof; and
bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(c) The plan shall be clear and legible, in print and electronic
formats.
(d) The plan shall be on sheets either 24 x 36 inches or 30 x 42
inches, and all lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if the
plan should be reduced to 1/2 size.
(e) Multiple sheets shall be numbered and show their relationship
to the total number of sheets.
(f) The boundary shall be shown in a solid heavy line.
(2) General information to be shown:
(a) The name of the subdivision.
(b) The name and address of the owner/applicant and contact
information, including e-mail address.
(c) The name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan, and contact information, including email
address.
(d) The present zoning classification on the subject tract and
adjacent properties and requirements on the subject tract.
(e) The date, North point and scale.
(f) A location map for the purpose of locating the site, at a scale of
not less than 800 feet to the inch.
(g) All monumentation, both existing and proposed, noting site
and material.
(h) A declaration by the engineer/surveyor who is responsible for
the plan that the boundaries and lot lines are correct as shown
and whether boundaries were established by deed or physical
field survey.
(3) Existing features to be shown:
(a) A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
revised, showing all courses, distances and areas and tie-ins to
all adjacent street intersections.
(b) The location, names and widths of streets, the location of
property and governmental boundary lines and the names of
adjacent owners, and the location of watercourses, sanitary
sewers, water distribution lines, storm drains, easements or
rights-of-way and similar features.
§ 163-23 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-23
155:453
§ 163-24. Major subdivision and land development procedure.
(c) The location and character of existing buildings, wooded areas,
and soils, with a special note on soils subject to flooding by
having a flood frequency other than “none” listed in the Official
Soil Survey provided by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web Soil
Survey (http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/). Topography may
be required.
(d) The existing floodplain delineations must be shown as required
in §§ 163-15 and 163-49.
(e) Proposed layout:
[1] The proposed layout of lots.
[2] Lots numbered.
[3] Building setback lines.
[4] Gross and net lot areas.
[5] Natural resource characteristics table.
(4) For state roads, a letter shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation indicating that the plan has been
reviewed and approved in concept and that traffic considerations,
driveways and the discharge of water on the road right-of-way have
been reviewed. For Township roads, a letter shall be obtained from
the Township Engineer approving all highway encroachments on
Township roads.
(5) Recording of plan: See § 163-24C(7).
A. Sketch plan. Prospective subdividers and developers are strongly urged
to discuss possible development sites with the Planning Commission
prior to submission of a preliminary plan. A sketch plan may be
presented for review not less than 30 days prior to the regular meeting
of the Planning Commission. Application for sketch plan review by the
Bucks County Planning Commission must accompany the submission.
The applicant is responsible for submitting his or her own plans to the
Bucks County Planning Commission. Submission of a sketch plan will
not constitute a formal filing of a subdivision or land development plan
with the Board of Supervisors.
B. Preliminary plan.
(1) Submission of preliminary plans is mandatory.
(a) The preliminary plan and all information and procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter and the Township Zoning
§ 163-23 WARWICK CODE § 163-24
155:454
Ordinance.118 It is the responsibility of the subdivider or
developer to coordinate plans with the respective private and
public service agencies, including but not limited to (where
applicable) the Bucks County Conservation District, Bucks
County Department of Health, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, PennDOT, and Municipal
Authorities.
(b) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite fee
and by not less than one copy of all required materials and not
less than eight prints of the preliminary plan of the subdivision
or development, or as requested by the Township Secretary. All
documents shall be submitted in an electronic format
designated by the Township.
(c) The Township Secretary shall forward a copy of the
preliminary plan prints and required materials to the Township
Engineer for review and comment.
(d) The Township Secretary shall forward copies of the
preliminary plan prints and required materials to the Planning
Commission.
(e) When applicable, the submission shall be accompanied by a
planning module for land development, as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) Submission requirements. The major subdivision plan shall meet
the following standards and include or be accompanied by the
following information:
(a) Drafting standards:
[1] The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40
feet, 50 feet or 100 feet.
[2] Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof; and
bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds.
[3] The plan shall be a clear, legible, paper print.
[4] The plan shall be on sheets either 24 x 36 inches or 30 x 42
inches, and all lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if
the plan should be reduced to 1/2 size.
[5] Multiple sheets should be numbered and show their
relationship to the total number of sheets.
[6] The boundary shall be shown in a solid heavy line.
(b) General information to be shown:
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-24
155:455
[1] The name of the subdivision.
[2] The name and address of the owner/applicant.
[3] The name and address of the engineer, surveyor or
architect responsible for the plan.
[4] The present zoning classification on the subject tract and
adjacent properties and requirements on the subject tract.
[5] The date, North point and scale.
[6] A location map for the purpose of locating the site, at a
scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch.
[7] All monumentation, existing and proposed, noting site and
material.
[8] A declaration by the engineer/surveyor who is responsible
for the plan that the boundaries and lot lines are correct as
shown and whether boundaries were established by deed
or physical field survey.
[9] A declaration by the applicant's registered landscape
architect (RLA) that the landscaping shown on the plan
complies with the Township codes and ordinances.
[10] Zoning requirements, including any variances or special
exceptions that may have previously been granted. Zoning
data shall indicate both required and proposed
information.
(c) Existing features to be shown:
[1] A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided
or revised, showing all courses, distances and areas and
tie-ins to all adjacent street intersections.
[2] The location, names and widths of streets; the location of
property and governmental boundary lines and the names
of adjacent owners; and the location of watercourses,
sanitary sewers, water distribution lines, storm drains,
monuments, easements or rights-of-way and similar
features within 400 feet of the site. Topography shall be
provided, based on USGS datum, with contours at no less
than two-foot intervals. Contour intervals of one foot may
be required where determined to be necessary for review
by the Township Engineer.
[3] The location and character of existing buildings, wooded
areas (including individual trees standing alone, greater
than 12 inches' caliper at a height of 14 inches above the
ground), floodplains, soil types, lakes, ponds,
§ 163-24 WARWICK CODE § 163-24
155:456
watercourses, wetlands, steep slopes of 8-15%, steep
slopes of 15-25%, steep slopes of 25% or steeper, and
other natural features.
[4] The existing floodplain delineations must be shown as
required by this chapter.
(d) Proposed layout:
[1] The layout of streets, including width of the right-of-way,
cartway, alleys and crosswalks.
[2] The layout and dimensions of lots, including the gross and
net lot area for each lot. Lots for which other than a
residential use is intended shall be indicated.
[3] The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in
nonresidential and multifamily developments, with all
necessary dimensions.
[4] For multifamily developments, total dwelling units,
number of buildings, proposed density, total parking
spaces and building coverage.
[5] A plan for the stormwater management of the tract shall
be provided, including collection, conveyance and all
detention/BMP facilities. A plan to control erosion during
and after the construction period shall be provided.
[6] Center-line profiles shall be provided for each proposed
street, including profile views of proposed and existing
utilities. Profiles may be required at the discretion of the
Township Engineer for parking areas.
[7] A plan of proposed landscaping and lighting shall be
provided, including all pertinent design information and
details. The submission shall contain but shall not
necessarily be limited to the following:
[a] Plans indicating the location on the premises of each
illuminating device, both proposed and any already
existing on the site.
[b] A description of all illuminating devices, fixtures,
lamps, supports, and reflectors, both proposed and
existing. The description may include but is not
limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by
manufacturers (including sections where required).
[c] Photometric data, such as that furnished by
manufacturers, or similar showing the angle of cutoff
of light emissions.
§ 163-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-24
155:457
[d] Descriptions and data sufficiently complete to enable
the designated official or reviewer to readily
determine whether compliance with the requirements
of this chapter will be secured. If such plans,
descriptions and data cannot enable this ready
determination, the applicant shall additionally submit
as evidence of compliance to enable such
determination such certified reports of tests as will do
so, provided that these tests shall have been
performed and certified by a recognized testing
laboratory.
[8] The length of proposed streets.
[9] Building setback lines.
[10] Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created
for all drainage purposes, utilities or other reasons.
[11] Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the
applicant's entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of
the prospective street layout for the remainder.
[12] The method of calculating the total number of off-street
parking spaces.
[13] An encroachment plan, which illustrates all natural
resources, including a tabulation of each resource, and
those areas to be disturbed.
[14] All necessary construction details.
(e) For state roads, a letter shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation indicating that the
plan has been reviewed and approved in concept and that
traffic considerations, driveways and the discharge of water on
the road right-of-way have been reviewed. For Township roads,
a letter shall be obtained from the Township Engineer
approving all highway encroachments on Township roads.
(f) Development impact statements, as required in Article III. In
the event that the impact assessment is waived, the plans shall
contain all design information necessary to support the
proposed improvements and indicate compliance with
Township ordinance requirements.
(3) Review of preliminary plans.
(a) In cases where the subdivision or land development adjoins an
existing or proposed state highway or has proposed streets
entering onto state highways, the developer shall submit the
plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
review and forward copies of that application to the Township.
§ 163-24 WARWICK CODE § 163-24
155:458
(b) The Planning Commission will consider the plan to determine if
it meets the standards set forth in this chapter, the Township
Zoning Ordinance,119 and all other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Township.
(c) Unless the applicant has granted a waiver or extension of the
review deadlines set forth the in the MPC, the Planning
Commission should act on the preliminary plan in time for the
Board of Supervisors to render its decision in accordance with
the time limits set forth in the MPC.
(4) Planning Commission recommendation.
(a) The Planning Commission should recommend whether the
preliminary plan should be approved, approved with
modifications, or waiver requests, or disapproved and should
notify the Board of Supervisors via written report from the
Township Secretary.
(b) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission
should consider the recommendations of the Township
Engineer, Township staff, Bucks County Planning Commission,
interested residents, and any agency or agencies from which a
review was requested.
(5) Township Engineer review. All plans, plan revisions and associated
documents should be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to
the transmission of such plans to the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors.
(6) Resubmission of preliminary plans. A revised plan submitted prior
to or after disapproval shall be considered and processed as a new
plan submission. A revised plan submitted after approval shall only
be considered a new plan submission if, in the opinion of the
Township, it has been substantially revised after said approval.
(7) All plans shall evidence compliance with requirements of the
Township Zoning Ordinance.120 Failure of the applicant to obtain all
necessary variances, special exceptions, and/or conditional use
approvals prior to preliminary plan approval shall be a cause for
denial of the plan.
(8) Approval of preliminary plans.
(a) Unless the applicant has granted a waiver or extension of the
time limitations of this chapter and the MPC, the Board of
Supervisors shall act on the preliminary plan and communicate
its decision to the applicant within the time deadlines set forth
in the MPC.121
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-24
155:459
(b) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of its
decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
the preliminary plan in writing. If the plan is approved with
conditions or disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall
specify in its notice the conditions which must be met and/or
the defects found in the plan and the requirements which have
not been met, including specific reference to provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., or any other statute or provision of this chapter which has
not been fulfilled.
(c) Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of
the subdivision or land development as to the character and
intensity of development and the arrangement and
approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned
features. The approval binds the subdivider or developer to the
scheme of the subdivision shown, unless a revised preliminary
plan is submitted, and permits the subdivider to proceed with
final detailed design of improvements, to arrange for a
guaranty to cover installation of the improvements, and to
prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does
not authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the
preliminary plan.
(d) Where preliminary plan approval is given subject to conditions,
the applicant shall accept or reject any or all of the conditions
within 15 days from the date that he/she receives the written
notification from the Board of Supervisors. Failure to accept or
reject such conditions in writing within the foregoing time limit
shall result in the conditional approval of the plan to become
automatically rescinded pursuant to Section 503(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,122 and, in the
alternate, the plan is denied due to noncompliance with the
specified conditions.
C. Final plan.
(1) Submission of final plans is mandatory.
(a) After the subdivider or developer has received official
notification from the Board of Supervisors that the preliminary
plan has been approved, he must submit a final plan in
accordance with the provisions of Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.123 Application to the Bucks
County Planning Commission with the appropriate fee must
accompany the final plan submission.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 163-24 WARWICK CODE § 163-24
155:460
(b) The final plan shall conform in all respects with the approved
preliminary plan. If it does not, the plan submitted shall be
considered a revised preliminary plan and shall be forwarded
by the Township Secretary to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation as a preliminary plan.
(c) The subdivider or developer must submit with the final plan a
guaranty for the installation of improvements which meets the
requirements of Article VI.
(d) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite
inspection and engineering fees as set forth in § 163-22.
(e) Documented approval of the planning module for land
development by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be part of the requisite
materials accompanying the final plan submission.
(f) The subdivider or developer shall submit one print of the final
subdivision or land development plans and at least eight copies
of all other required information. Additionally, all documents
must be submitted in electronic format.
(2) Review of final plans.
(a) The Planning Commission should review the plan and requisite
materials for compliance with the approved preliminary plan
and for conformance to the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Unless the applicant has granted a waiver or extension of the
time limitations of this chapter and the MPC, the Board of
Supervisors shall act on the final plan and communicate its
decision to the applicant within the time deadlines set forth in
the MPC.124
(3) Planning Commission recommendation.
(a) The Planning Commission should recommend whether the final
plan should be approved, approved with conditions, or
disapproved, and should notify the Board of Supervisors via
written report from the Township Secretary.
(b) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission
should consider the recommendations of the Township
Engineer, Township staff, the Bucks County Planning
Commission, the Bucks County Conservation District,
PennDOT, and the recommendations of any agency or agencies
from which a review was requested.
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 163-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-24
155:461
(4) Township Engineer review. All plans and associated documents
shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to the
transmission of such plans to the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Resubmission of final plans. A revised plan submitted after denial
shall be considered and processed as a new final plan submission.
(6) Approval of final plans. Unless the applicant has granted a waiver
or extension of the time limitations of this chapter and the MPC, the
Board of Supervisors shall act on the final plan and communicate
its decision to the applicant within with time deadlines set forth in
the MPC.125
(a) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him at his last known address.
(b) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the application and
describe the requirements which have not been met and shall,
in each case, cite the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code or any other statute and the
provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance relied upon.
(c) Where final plan approval is given subject to conditions, the
applicant shall accept or reject any or all of the conditions
within 15 days from the date that he receives the written
notification from the Board of Supervisors. Failure to accept or
reject such conditions in writing within the foregoing time limit
shall result in the conditional approval of the plan to become
automatically rescinded pursuant to Section 503(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,126 and, in the
alternate, the plan is denied due to noncompliance with the
specified conditions.
(7) Recording of final plans.
(a) Upon approval of the final plan, the subdivider or developer
shall prepare five Mylar reproductions of the original final
record plan and five paper prints, which include all plan
sheets. All plans shall be executed and notarized by the
applicant, bearing appropriate engineering and surveying
seals. The plans, upon satisfaction of all conditions attached to
the approval, will be signed by the Board of Supervisors. A
copy of the signed final plan shall be recorded in the office of
the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days after
approval of the final plan or the approval of the Board of
Supervisors shall be null and void. The final plan must be
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 163-24 WARWICK CODE § 163-24
155:462
§ 163-25. (Reserved)
§ 163-26. Waivers and modifications.
§ 163-27. (Reserved)
§ 163-28. (Reserved)
recorded by the applicant before proceeding with the sale of
lots or construction of buildings.
(b) Within two days of the plans being recorded with the Bucks
County Recorder of Deeds, the applicant shall return to the
Township two recorded Mylar plans, two recorded paper plans,
and a scanned electronic copy of the original signed recorded
plans.
(c) Recording the final plan shall be an irrevocable offer to
dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use, and to
dedicate or reserve all open space and other public areas to
public use unless determined by the Board of Supervisors to
remain private and undedicated, provided that the approval of
the final plan shall not impose any duty upon the Board of
Supervisors of Warwick Township concerning maintenance of
the improvements offered for dedication, nor shall such
approval be construed as an acceptance of such dedication.
(d) The subdivider shall place a notation on the final plan if there is
no offer of dedication to the public of streets and certain
designated public areas, in which event the title to such areas
shall remain with the owner, and the Township shall assume no
responsibility for improvement or maintenance thereof; which
fact shall be noted on the plan.
A. General. The Board of Supervisors may grant a waiver or modification
of the requirements of one or more provisions of this article if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will
not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
the article is observed.
B. Procedure. All requests for waiver or modification shall be in writing
and shall accompany and be part of the application for development.
The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the article involved, and the minimum
modification necessary.
C. Requests for waiver or modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
§ 163-24 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-28
155:463

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 163-29. Applicability of requirements; modifications and
adjustments.
§ 163-30. General standards.
A. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered
minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly
impractical, the Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the
standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing
substantial conformance with the objectives of these regulations.
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked
areas are not created.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public
lands or adjacent private lands shall be prohibited, unless their control
is definitely placed in the Township under conditions approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. In general, lot lines shall follow Township boundary lines, rather than
cross them.
D. Where trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots or other
community assets and landmarks are located within a proposed
subdivision or land development, every possible means shall be
provided to preserve these features.
E. Subdivisions or land developments shall be designed to eliminate the
need for cut or fill.
F. Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or property and
land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be subdivided or
developed for residential occupancy or for such other uses as may
endanger health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazards
until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the final plans. Such
land within a subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the
plan for uses that will not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
G. Road rights-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final record
plan are to be separate and distinct from lots or parcels adjoining such
right-of-way and are not included with the dimensions or areas of such
lots or parcels.
§ 163-29 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-30
155:465
§ 163-31. Location of development.
§ 163-32. General requirements for streets.
H. In addition to the provisions of adequate rights-of-way and paving on
existing streets, and the reservation of areas and easements for
facilities normally required in residential sections, the Board of
Supervisors may require rights-of-way and easements for access and
storm and sanitary sewer facilities in those areas that cannot be
immediately joined to the existing storm and sanitary sewer systems of
the Township.
I. Where design and construction specifications are not specifically listed
in this chapter, the applicant shall follow those specified in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Form 408, as amended,
and Road Construction Standards, as amended. Where conflicts exist,
the most-restrictive specification shall apply, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
J. Traffic signal design requirements shall be as determined by the
Township Engineer. Such standards shall apply to both installation and/
or modifications to existing signals where required by the Township.
A. Subdivision and land development proposals will be examined to
determine whether the submission is in conformance with:
(1) The goals in the Warwick Township Comprehensive Plan for the
area in which the submission is located.
(2) The requirements of the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance for
the zoning district in which the submission is located and for the
use requirements for which the land is to be developed.127
(3) The character of existing development near the location of the
proposed subdivision or land development. The application shall be
complementary to the surrounding uses and shall be laid out so
that the best possible integration of existing and proposed streets
and building orientations is achieved.
B. A finding by the Board of Supervisors that the application does not
conform to one or more of the above criteria shall be sufficient reason
for denying approval of the application.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, grade and location of proposed
streets shall conform to the Warwick Township Street Map and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-30 WARWICK CODE § 163-32
155:466
B. Proposed streets shall conform to any county and state street and
highway plans.
C. When not shown in the Warwick Township Street Map, the layout of
proposed streets in a subdivision or land development shall either
provide for the appropriate continuation of adjacent streets or conform
to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board of
Supervisors to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impractical.
D. Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through
traffic.
E. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing
or proposed arterial or collector street, the Board of Supervisors may
require marginal access streets, reverse-frontage streets, alleyways, or
such street designs needed to adequately protect existing and/or
proposed residential properties and to separate through and local
traffic.
F. Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing
streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall
not be repeated, and all street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
G. If the lots resulting from an application are large enough for further
subdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable future
street access to these lots shall be provided.
H. Where the proposed subdivision or land development adjoins
unsubdivided acreage, stub streets shall be provided to the boundary
lines of this acreage, with temporary easements for turnarounds. These
turnarounds shall conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
I. Whenever an applicant proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication and not required to be offered for dedication, he
shall enter into an agreement with the Township, which shall be
recorded with the subdivision plan. This agreement shall establish the
conditions under which the streets may later be offered for dedication
and shall stipulate, among other things, the following:
(1) That the street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by the
Township Engineer or that the owners of the lots along it agree to
include with the offer of dedication sufficient money, as estimated
by the Township Engineer, to bring the street in conformance with
Township specifications.
(2) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the street
as a whole.
(3) The method of assessing repair costs.
§ 163-32 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-32
155:467
§ 163-33. Street classifications and requirements.
Street classifications shall be established in accordance with the following
subsections and shall be determined by the average daily traffic (ADT) count
for each street or portion thereof. ADT shall be based on the current trip
generation rates as published by the Bucks County Planning Commission
for the specified uses:
(4) That a proposal to offer the street for dedication by the owners of
more than 50% of the lot road frontage shall be binding on owners
of the remaining lots.
J. The Board of Supervisors shall, in the interest of highway safety and the
safety of the area residents and in order to promote orderly community
development, require the owner/developer of any large commercial
use, such as a shopping center, industrial park or plant, housing
project, apartment complex, major education or recreational facility or
other significant traffic generator, to meet jointly with representatives
of the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to
ultimately achieve the best possible design from the standpoint of
traffic.
K. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a state
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
L. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a
Township road is required to obtain a road occupancy permit from the
Township.
M. The area between an existing right-of-way line and the ultimate right-ofway
line shown on a proposed subdivision or land development plan
shall be offered for dedication to the entity having jurisdiction over the
road. (See Appendix E.128)
A. Arterial streets and highways are those roads which carry fast-moving
and heavy traffic or may handle interstate or transcontinental traffic.
Such streets or highways are generally restricted to limited access,
and, for the most part, the authority for control of access or
construction within their rights-of-way is vested within the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, PennDOT 408 Standard as
well as the guidelines and requirements set forth in the MUTCD
(Manuel on Uniform Traffic Control Devices) for streets and highways.
B. Collector streets are those which carry traffic from other collector,
primary or secondary streets into the system of arterial or major
highways (ADT of 1,001 to 3,000).
C. Primary streets are those which carry traffic from the secondary streets
to the system of collector streets (ADT of 501 to 1,000).
128. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-32 WARWICK CODE § 163-33
155:468
D. Secondary streets are those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties and generally serve only internally developed areas
(ADT of 201 to 500).
E. Residential streets are those serving areas of low population density
where abutting properties are of one acre or more in area. Roads of this
class may be considered a part of the Comprehensive Plan of the
municipality but shall not be included in any subdivision plan under this
classification (ADT of zero to 200).
F. Cul-de-sac streets are those which are closed at one end and shall not
be more than 500 feet long, terminating in a turnaround with a
minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and an outer paving radius of 40
feet. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 50 feet, and the
minimum cartway width shall be 30 feet (ADT of zero to 200).
G. Marginal access streets are minor streets of the secondary class which
are laid out parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and
which provide access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
H. Alleys are streets which are intended to provide access to the rear of
residential lots for service and on-lot parking.
I. Minimum street requirements shall be:
Dimensions
Pavement
Widths(3)
Classification
Guide
ADT
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
On-
Street
Parking
Curbs
(feet)
No
Curbs
(feet)
Sidewalk
Required
Curb
Required
Shoulder
(feet)
Arterial 3,000+ 100
(minimum)
No 36 or
greater
— Yes(2) Yes No
Collector (no
direct access
or lot frontage
is permitted)
1,001 to
3,000
80 No 36 or
greater
— Yes(2) Yes 4 each(1)
Primary 501 to
1,000
60 No 36 — Yes(2) Yes 4 each(1)
Secondary 201 to
500
60 No 36 — Yes(2) Yes 4 each(1)
Residential 0 to 200 50 No 30 — Yes(2) Yes 4 each(1)
Cul-de-sac 0 to 200 50 No 30 Same as residential requirements
Turnaround 50-foot
radius
No 40-foot
paved
radius
— As determined
above by lots and
use
4 each(1)
§ 163-33 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-33
155:469
Dimensions
Pavement
Widths(3)
Classification
Guide
ADT
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
On-
Street
Parking
Curbs
(feet)
No
Curbs
(feet)
Sidewalk
Required
Curb
Required
Shoulder
(feet)
14-foot
minimum
cartway
— No(2) 4 each(1)
Marginal
access
— 60 Same as primary street requirements
Alleys and
driveways
Dedicated — 25 No — 12 No No(1) 2 each(1)
Not
dedicated
— 25 No — 12 No No(1) 2 each(1)
NOTES:
(1) Where curbs are not required at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, shoulders of the
dimensions specified herein shall be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
(2) The sidewalk requirements as specified herein may be waived, in part or in whole, by
the Board of Supervisors when it has been satisfactorily demonstrated that sufficient interior
development pedestrian pathways/bikeways connecting residential, commercial, recreational and
transportation centers have been provided to accommodate expected pedestrian traffic volumes.
(3) Where on-street parking is proposed on one side only and approved at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors, the pavement width specified herein may be reduced by eight feet.
J. The following are considered to be minimum street construction
standards; more-restrictive standards may be applied if conditions
warrant:
Paving Sections:
Street Paving Sections:
(All paving materials shall conform to PennDOT Superpave HMA
design mix PG64-22, or other material directed by the Township
Engineer in accordance with PennDOT recommendations.**)
Street
Classification
Subbase***
(inches)
Base
Course
(25 mm)
Binder
Course
(19 mm)
Wearing
Course
(9.5 mm)
Arterial* 8 6 inches 2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Collector* 8 5 inches 2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Primary* 6 4 1/2 inches 2 inches 1 1/2 inches
§ 163-33 WARWICK CODE § 163-33
155:470
§ 163-34. Street arrangement.
Street
Classification
Subbase***
(inches)
Base
Course
(25 mm)
Binder
Course
(19 mm)
Wearing
Course
(9.5 mm)
Secondary* 6 4 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Residential* 6 4 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Cul-de-sac* 6 4 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Marginal
access*
6 3 inches 1 1/2 inches
Alleys 6 4 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Public
driveways
and
commercial
or industrial
parking
facilities*
6 4 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Private
residential
driveways
and parking
facilities*
4 3 inches 1 1/2 inches
NOTES:
* Six-inch pipe foundation underdrain is required for all paving
sections. Use of the underdrain may be waived if it is determined
unnecessary by the Township Engineer upon inspection of the
subsurface soil conditions during roadway excavation.
** Prepared subgrade is required for all streets or driveways that
are to be paved.
*** Subbase material shall be PennDOT 2A stone material.
K. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing
street of inadequate right-of-way width, a future right-of-way width
shall be indicated on the plan to conform to the standards shown in this
chapter.
A. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation or
approximate projection of existing collector or primary streets in
surrounding areas.
B. Secondary streets shall be so laid out that through traffic will be
encouraged.
§ 163-33 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-34
155:471
§ 163-35. Street alignment.
C. The intersections of primary or secondary streets entering any collector
street from the same side shall be located not less than 800 feet apart,
as measured from center line to center line. The intersections of
secondary streets entering any existing or proposed street from
opposite directions shall be located not less than 125 feet apart, as
measured from center line to center line.
D. Marginal access streets shall be provided when a development adjoins
an arterial or collector route. These marginal streets shall provide
access to all lots abutting this arterial road, and none of these lots shall
take access from the arterial or collector road.
E. The center-line profile of streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the
land so as to produce usable lots and streets consistent with reasonable
grade, alignment, drainage and future municipal sanitary facilities.
F. The rights-of-way shall be graded to their full width, and the applicant
shall provide suitable finished grades to the tolerances herein specified.
In no case shall the rights-of-way be less than the minimum width
specified in this chapter.
G. Provision for additional street width may be required by the Township
in specific cases for:
(1) Public safety and convenience.
(2) Parking in commercial or industrial areas and in areas of highdensity
residential developments.
(3) Widening existing streets where the minimum width outlined in
these specifications does not meet with the specific requirements
of the individual street.
A. The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector streets
shall be 500 feet; for primary streets, 350 feet; and for secondary,
residential and cul-de-sac streets, 150 feet.
B. Superelevation.
(1) Street superelevations shall only be required on collector and
arterial streets. All curves shall be superelevated in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part 2, Highway Design, as amended.
(2) On all types of pavement or all subbase construction, curves to be
superelevated shall conform to the requirements set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual, Part 2,
Highway Design, as amended. The crown will be removed and the
slope will be uniform from the inside to the outside of the
pavement. Full superelevation will be attained at the point of
§ 163-34 WARWICK CODE § 163-35
155:472
curvature and point of tangency with runouts as indicated in the
Design Manual.
(3) The normal grade of the inside edge of the pavement or the center
line of the pavement will be held as a baseline from which all
superelevation will be applied. The method to be used shall be
specified by the Township.
C. Proper sight distances shall be provided for both horizontal and vertical
alignment, measured along the center line. Minimum sight distances
shall be 500 feet for collector streets, 400 feet for primary streets and
250 feet for secondary streets. Sight distances provided shall not be
less than permitted by PennDOT for similarly classified roadways.
Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections. Measured
along the center line, there shall be a clear-sight triangle for 75 feet
from the point of intersection for fifty-foot rights-of-way and 130 feet for
sixty-foot and eighty-foot rights-of-way. This sight line shall be indicated
on all plans of street alignment. No existing or proposed structure,
plantings or fences are permitted in the area between a plane two feet
above the road center line and a plane eight feet above the road center
line.
D. At each point where a private accessway (driveway or private street)
intersects a public street, a clear sight triangle conforming to the
required sight distance shall be maintained, within which vegetation
and other visual obstructions shall be limited to a height of not more
than two feet above the street grade. Intersection sight distance, both
required and available, shall be provided in accordance with Pa. Code,
Title 67, Chapter 441, latest revision.
E. Street intersections shall be approached from all sides by leveling
areas. Where the grade exceeds 7%, such leveling areas shall have a
minimum length of 50 feet, measured from the edge of the pavement of
the transverse street, within which no grade shall exceed 4%.
F. At changes in grade of more than 1%, vertical curves shall be used. The
length of the curve shall be a minimum of 100 feet on collector and
primary streets and a minimum of 50 feet on secondary streets for
every one-percent change in grade. Vertical alignment shall conform as
much as practical to the existing contour of ground within the
limitations herein stipulated.
G. Regarding the horizontal alignment of streets, a minimum tangent
length of 100 feet, measured along the center line, shall be provided on
collector and primary streets between the point of tangency of the first
curve and the point of curvature of the second curve, unless otherwise
approved by the Township Engineer. In no case shall two curves in
reverse direction be joined together without this minimum onehundred-
foot tangent length provided for the above two classifications
of streets. The tangent length between curves on secondary streets
shall be designed as required or approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 163-35 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-35
155:473
H. A minimum grade of 1% shall be established on all primary or
secondary streets. A minimum grade of 1/2% shall be established for all
collector streets only under unique circumstances and upon prior
approval by the Township Engineer.
I. Maximum grades of 5% shall generally apply. In exceptionally hilly
areas, a maximum grade of 6% on collector and primary streets and
10% on secondary streets for a maximum distance of 1,500 feet will be
permitted. Grades in excess of 6% should be avoided on all streets
wherever possible.
J. The grade within the outer perimeter of a cul-de-sac shall not exceed
3%. The grade will be measured along the curbline of the street.
K. A combination of minimum-radius horizontal curves and maximum
grades will not be approved.
L. A normal crown shall be provided on all streets, not superelevated, of 5/
16 inch per foot of straight slope extending in cross section from the
edge of the pavement to the center line or from the edge of the
pavement to the medial edge, whichever will apply, symmetrical to the
center line.
M. Whenever practicable, the number of intersections with arterial
highways shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located at least 1,000
feet apart.
N. Whenever practicable, right-of-way lines shall intersect at right angles.
When secondary streets intersect primary or collector streets, the angle
of intersection of the street center lines shall not be less than 90º.
O. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 25 feet for secondary streets and 35 feet for
intersections which incorporate primary or collector streets.
P. The dedication of half streets at the perimeter of a new subdivision is
prohibited. If circumstances render this impracticable, adequate
provision for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the
street must be furnished by the subdivider. Where there exists a half
street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided
by the proposed development.
Q. Reserve strips controlling ingress and egress are prohibited. When the
development adjoins unimproved land, new streets shall be provided
through to the boundary lines of the development with temporary
easements for turnarounds; or, at the discretion of the Engineer, the
entire width of the right-of-way may be paved for a distance of 75 feet.
R. Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing
named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. All street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 163-35 WARWICK CODE § 163-35
155:474
§ 163-36. Cul-de-sac streets.
§ 163-37. Alleys.
S. The minimum longitudinal length of depressed curb for private
driveway crossings shall be 12 feet (16 feet maximum), and the
maximum longitudinal length for driveway crossings in commercial or
industrial areas shall be 35 feet (25 feet minimum).
T. A long radius curve shall be preferred in all cases to a series of short
curves and tangents.
U. Whenever curbs are to be constructed across private driveways within
residential areas or driveway approaches of ingress or egress from
abutting industrial or commercial properties, the curb shall be
depressed unless otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
V. When required and approved by the Supervisors, separated driveway
approaches may be constructed for entrance and exit to abutting
properties. Such individual driveway approach shall not exceed the
maximum longitudinal length of 35 feet of depressed curb at each
driveway approach, and a standard curb section shall be constructed as
a separating curb between the driveways, conforming to the
dimensions and details of the standard detailed drawings of these
specifications.
A. A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street is practicable.
The applicant shall have the burden of showing the impracticability of
the through street in order to justify a cul-de-sac.
B. A cul-de-sac permanently or temporarily exceeding 500 feet in length
may be approved by the Board of Supervisors if conditions of the land
so warrant.
C. A cul-de-sac permanently terminated according to the subdivision plan
shall be provided with a circular turnaround with a minimum right-ofway
radius of 50 feet and an outer paving radius of 40 feet.
D. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed the same as a permanent culde-
sac.
E. Drainage, where possible, shall be toward the open end.
F. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line, and
a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the
property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street
into the adjoining street. At such time as the street is extended, the area
created by the turnaround shall revert ownership to the property
owner(s) fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.
§ 163-35 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-37
155:475
§ 163-38. Driveways.
§ 163-39. Automobile parking facilities.
A. Alleys are prohibited in developments of single-family detached
residences (Zoning Use B1 only) but may be permitted in other types of
residential development.
B. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but, where necessary, corners shall be rounded or cut back sufficiently
to permit safe vehicular circulation.
C. Intersections of right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a tangential arc,
the minimum radius of which shall be 10 feet, and the edge of paving at
intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc, the minimum radius
of which shall be 15 feet.
D. An alley shall not provide the exclusive means of frontage to a lot.
E. Parking is not allowed within the alleyway itself.
F. Alley access is prohibited from arterial and/or collector streets.
A. Driveways shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide
sight distance at intersections with streets in accordance with
§ 163-35D. A stopping area, measured 20 feet behind the ultimate rightof-
way line, shall be provided, not to exceed a four-percent grade.
Driveway center-line slope shall not exceed 10% beyond the initial 20
feet of the ultimate right-of-way line. Driveways shall not interfere or be
inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of or the safe
passage of traffic on public or private roads.
B. Driveways shall be located not less than 40 feet from any intersection.
Driveways on corner lots shall take access from the lowest classification
street.
C. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a state
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (see Appendix B).129
D. Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a
Township road is required to obtain a road occupancy permit from the
Township (see Appendix C).130
E. Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
A. Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off street in accordance
with the requirements of the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance.131
129. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-37 WARWICK CODE § 163-39
155:476
B. At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be permitted along the
public streets. All parking lots and bays permitting parking other than
perpendicular shall be reviewed in depth by the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors, with special attention to
circulation and access.
C. All parking areas, drives or access and circulation roads shall be
physically defined by one or more of the following methods: concrete
curbing, wood or concrete bollards, railroad ties or concrete tire stops.
Parking stalls shall be striped with a four-inch painted line. All of the
above shall be to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
Form 408 Specifications, as amended, or the Township's requirements.
D. Rows of parking spaces shall not exceed 12 spaces. Rows exceeding 12
spaces shall be split into conforming rows by a planting strip equal to
the width of one parking stall. Such planting strips may not be used in
calculating optional landscape reserve areas as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.
E. Where parking areas exceed 350 feet in length, measured along the
narrow stall dimension, the parking areas shall be separated from one
another by ten-foot planting strips or pedestrian walkways, or both. In
areas where there are multiple parallel parking areas, the pedestrian/
planting strip shall be required on every other parking area, starting
with areas adjacent to access or circulation roads. Such planting strips
may not be used in calculating optional landscape reserve areas as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
F. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following
table:
Parking Stall Driveway
Angle of
Parking
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90º 10 18.5 22 24
60º 10 18.5 17 24
45º 10 18.5 14 24
30º 10 18.5 14 12
Parallel 8.0 22.0 12 12
G. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup
area for the end stalls of the parking lot.
H. Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed
to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the
moving of any other vehicle.
I. No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all
curblines in all parking areas.
§ 163-39 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-39
155:477
§ 163-40. Sidewalks.
§ 163-41. Crosswalks.
J. All parking areas shall be set back from the ultimate right-of-way line at
least 15 feet. The distance between this required setback and the future
right-of-way shall be maintained as a planting strip.
K. The construction of all automobile parking areas shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Specifications, as amended, or the Township specifications and
standards of this chapter.
L. The required number of parking spaces shall be as specified in the
Zoning Ordinance.
M. All proposed parking areas shall include handicap parking spaces in
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as revised.
The quantity of handicap parking spaces to be provided shall not be less
than 2.5% of the total number of spaces proposed.
A. The sidewalk and curb shall be separated by an unpaved section of a
minimum of four feet in width; the minimum width of the sidewalk shall
be five feet along all streets.
B. The grades and paving of the sidewalk shall be continuous across
driveways, except in cases where safety considerations or storm
drainage requirements dictate otherwise.
C. At corners and pedestrian street-crossing points, sidewalks shall be
extended to the curbline with an adequate apron/ramp area for
anticipated pedestrian traffic in accordance with current ADA
standards and as directed by Township Engineer.
D. Sidewalks adjacent to angle-type parking areas shall have a minimum
of three feet of additional width to permit pedestrian movement beyond
the bumper overhang area.
E. Sidewalks shall not exceed a seven-percent grade. Steps or a
combination of steps and ramps shall be utilized to maintain the
maximum grades.
F. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with specifications set
forth in this chapter.
G. Upon approval by the Board of Supervisors, the sidewalk may be
substituted with an asphalt path.
A. Crosswalks shall be required at all intersections and other points of
pedestrian access along public streets in accordance with current
PennDOT and Township standards.
§ 163-39 WARWICK CODE § 163-41
155:478
§ 163-42. Street and regulatory signs.
B. Crosswalks shall be delineated by thermoplastic markings in
accordance with PennDOT standards.
C. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with a concrete
paving not less than four feet wide shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
D. The Board of Supervisors may require use of other/alternate materials
to facilitate traffic calming, pedestrian safety and/or to encourage
pedestrian use.
E. All crosswalks at signalized intersections shall contain pedestrian
countdown features as approved by PennDOT and the Township
Engineer.
A. Street and regulatory signage shall be shown on subdivision and land
development plans. All signage, i.e., street name and regulatory signs,
required as a result of new construction shall be installed at the
expense of the applicant. Minimum regulatory signage includes stop
signs, street signs, speed limit signs (on residential streets), and any
other signage as deemed necessary during the review and approval
process.
B. Lettering for street signs shall be as required by the Board of
Supervisors; at a minimum, lettering shall consist of six-inch-high black
letters on a white reflectorized background. The plates shall be
horizontal.
C. The standard shall be rustproof metal and shall be of sufficient length to
permit the same to be embedded in the ground a distance of not less
than three feet, as hereinafter provided, and to permit the lower edge of
the street nameplate to be seven feet above the ground level or curb, as
hereinafter provided. Upon erection, the standard shall be embedded in
a concrete base for a depth of not less than three feet below the surface
of the ground. Suitable backfill material shall be placed in the hole
around the post in successive layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth,
measured loose. Each layer of backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to
secure maximum practical density so that the post will be plumb and
rigid. Posts shall not be installed in freezing or thawing weather. The
standard shall be of such metal construction as to hold the nameplate
rigidly in a proper and permanent position and prevent it from swaying
in the wind. Street sign installation must comply with the PennDOT
Publication 408 Standards as well as the guidelines and requirements
set forth in the MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices) for
streets and highways.
D. The signs shall be located with a view to making them seen at all times
with a minimum of effort by both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and as
§ 163-41 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-42
155:479
§ 163-43. Streetlights.
close to the side of the cartway or curb as practical, but no part of the
nameplate shall be permitted to overhang any part of the cartway or
curb.
E. Street nameplates, standards, installations and locations shall be
subject to the approval and inspection of the Township Engineer.
A. The owner, developer or applicant shall install or cause to be installed
pole streetlights on all streets, private or public, which shall be serviced
entirely by an underground conduit in accordance with a plan prepared
by the Philadelphia Electric Company (PECO), reviewed by the
Township and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The equipment
used in such a plan must contain LED fixtures of that type provided by
PECO or variations approved by PECO and the Township. An energizing
plan with phasing, if necessary, and a layout and spacing plan must be
submitted for review by the Township Planning Commission and
approved by the Board of Supervisors. All fixtures shall be
programmable.
B. Horizontal footcandle requirements for various development areas:
Type of
Development
Minimum Average
Footcandle Level at
Average Ground
Surface Elevation
Average to Minimum
Uniformity Ratio
Shopping centers and
other commercial
areas
2.0 3:1
Industrial/office
campuses
1.0 3:1
Recreational areas 1.0 3:1
Multifamily and
planned residential
developments
0.6 to 0.8 3:1
Residential streets 0.4 3:1*
Sidewalks 0.2 3:1
Pedestrian walkways 0.4 3:1
NOTES:
* Streets with ADT's of less than 200 may have a ratio of 6:1.
C. The applicant shall submit to the Township, prior to final plan approval,
a petition requesting the establishment of a streetlight district for the
subdivision or land development. In the alternative, the applicant may
impose upon the homeowners' association the continuing obligation for
§ 163-42 WARWICK CODE § 163-43
155:480
§ 163-44. Curbs.
Curbs shall be provided and constructed in accordance with the appropriate
specifications set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 163-45. Blocks.
§ 163-46. Lots.
the maintenance of streetlights and all electric bills associated with the
streetlights.
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
regard to:
(1) The planned use of the land.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot size, dimension and minimum lot
area per dwelling unit.
(3) The need for convenient access.
(4) The control and safety of street traffic.
(5) The limitations and opportunities of the topography.
B. In general, all blocks in a development shall have a minimum length of
at least 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,600 feet.
C. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to provide two
tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the applicable zoning
classification, except in the case of lots along a major thoroughfare
where the lot fronts on an interior street.
D. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with a concrete
paving not less than four feet wide shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Warwick
Township Zoning Ordinance.132
C. All lots shall have access to a public street of at least a twenty-five-foot
width, except multifamily uses, which may have access to a deedrestricted
parking area and/or access road which is/are accessible from
a public street.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-43 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-46
155:481
§ 163-47. Grading.
Grading and earth-disturbance activities shall be designed and undertaken
in accordance with the Warwick Township Stormwater Management and
Grading Ordinance, as amended.133
§ 163-48. Easements.
D. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line.
E. The depth and width of lots reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial uses shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking.
F. Lots shall not be designed with a lot depth to width ratio exceeding 2.5
(the lot must be less than 2.5 times deeper than wide) or less than one
(the lot cannot be wider then it is deep) and shall not be excessively
irregular in shape.
G. House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with Township
requirements.
H. Existing buildings. The following regulations shall apply as they affect
tracts upon which buildings exist at the time of the application:
(1) Nonconforming yard requirements. The subdivision of a tract
which creates nonconforming side and/or rear yards for existing
buildings will not be approved. Nonconforming front yards may be
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board if necessary to obtain
proper street alignment.
(2) Alterations and replacements will be permitted within the existing
structure, but exterior extensions of the building must conform to
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
(3) Conversions. In cases where the principal building use has not
been as a dwelling, its conversion to a dwelling shall comply with
all Township ordinances, codes, rules and regulations.
I. Totally unusable land areas may be included in individual lot areas,
provided that there is no infringement of the building envelope, as
determined by minimum required front, side and rear yard setbacks,
into these areas. Totally unusable land areas shall not be included in
land areas utilized for density calculation but may be utilized to meet
common open space requirements of this chapter.
A. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet or greater shall be
provided as necessary for utilities and drainage.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
§ 163-46 WARWICK CODE § 163-48
155:482
§ 163-49. Stormwater management.
Stormwater management facilities shall be designed, installed and
undertaken in accordance with the Warwick Township Stormwater
Management and Grading Ordinance, as amended.134 The regulations of the
Warwick Township Stormwater Management and Grading Ordinance are
incorporated herein as if set forth in their entirety.
C. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the
area of an easement necessary for access and maintenance of any
utility or drainageway contained within that easement. Where such
easements contain existing vegetation, i.e., trees and/or ground cover,
as much as possible of the existing vegetation shall be maintained in its
natural state to preserve the natural appearance and stabilize soil
conditions. Where such vegetation exists, clearing plans shall be
approved by the Township before clearing commences.
D. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse
or drainageway, there shall be provided a drainage easement or rightof-
way conforming substantially with the boundaries of such
watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage, but not less than 20 feet, or as may be required or directed by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The
applicant shall properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open
ditches when it is deemed necessary by the Township. Within the
restrictions of this section, the Board of Supervisors may permit or
require such drainageway improvements to effectively improve the
quality and character of such drainageway.
E. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within the
subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in volume
over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land
development, the applicant or owner shall reserve or obtain easements
over all lands affected thereby, which easements shall be adequate for
such discharge or drainage and for the carrying off of such water and
for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same, including
the right of passage over and upon the same by vehicles, machinery and
other equipment for such purposes, and which shall be of sufficient
width for such passage and work. The owner shall convey, free of
charge or cost, such easements to the Township upon demand.
F. The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township and at the
owner's sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted, set or put
(with or without knowledge of this regulation) within the area of any
easement.
G. No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the
approved plan.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
§ 163-48 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-50
155:483
§ 163-50. Bridges and culverts.
§ 163-51. Landscape plantings.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 and Form 409 Specifications,
as amended, to support expected loads and to carry expected flows.
They shall be constructed to the full width of the right-of-way or to an
adequate dimension to accommodate special grade conditions.
B. Approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Dams and Encroachments, is required for bridges and
culverts in accordance with Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway
Management Rules and Regulations, as amended.
C. Also see additional design criteria as contained in the Warwick
Township Stormwater Management and Grading Ordinance.135
A. Street tree planting.
(1) Within any land development or subdivision, street trees shall be
planted immediately outside the right-of-way lines on both sides of
all public or private streets where suitable street trees do not exist.
(2) Street trees shall be planted at a maximum of 60 feet apart, or an
equivalent number shall be planted in an informal arrangement
acceptable to the Township.
(3) Street trees shall not be planted opposite each other but shall
alternate.
(4) At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 30 feet from
the intersection of the street right-of-way lines or at some
measured distance so that the required clear-sight triangle is not
obstructed.
(5) Reference § 163-51F(11) for selection of appropriate plants.
B. Parking area planting.
(1) Parking area green areas in residential, commercial and office/
industrial areas, exclusive of areas allotted for screening and buffer
requirements and areas adjacent to or considered a part of
individual or groups of buildings set aside for general landscaping,
shall be landscaped with coniferous and deciduous trees, shrubs,
ground cover and mulch as determined to be appropriate or
necessary for each specific site by the Township.
(a) Hardy ground cover shall be used in place of grass wherever
possible.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
§ 163-50 WARWICK CODE § 163-51
155:484
(b) A type of mulch shall be used which will aid in controlling
erosion and noxious weeds and generally preserve and
enhance the quality and character of the proposed landscape
planting.
(c) In all areas of parking area planting, emphasis shall be put on
simplicity of design and adequacy to meet specific aesthetic,
physical or safety needs as required by the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors.
(d) Reference § 163-51F(11) for selection of appropriate parking
area plants.
(2) Parking area planting. The following standards shall apply to
parking areas of six or more spaces:
(a) Parking areas shall have at least one deciduous tree for every
six spaces in single rows plus one tree for every 12 spaces in
double-loaded rows of parking spaces.
(b) Trees shall be planted along the perimeter of the parking area,
as well as in raised planting islands to provide shade for the
parked automobiles. Raised planting islands shall be located at
each end of a double-loaded parking row and shall be planted
with two deciduous trees per island.
(c) The perimeter of parking areas shall be bordered by screen
plantings. These plantings shall consist of shrubs at such
height as to screen surrounding residential areas or public
streets from headlight glare.
(d) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum diameter of 3.5 inches.
Shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height.
(e) These plantings shall be in addition to all other landscaping
requirements of this chapter.
C. Screening and buffer plantings. Screening and buffer area
requirements shall be those specified in the Zoning Ordinance, as
amended,136 for each specified district and all off-street parking areas.
All such areas shall be subject to a detailed review.
(1) Required screening and buffer areas shall consist of at least 80%
coniferous material and 20% deciduous trees and shrubs for accent
and color and must, through layout and content, provide design
solutions which solve all visual and noise problems from
recreational, industrial, commercial or motor vehicle uses, whether
on the same lot or not.
(2) In addition to required tree and shrub buffers, earthen berms,
fences or masonry walls may be acceptable or desirable when the
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-51 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51
155:485
Township determines that it is not possible to achieve desired
buffering with the plant material specified above.
(3) Spacing, density and material selection shall be based on the
intensity or degree of the problem in the area of required screening
or buffer planting.
(4) It is recommended that the applicant employ a landscape architect
to ensure proper use and arrangement of plant material to achieve
the required screening and buffer while maintaining an aesthetic
appearance.
(5) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will be not
closer than three feet from any ultimate right-of-way or property
line.
(6) No parking, loading, service area or other facilities shall be
permitted in the buffer planting strips or buffer yard.
(7) Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at all street intersections
and at all points where private vehicular driveways intersect public
streets as specified elsewhere in this chapter and in the Zoning
Ordinance.
(8) The final form and content of the proposed buffer planting strip
shall be submitted for review by the Township Planning
Commission and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(9) The screen planting or buffer may be broken only at points of
vehicular or pedestrian access.
(10) The buffer or screen planting strips shall be permanently
maintained, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced at the start of the next planting season.
D. Grassed or grass/ground cover areas. All such areas specified on
proposed or approved plans shall be prepared, installed and maintained
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Form 408 Specifications, as amended.
E. Open space, storm drainage and retention areas. All areas proposed for
recreational use, whether active or passive, shall be planted to
effectively naturalize the areas to become an integral and harmonious
element in the natural landscape. All storm drainage channels and
retention areas, whether existing or proposed, shall be graded and
planted to effectively naturalize area(s) so as to become an integral and
harmonious part of the landscape by contour and type of plant material
employed, as determined by the Township Engineer.
F. Landscape performance standards. See the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Form 408 Specifications, as amended, for
performance standards.
§ 163-51 WARWICK CODE § 163-51
155:486
(1) Tree specifications. The following are the minimum sizes for plant
material:
Type Size
Street trees 3 1/2 inches' caliper measured at a
height of 6 inches above grade*
Deciduous trees 3 1/2 inches' caliper measured at a
height of 6 inches above grade*
Ornamental/flowering trees 6 to 8 feet**
Coniferous trees 6 to 8 feet**
Deciduous shrubs 18 to 24 inches**
Coniferous shrubs 18 to 24 inches**
Coniferous shrub screens and
buffer
2 1/2 to 3 feet
NOTES:
* All trees shall have a minimum of a five-foot single straight
stem to the first lateral branches above grade.
** To meet standards as described by the American
Nurserymen's Association.
(2) Trees shall be of nursery stock quality, grown under the same
climatic conditions as at the location of the development.
(3) All planting shall be done in accordance with good nursery and
landscape practice and to the standards established by this
chapter.
(4) Trees shall have symmetrical growth and be free of insect pests
and disease.
(5) Depending on good planting practice with reference to the
particular species to be planted, the Township may modify the size
requirements of trees.
(6) All buildings must have a planting plan, approved before
construction.
(7) All plantings and lawns must be regularly fed with proper plant and
lawn food and be trimmed and maintained properly at all times.
Mulched planting areas must be maintained at all times.
(8) Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted
until the finished grading of the subdivision or land development
has been completed.
(9) Final landscape plans, as approved, will be incorporated into the
agreement and bond requirements as required elsewhere in this
chapter.
§ 163-51 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51
155:487
(10) All grading, seeding, mulched beds and plantings must be installed
and maintained by the applicant in accordance with approved
landscape plans.
(11) All plant materials must be installed and maintained accordingly.
(a) At the time of installation, the minimum trunk diameter of
canopy trees, measured at a height of six inches above finished
grade, shall be 3 1/2 inches.
(b) Any plant material which does not survive shall be replaced by
the developer. Financial security shall be posted with the
Township in an amount equal to the estimated cost of trees and
plantings, to be released 18 months from Township acceptance
of the installation and satisfactory replacement of all dead
plantings.
(c) The following plant material is permitted for use as tree
plantings when placement is within four feet of curb, sidewalk,
or asphalt surface:
Acer campestre — Hedge maple
Acer x freemanii "Armstrong" — Armstrong freeman maple
Carpinus caroliniana tree form — American hornbea
Prunus sargenti "columnaris" tree form — Columnar sargent
cherry
(d) The following plant material is permitted for use as tree
plantings when placement is greater than four feet from curb,
sidewalk, or asphalt surface:
Acer rubrum — Red maple (all cultivars)
Ginko biloba — Ginko (male only)
Platanus x acerifolia — London planetree
Quercus acutissima — Sawtooth oak
Quercus imbricaria — Shingle oak
Gleditsia triacanthos — Honeylocust (thornless cultivars only)
Tilia cordata — Littleleaf linden
Zelkova serrata — Japanese zelkova
(e) In addition to plant material included in Subsection F(11)(c)
and (d) above, the following may be utilized where required for
buffer yards, detention basins, open space planting, etc.:
[Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
Small Trees
Acer buergeranum tree form — Trident maple
Acer gmnnala tree form — Amur maple
§ 163-51 WARWICK CODE § 163-51
155:488
Acer griseum tree form — Paperback maple
Acer tataricum tree form — Tatarian maple
Amelanchier laevis tree form — Serviceberry (all cultivars)
Carpinus betulus — European hornbeam
Cercis canadensis tree form — Eastern redbud
Cornus kousa tree form — Kousa dogwood
Cornus florida "rubra" — Pink flowering dogwood
Crataegus (many species) — Hawthorn (thornless only)
Magnolia x loebneri "Merrill" — Merrill magnolia
Malus "centzam" tree form — Centurion crabapple
Malus "hargozam" tree form — Harvest gold crabapple
Malus "snowdrift" tree form — Snowdrift crabapple
Malus "spring snow" tree form — Springsnow crabapple
Malus x zumi "calocarpa" tree form — Redbud crabapple
Prunus serrulata tree form — Kwanzan oriental cherry
Pyrus betulifolia — Birchleaf pear
Sorbus (many species/hybrids) — Mountain ash
Syringa reticulata “ivory silk” — Ivory silk Japanese tree lilac
Large Trees
Acer nigrum — Black maple
Acer saccharum — Sugar maple (all cultivars)
Aesculus hippocastanum "Baumannii" — Bauman horse
chestnut
Aesculus x carnea "Briotii" — Ruby red horse chestnut
Betula nigra — River birch
Liquidambar styraciflua — Sweetgum (rotundlfolla)
Magnolia acuminata — Cucumbertree
Ostrya virginiana tree form — American hophornbeam
Quercus macrocarpa — Bur oak
Quercus coccinea — Scarlet oak
Quercus phellos — Willow oak
Quercus rubra — Northern red oak
Tillia americana — American linden
Tillia tomentosa — Silver linden
Evergreens (four feet high minimum)
Ilex opaca — American holly
Picea abies — Norway spruce
§ 163-51 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51
155:489
Picea omorika — Serbian spruce
Picea pungens — Colorado spruce
Pinus nigra — Austrian pine
Pinus strobus — White pine
Pseudotsuga menziesli — Douglas fir
Tsuga canadensis — Canada hemlock
Thuja occidentalis — American arborvitae
Hedge (four feet high minimum)
Crataegus intricata — Thicket hawthorn
Forsythia intermedia — Border forsythia
Rhamnus frazula columnaris — Tallhedge buckthorn
Syringa chinensis — Chinese lilac
Syringa vulgaris — Common lilac
Hedgerow (four feet high minimum)
Crataegus crus-galli — Cockspur thorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum — Washington hawthorn
Viburnum sieboldii — Siebold viburnum
Viburnum tomentosum — Doublefile viburnum
Shrubs (three feet high minimum)
Juniperus virginiana — Upright juniper
Phracantha lalandi — Laland firethorn
Taxus capitita — Upright yew
Taxus hicksi — Hicks yew
Thuja occidentalis — American arborvitae
Shrubs (four feet high minimum)
Hamamelis vernalia — Vernal witch hazel
Hamamelis virginiana — Common witch hazel
Ilex verticillata — Winterberry
Viburnum dentatum — Arrowwood viburnum
Viburnum lantana — Wayfaring tree viburnum
Trees and Shrubs Suitable for Detention Basins
Balsam fir [Abies balsamea (L.) Mill.]
Green alder [Alnus crispa (Dryalnd. in Ait.) Pursh]
European alder [Alnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn.]
Seaside alder [Alnus maritima (Marsh.) Nutt.]
Speckled alder [Alnus rugosa (DuRoi) Spreng.]
§ 163-51 WARWICK CODE § 163-51
155:490
Oblong-leaf service-berry [Amelanchier canadensis (L.)
Medic.]
Bog rosemary (Andromeda polifolia L.)
Red chokeberry [Aronia arbutifolia (L.) Elliott]
Purple chokeberry [Aronia prunifolia (Marsh.) Rehder]
Yellow birch (Betula alleghaniensis Britton)
Sweet birch (Betula lenta L.)
Gray birch (Betula populifolia Marshall)
Northern catalpa [Catalpa speciosa (Warder ex Barney)
Warder ex Engelm.]
Atlantic white cedar [Chamaecyparis thyoides (L.) BSP.]
White fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus L.)
Flowering dogwood (Cornus florida L.)
Common persimmon (Diospyros virginiana L.)
Black crowberry (Empetrum nigrum L.)
Eastern burning bush (Euonymus atropurpureus Jacq.)
American beech (Fagus grandifolia Ehrh.)
White ash (Fraxinus americana L.)
Black ash (Fraxinus nigra Marshall)
Creeping snowberry [Gaultheria hispidula (L.) Muhl. ex Torr.]
Teaberry (Gaultheria procumbens L.)
Honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos L.)
Shrubby St. John's wort (Hypericum prolificum L.)
American holly (Ilex opaca Soland. in Ait.)
Butternut (Juglans cinerea L.)
Black walnut (Juglans nigra L.)
Sheep-laurel (Kalmia angustifolia L.)
Mountain laurel (Kalmia latifolia L.)
American larch [Larix laricina (DuRoi) K. Koch]
Tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipifera L.)
Eastern ninebark [Physocarpus opulifolius (L.) Maxim.]
Red spruce (Picea rubens Sarg.)
Pitch pine (Pinus rigida Mill.)
Eastern white pine (Pinus strobus L.)
Balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera L.)
Eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides W. Bartram ex
Marshall)
§ 163-51 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51
155:491
Swamp cottonwood (Populus heterophylla L.)
Quaking aspen (Populus tremula L.)
Southern red oak (Quercus falcata Michx.)
Shingle oak (Quercus imbricaria Michx.)
Willow oak (Quercus phellos L.)
Chestnut oak (Quercus prinus L.)
Post oak (Quercus stellata Wangerh.)
Alder-leaf buckthorn (Rhamnus alnifolia L'Her)
Pink azalea [Rhododendron periclymenoides (Michx.)
Shinners]
Old field blackberry (Rubus alumnus L.H. Bailey)
Bailey blackberry (Rubus baileyanus Britt.)
Sand blackberry (Rubus cuneifolius Pursh)
Enslen blackberry (Rubus enslenii Tratt.)
Common red raspberry (Rubus idaeus L.)
Tall Prairie willow (Salix humilis Marshall)
Shining willow (Salix lucida Muhl.)
Silky willow (Salix sericea Marshall)
Narrow-leaf meadow-sweet (Spiraea alba DuRoi)
Eastern hemlock [Tsuga canadensis (L.) Carriere]
NOTE: Additional trees and other plant material and
cultivars may be utilized when approved by the Township.
(f) Plant material specifications.
[1] Name of plants. Plant names shall agree with the
nomenclature of Standard Plant Names, as adopted by the
American Joint Committee on Horticulture Nomenclature,
1942 Edition, as amended; size and grading standards
shall conform to those specified by the American
Association of Nurserymen in the latest edition of the
USDA Standards for Nursery Stock. No substitutions shall
be permitted except by written permission of the
Township.
[2] Quality. All plants shall be typical of their species or
variety and shall have normal, well-developed branches
and vigorous fibrous root systems. All plants shall be
nursery-grown unless otherwise stated; they shall have
been growing under the same climate conditions as the
municipality for at least two years prior to date of planting.
All plants which are found unsuitable in growth or
§ 163-51 WARWICK CODE § 163-51
155:492
condition or which are not true to name shall be removed
and replaced with acceptable plants.
[3] Preparation of plants. All precautions customary in good
trade practice shall be taken in preparing plants for
moving. All balled and burlapped plants shall be dug to
meet or exceed the USDA Standards for Nursery Stock.
[4] Delivery. Plants shall be packed, transported and handled
with utmost care to ensure adequate protection against
injury.
[5] All plantings shall be able to survive soot, gas fumes and
salt. Trees which have low-growing branches, gum or
moisture which may drop on vehicles or blossoms, thorns,
seeds or pods which may clog drainage facilities shall be
avoided. The plantings chosen should be of sufficient size
to be effective the first year they are planted.
(g) Existing vegetation. In cases where natural features on the site
duplicate or essentially duplicate the requirements of the
buffering provisions of this chapter, these requirements may be
waived by the Board of Supervisors.
(12) Maintenance.
(a) An agreement between the developer and the Township shall
be required and entered into in order to provide maintenance
of all such plantings.
(b) Street trees, plant material and buffer plantings.
[1] The term of the maintenance agreement shall be for 18
months from the day the Board of Supervisors takes final
dedication of all public streets and any other public
improvements in all phases of an approved subdivision and
land development plan. If for some reason dedication of
streets is not part of the approved subdivision or land
development plan, the term of the maintenance agreement
shall be from the day the Township Engineer and Township
Manager give to the developer final approval on all
required improvements identified in the developer's
agreement. During this maintenance term, the developer
shall:
[a] Replace all dead street trees, plant material and
buffer plantings due to improper maintenance or
damage by accident within six months of notification
by the Township Engineer.
[b] Control insects and diseases.
[c] Repair mechanical injury.
§ 163-51 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51
155:493
§ 163-51.1. Tree protection standards.
[d] Remove all dead branches.
[2] The Township Engineer shall make a final inspection of all
street trees, plant material and buffer plantings prior to
the end of the term of the maintenance agreement to make
sure that all conditions set forth in and all terms of said
maintenance agreement have been met. A written report
of compliance shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors.
[3] Upon the satisfactory completion of said maintenance
agreement, the maintenance and replacement of all street
trees, plant material and buffer plantings as shown on the
final subdivision and land development plans shall become
the responsibility of the applicant, unless otherwise
agreed to by the Township.
[4] Upon the completion of a maintenance agreement, the
Township Zoning Officer shall have jurisdiction to enforce
these provisions to ensure compliance with the landscape
material shown on the approved final land development
plans as they will pertain to the individual lots.
[5] Replacement of all street trees, plant material and buffer
plantings by an individual lot owner shall be subject to
approval by the Zoning Officer or another designated code
enforcement official, including but not limited to the
Township Engineer, foresters, tree wardens or other
assistants the Township Board of Supervisors may employ.
[6] Where areas of forest remain as part of the land
development or open space associated therewith, the
developer shall be responsible for maintenance and sound
forest management practices, including but not limited to
removal of dead or diseased trees. Where a forested area
is to be dedicated to the Township, the developer shall
provide the Township with a forestry management plan
prepared by a certified arborist. Prior to dedication and
during the eighteen-month maintenance period, the
developer shall implement the forestry management plan,
including the removal of all dead and diseased trees.
A. General requirements.
(1) Grade changes and excavation shall not encroach upon the tree
protection zone. The tree protection zone shall be established as a
distance of 20 feet from the trunk of the tree, or the dripline,
whichever is greater.
§ 163-51 WARWICK CODE § 163-51.1
155:494
(2) No toxic materials shall be stored within 100 feet of a tree
protection zone, including petroleum-based and/or -derived
products.
(3) The area within the tree protection zone shall not be built upon, nor
shall any materials be stored there either temporarily or
permanently. Vehicles and equipment shall not be parked in the
tree protection zone.
(4) When tree stumps are located within 10 feet of the tree protection
zone, the stumps shall be removed by means of a stump grinder to
minimize the effect on surrounding root systems.
(5) Tree roots which must be severed shall be cut by a backhoe or
similar equipment aligned radially to the tree. This method reduces
the lateral movement of the roots during excavation, which, if done
by other methods, could damage the intertwined roots of adjacent
trees.
(6) Within four hours of any severance of roots, all tree roots that have
been exposed and/or damaged shall be trimmed cleanly and
covered temporarily with moist peat moss, moist burlap or other
moist biodegradable material to keep them from drying out until
permanent cover can be installed.
(7) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not discharge into
the tree protection zone.
(8) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not be located
within the tree protection zone.
(9) Trees shall not be used for roping, cables, signs or fencing. Nails
and spikes shall not be driven into trees.
B. The tree protection zone. Prior to construction, the tree protection zone
shall be delineated by the following methods:
(1) The tree protection zone that is delineated on the site prior to
construction shall conform to the approved development plans.
(2) All trees scheduled to remain shall be marked; where groups of
trees exist, only the trees on the edge need to be marked.
(3) A forty-eight-inch-high barrier fence (commonly referred to as a
"snow fence"), mounted on posts, located eight feet on center, shall
be placed along the boundary of the tree protection zone. Such
fence shall be bright orange in color.
(4) In addition to the tree protection zone, trees may be left standing
as protection between the trunks of the trees to be retained and the
limits of grading. When additional trees are used as protection, the
tree protection zone on the approved plan shall be marked in the
field as directed by the Township Engineer so that the additional
§ 163-51.1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51.1
155:495
buffer area is delineated. When this method of protection is used,
these additional trees shall be removed at the time of completion of
the project.
(5) When the barrier fence has been installed, it shall be inspected and
approved by the Township Engineer prior to commencing clearing
and construction; the fencing along the tree protection zone shall
be maintained until all work/construction has been completed. Any
damages to the protective fencing shall be replaced and repaired
before further construction shall begin.
(6) Trees being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a
tree protection zone or into trees that are to be retained.
C. Retaining walls.
(1) When the original grade cannot be retained at the tree protection
zone line, a retaining wall shall be constructed outside of the tree
protection zone.
(2) The retaining wall shall be designed to comply with the Township
standards for retaining walls.
(3) In addition, the following methods shall be used to ensure survival
of the tree:
(a) The top of the wall shall be four inches above the finished
grade line.
(b) The wall shall be constructed of large stones, brick, building
tile, concrete blocks or treated wood beams not less than 6 x 6
inches. A means for drainage through the wall shall be
provided so water will not accumulate on either side of the
wall. Weep holes shall be required with any wall.
(c) Any severed roots as a result of excavation shall be trimmed so
that their edges are smooth and are cut back to a lateral root if
exposed.
(d) A layer of clean stone (size: 3/4 to one inch) shall be placed one
foot out from the wall to aid in drainage.
(4) Design drawings and supporting calculations, both prepared by an
engineer registered to practice in Pennsylvania, shall be submitted
to the Township for review prior to construction.
D. Pruning methods. All final cuts shall be made sufficiently close to the
trunk or parent limb but without cutting into the branch collar or
leaving a protruding stub, according to the National Arborist
Association standards. All necessary pruning cuts must be made to
prevent bark from being torn from the tree and to facilitate rapid
healing. Flush cuts are unacceptable.
§ 163-51.1 WARWICK CODE § 163-51.1
155:496
§ 163-51.2. Individual tree replacement.
Any individual trees having a diameter of eight inches or more, measured at
breast height, which are removed as a result of development of a parcel and
cannot be relocated shall be replaced with a new tree of like kind having
a minimum diameter of 2.5 caliper inches, measured at breast height.
Individual trees shall be defined as those freestanding trees outside a forest,
as defined by this chapter. This is in addition to all other plantings as
required by this chapter.
§ 163-51.3. Corridor Overlay District.
E. Fertilization methods.
(1) All trees which have experienced any disturbance or have had
damages to the roots or branches shall be fertilized.
(2) Trees shall be fertilized in early fall (September to October) or mid
spring (April to May). Fall applications are preferred.
(3) Fertilizer shall be broadcast over the soil surface in an area twice
the size of the tree protection zone at a rate equivalent to one
pound of nitrogen per 1,000 square feet. A minimum of 1,000
square feet per tree will receive fertilization.
(4) Fertilizer grade shall have approximately three parts nitrogen to
one part phosphorus and potassium (3:1:1 ratio).
F. Trenching and tunneling.
(1) If there is no alternative but to locate a utility line through a tree
protection zone, tunneling shall be used instead of trenching,
except where, in the opinion of the Township arborist, survival of
the tree would not be affected by either method. The Township
Engineer shall determine the most-desirable location for the utility
line.
(2) Trenches shall be filled as soon as possible and tamped lightly to
avoid air spaces.
A. Applicability. The Corridor Overlay District shall apply to all properties
in Warwick Township, regardless of zoning district, depicted on the
attached overlay district plan. These are supplemental regulations
which shall apply in addition to all other applicable regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance137 and this chapter. In the case of a conflict between
this section and any other section, the section imposing the stricter
requirements shall apply.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the Corridor Overlay District is to enhance the
appearance and design of the corridor which serves as a gateway to
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-51.1 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51.3
155:497
Bucks County and to Warwick Township; to develop a process for
review and approval of development that maintains a high standard
of architectural and site development design; to ensure that facilities
for parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation can be safely and
adequately provided; to provide for landscaping and street trees; and
to make sure that new development reflects and enhances the visual,
historic and cultural character of Warwick Township. This section is
adopted in accordance with Section 605(2) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.138
C. Design review process. Applicants for subdivision or land development
shall submit, in addition to all other required information, the
information, drawings, and sample materials listed below. The proposed
design shall be reviewed as part of the subdivision or land development
review process. Where no subdivision or land development is required
or where developments are constructed in phases, such as but not
limited to expansions or changes in use, the proposed design shall be
reviewed by the Township as part of the building permit review process
and at the request of the Township by the Warwick Township Board of
Supervisors. Design review consists of a systematic assessment of the
three-dimensional configuration, design, and materials to be used to
ensure that the proposed development meets the goals for the Corridor
Overlay District.
(1) A description of the use or uses proposed.
(2) Architectural drawings of proposed building(s), showing all sides of
the proposed building(s), with information on building materials
and colors along with sample building materials.
(3) Photographs of the original site on which the proposed
development will occur, prior to any change being made, showing
surrounding areas and how the new development will relate to the
existing surroundings.
D. Standards for development within the Corridor Overlay District.
(1) Building design. The following standards shall apply to all building
designs:
(a) All sides of a building shall be architecturally consistent with
the front facade, and all building faces visible from the street
or abutting properties shall have the same architectural
features and style as the front facade. Modifications may be
made in the design for necessary loading and other utility
areas.
(b) Building materials shall be limited to the following:
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605.
§ 163-51.3 WARWICK CODE § 163-51.3
155:498
Stone
Clapboard (wood, vinyl, or simulated)
Brick
Stucco
Board and batten
Cedar shakes or simulated shakes looking like cedar
Slate or slate substitute
Decorative block
(c) Roof design. Pitched roofs are required. Flat roofs are
prohibited, except where there is a partial or pent roof that
extends along all sides of the building. HVAC units shall not be
visible from surrounding properties or any public street on the
same elevation.
(d) Colors. All buildings and roofs shall be designed to use
primarily earth tones, colors of natural materials, or colors of
traditional building materials such as brick, stone, or wood.
Appropriate augmenting trim colors shall be permitted. No
bright or neon colors will be permitted.
(e) Building walls of more than 150 feet in length must be
designed so that there are no long expanses of unbroken wall.
The building wall shall include change in materials, color, or
texture; windows; entranceways; or other variations.
(2) Prototypical design. Design of establishments shall conform to the
standards of building design, landscaping, parking, lighting, and
signs for developments within the Corridor Overlay District.
Modifications shall be made to any prototypical design to ensure
that it meets the purpose and standards of the Corridor Overlay
District.
(3) Landscaping. Street trees shall be provided every 30 feet along
public street frontages. Where parking areas are located between
the street and the proposed principal building, plant materials shall
be installed at the edge of the parking area closest to the street,
which shall be at least three feet in height when planted and which
shall meet the landscape requirements of this chapter. The
development shall meet any additional buffer requirements of all
applicable Township ordinances.
(4) Parking.
(a) All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way line of any public street. The area
between the cartway and the parking areas shall be devoted to
required street trees, landscaping, and sidewalks.
§ 163-51.3 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51.3
155:499
(b) Parking lots shall be designed so that a portion of the parking
spaces is located to the side and the rear of the building.
(c) Parking layout shall provide for pedestrian circulation
throughout the parking area. The pedestrian circulation
system shall be illustrated on the site plan.
(5) Pedestrian circulation standards.
(a) There shall be clear grade-separated pedestrian connections
between all parking areas and all buildings.
(b) Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five feet
in width, shall provide a direct link from the public sidewalk or
street right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all
principal retail establishments on the site. Walkways shall also
connect focal points of pedestrian activity, such as but not
limited to transit stops, street crossings, and building and store
entry points.
(c) Sidewalks, no less than six feet in width, shall be provided
along the full length of the building along any facade featuring
a customer entrance and along any facade abutting public
parking areas. Along facades with building entrances, the
required six-foot sidewalk area shall be set back from the
facade by a three-foot area that contains either planting beds
or additional sidewalk width.
(d) All internal pedestrian walkways and crosswalks shall be
distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable,
low-maintenance surface materials, such as pavers, bricks or
scored concrete, to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort.
(e) Buildings and sidewalks shall be handicapped accessible.
(6) Lighting and signs.
(a) All parking areas, walkways, and passages shall be adequately
illuminated with a lighting system designed to complement the
general areas and the site of the proposed development and to
prevent any off-site glare and spillover light onto adjacent
properties. Lighting plans must provide detailed isocandle
levels with a minimum 1.0 maintained footcandle level and a
maximum 3.0 maintained footcandle level. The incident
spillover light at property boundaries shall not exceed 0.3
footcandle, except that this maximum may be increased to 0.5
footcandle along adjacent public roadways.
(b) All lighting sources are to be light-emitting diode (LED).
(c) Freestanding fixtures.
§ 163-51.3 WARWICK CODE § 163-51.3
155:500
[1] Freestanding fixtures shall utilize appropriate shape cutoff
luminaries with shielding of the light source at angles
above 72° from the vertical.
[2] In order to establish a consistent design scheme along the
Corridor Overlay District, all freestanding fixture types
shall be constructed of wood in a style approved by the
Township. The design lighting plan shall provide details on
all proposed fixtures and poles and shall be accompanied
by appropriate manufacturer cut sheets at the time of plan
submission.
[3] The maximum height of freestanding fixtures shall vary to
provide scale and dimension to the project. A maximum of
25% of the fixtures required on the site shall not exceed 20
feet in height. All other fixtures shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. Fixture heights shall be measured from the bottom
of the fixture to ground level.
(d) Building-mounted lighting shall be shown on all plans. All
building-mounted lighting shall be designed so that all light
from the source is shielded at angles above 72° from the
vertical so as not to create any glare or visible source of light.
Lights are not permitted along the outline of buildings or along
rooflines.
(e) Rotating or revolving signs and electronic message boards
shall be prohibited in the Corridor Overlay District, as shall
advertising pennants, flags, banners, balloons, and objects
such as tires, automobiles, food products, or other items
designed to draw attention to the product or business.
(7) Streetscape and green areas.
(a) The streetscape and green area standards set forth below are
required for all new developments and additions/alterations
along the street frontage. Design features in the streetscapes
and green area shall be consistent with the Warwick Township
Corridor Overlay Design Standards Manual and shall be
reviewed by the governing body. The applicant shall
demonstrate that these standards are met through elevations
and conceptual sketches. All designs require approval by the
Board of Supervisors.
(b) Figure 1 describes the categories and minimum requirements
for streetscapes and green area standards. Category A
contains planting and greening elements as well as street
furniture and other streetscapes elements. Category C
includes more-extensive building elements, streetscape
improvements, and open space elements. Figure 2 presents the
streetscape and green area items within each category.
§ 163-51.3 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-51.3
155:501
Figure 1: Minimum Requirements
Building
Additions
and
Alterations
New
Developments
of
2,500—4,999
Gross
Square Feet
in Size
New
Developments
of
5,000—4,999
Gross Square
Feet in Size
New
Developments
of 10,000
Gross Square
Feet and Over
in Size and/or
New
Buildings
4 points from
Category A
(no more than
3 of one item)
4 points from
Category A
(no more than
3 of one item)
5 points from
Category A, 4
points from
Category B
7 points from
Category A, 5
points from
Category B,
and 6 points
from Category
C
Figure 2: Streetscape and Green Area Categories
Category Item Number
A Hanging basket (minimum size 12
inches in diameter)
1
A Bicycle rack 1
A Decorative community banners/flags 1
A Windowbox (as wide as windowsill
and a minimum size 6 inches wide by
6 inches deep)
2
A Additional planting area, including
shrubs, trees, ground cover or
flowers
2
A Building decorative lighting 2
B Bench (at least 5 feet in length) 1
B Trash receptacle 2
B Raised planting beds 2
B Public art/mural 2
B Trellis, arbor and pergola (planted
with vines or shrubs)
2
B Awning for window or door 2
B Knee wall 3
B Drinking fountain 2
C Decorative paving 2
C Water feature (fountain) 2
C Balconies 3
§ 163-51.3 WARWICK CODE § 163-51.3
155:502
§ 163-52. (Reserved)
§ 163-53. Multifamily developments.
Figure 2: Streetscape and Green Area Categories
Category Item Number
C Streetlighting 3
C Planting in curb extension (planted
bulbs outs/large planters)
3
C Urban garden 3
C Bus shelter 3
C Clock tower 3
C Decorative architectural treatments 3
C Plaza/square/courtyard 6
C Facade restoration 3-6
C Other amenity approved by governing
body
3-6
A. The density, parking area and building requirements shall in all
respects conform to the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance139 for
multifamily developments.
B. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed development. Final approval may be obtained section by
section, but such development sections shall be specified on the
preliminary plan and must be numbered in the proposed order that they
are to be developed. Such order of development must be adhered to;
and, if changes are required, plans must be refiled, reviewed and
approved.
C. Arrangement of building and facilities.
(1) All of the elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and
efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and shape of
the plot, the character of adjoining properties and the type and size
of the proposed buildings to produce a livable and economic land
use pattern.
(2) Arrangement of buildings shall be in favorable relation to the
natural topography, existing desirable trees, views, within and
beyond the site, and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the
site.
D. Access and circulation.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-51.3 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-53
155:503
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and
other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the occupants. This
will be accomplished with interconnected trails, walkways, and/or
sidewalks within and connecting to off-site trails and the sidewalk
system, existing or proposed.
(2) Access and circulation for fire-fighting equipment, furnituremoving
vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries and snow
removal shall be planned for efficient operation and convenience.
Vehicle turning templates shall be included in the land
development plan set to confirm that the street and access drive
layout will adequately accommodate these vehicles.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building to a street,
driveway or parking area shall usually be less than 100 feet;
exceptions to this standard should be reasonably justified by
compensating advantages, such as desirable views and site
preservation through adaptation to topography. In no case shall the
distance exceed 250 feet.
E. Yards. Yards shall assure adequate privacy, desirable outlook, adequate
natural light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the
dwellings and other essential uses.
F. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved areas and
other facilities to assure adequate surface drainage and safe and
convenient access to and around the buildings and for the
conservation of desirable existing vegetation and natural ground
forms.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with
natural topography and to minimize earthwork and the need for
deep footings.
G. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be provided on the site, where necessary, to furnish
convenient access to the living units and other important facilities
on the property.
(2) Streets proposed to be dedicated for public use and maintenance
shall conform to the design requirements and specifications of this
chapter.
H. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to the living units, garage compounds, parking
areas, and service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse and
§ 163-53 WARWICK CODE § 163-53
155:504
all other necessary services. Driveways shall enter public streets at
safe locations.
(2) Driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation suitable for
traffic needs and safety.
(3) Driveways shall conform to the standards of this chapter.
(4) All driveways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with
this chapter.
I. Parking areas.
(1) Paved parking areas shall be provided to meet the needs of the
residents and their guests without interference with normal traffic.
(2) Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with and conform
to the standards and requirements of this chapter and those of the
Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance.140
J. Sidewalks.
(1) Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be provided for
convenience and safe access to all living units from streets,
driveways, parking areas and/or garages and for convenient
circulation and access to all project facilities.
(2) The width, alignment, and gradient of walks shall be designed and
constructed to provide safety, convenience and appearance for
pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in the alignment shall be avoided.
(3) The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water
on or across the walk and to prevent the pocketing of surface water
by walks.
(4) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of this chapter.
(5) Sidewalks and respective handicap access ramps shall conform to
the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended.
K. Refuse collection.
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage
is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located to avoid being offensive and
shall be convenient for both collectors and tenants. Collection
stations shall be screened from public view by means of planting
and/or fenced enclosure, at the discretion of the Township.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-53 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-53
155:505
§ 163-54. Nonresidential development.
Acceptable methods of screening may include fencing, plantings
and/or split-face concrete block walls. Chain-link fencing shall not
be permitted.
(3) Collection stations shall not occupy parking spaces.
L. Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site
features; and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy,
shade, beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable
features.
A. Lotting of individual lots for commercial purposes shall be avoided in
favor of a comprehensive design of the land to be used for such
purposes.
B. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed development. Final approval may be obtained phase by phase,
but such development phases shall be specified on the preliminary plan
and must be numbered in the proposed order that they are to be
developed. Such order of development must be adhered to; and, if
changes are required, plans must be refiled, reviewed and approved.
C. Bonding procedures as specified in Article VII shall be required before
signing of the final development plan and shall guarantee the
improvements by the builder of streets, sidewalks, curbs,
streetlighting, street trees, drainage facilities, utilities and other
facilities that the Board of Supervisors may deem necessary.
D. Arrangement of buildings and facilities. All of the elements of the site
plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to
topography, the size and shape of the plot, the character of the
adjoining property and the type and size of the buildings, in order to
produce a livable and economical land use pattern.
E. Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for
nonresidential use may be required, as deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors, to assure the free flow of through traffic from vehicles
entering or leaving parking areas.
F. When adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on a collector
or arterial street, the owner may be required to provide a service road
for ingress and egress, or, in lieu thereof, the owner may be required to
provide an area adjacent to the proposed lots for off-street parking
purposes.
G. Alleys shall be required in commercial and industrial districts, except
where other adequate provision is made for off-street loading and
parking consistent with the use proposed. Where required, alleys in
§ 163-53 WARWICK CODE § 163-54
155:506
§ 163-55. Erosion and sediment control.
All erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed in accordance
with the requirements of the Bucks County Conservation District and the
Warwick Township Stormwater Management and Grading Ordinance,142 as
may be amended from time to time, and 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
§ 163-56. (Reserved)143
commercial and industrial districts shall conform to the applicable
standards of this chapter.
H. Dead-end alleys are prohibited. If a waiver is granted to this provision,
the dead-end ally shall be terminated with a paved turnaround of
adequate dimensions as determined by the Township.
I. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisances created by the proposed nonresidential
development, including the provisions of extra depths in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential developments and
provisions for a permanently landscaped evergreen buffer strip.
J. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic shall not be extended to the
boundaries of the adjacent existing or potential residential areas or be
connected to streets intended for primarily residential traffic.
K. Parking areas shall be located or designed in such a manner that they
are visibly secluded from eye level of the surrounding area. Grading to
depress the parking area, raised berms, landscaping and fencing are
satisfactory methods to create such seclusion.
L. All area, design and parking requirements shall conform to the Warwick
Township Zoning Ordinance141 and applicable sections of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
143. Editor’s Note: Former § 163-56, Improvements in designated floodplain districts, was
repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6.
§ 163-54 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-56
155:507

ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements and Specifications
§ 163-57. Purpose.
§ 163-58. Applicability of requirements; modifications and
adjustments.
§ 163-59. Revisions of plans.
When changes from the approved plans become necessary during
construction, written acceptance by the Board of Supervisors, with the
advice of the Township Engineer, shall be secured before the execution of
such changes.
§ 163-60. Maintenance of streets.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all streets shall be
made by dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the Township or
by other acceptable means.
§ 163-61. General requirements for streets.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be constructed by the applicant
as a condition for final plan approval and, in addition, to provide
specifications as to how these improvements are to be constructed.
B. The construction of the development and improvements shall be
completed in accordance with the specific conditions of the Township's
approval of the development; the approved final, recorded plans and
specifications; any and all agreements, declarations, easements, and
other documents entered into by the applicant; and in the manner
acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors.
A. The improvements included in this article are minimum requirements.
As such, the Board of Supervisors reserves the right in any case to
increase the same if conditions so warrant.
B. Where literal compliance with the improvements hereinafter specified
is clearly impractical, the Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust
the improvements and standards to permit reasonable utilization of
property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of
these regulations.
A. The construction of streets, roads, lanes, driveways and alleys, as
shown upon final plans and as contained in development agreements,
shall in every respect conform to such requirements as the Board of
Supervisors may, by amendment to this chapter, require for the
construction of streets in the Township. These requirements shall be
known as the specifications contained within this article of the chapter,
§ 163-57 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-61
155:509
including such changes as the Board of Supervisors may from time
to time adopt by amendment. The minimum requirements of all
subdivisions, land developments, plans and agreements shall be
governed by that amendment in effect at the time of the applicant's
preliminary submission.
B. All streets shall be graded to:
(1) The grades shown on the street profiles and cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the final plan.
(2) The full width of the right-of-way.
C. Existing unpaved streets on which a subdivision or land development
abuts shall be improved by the owner of the subdivision or land
development as required by the Board of Supervisors. Improvements to
the abutting street shall be determined by the width of the required
cartway of the road and shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the specifications outlined in § 163-61D. At the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, an escrow account may be
established pursuant to Article VII, to be used by the Township for the
improvement of the cartway to the required standards.
D. Subgrade specifications:
(1) Clearing and grubbing. This item shall consist of the cutting of
vegetation, brush and trees; the grubbing out of roots, stumps,
logs, rubbish and similar objectionable material within the rightsof-
way of the street or road; and the removal of all such materials
and debris from the site. The entire area between the rights-of-way
of the street shall be so cleared and grubbed unless otherwise
directed by the Township Supervisors and/or Engineer.
(2) Stripping of topsoil. All topsoil shall be stripped from areas of
street excavation or fill to a minimum depth of six inches, or to the
full depth of excavation when so directed by the Township
Engineer, and stored in stockpiles for future use on the job site or
as directed by the Township Engineer. Unsuitable subgrade
materials shall be removed from the site and deposited at an
approved disposal facility.
(3) Excavation. Upon completion of clearing, grubbing and stripping of
the topsoil within the street right-of-way limits, excavation of the
subgrade shall be completed to the lines, grades and limits of
slopes indicated on the typical cross section of the standard
detailed drawings of these specifications or as otherwise directed
by the Engineer. All stable and suitable materials from the
excavation shall be used as far as practicable for embankment fill.
Drainage facilities shall be excavated conjunctive with this work,
and the bottom of the excavated subgrade shall be shaped
uniformly and compacted to the limits established by the typical
cross sections of the aforementioned standard detailed drawings.
§ 163-61 WARWICK CODE § 163-61
155:510
When solid rock, shale or similar material is encountered, the
excavation shall be carried 12 inches below the subgrade elevation
within the proposed pavement area. The undercut area shall then
be backfilled to the required subgrade elevation with PennDOT 2A
material approved by the Engineer and compacted by approved
methods. The 2A material shall extend to a minimum of 12 inches
above any pipes in the excavated area.
(4) Embankments.
(a) Embankments shall be formed of approved materials in
horizontal layers to the width, lines and grade shown on the
approved drawings and as directed by the Engineer.
(b) It is to be definitely understood that, whenever possible and
subject to the approval of the Engineer, materials excavated
within the limits and scope of the project shall be used in the
formation of embankments and for backfilling in accordance
with these specifications. However, all materials from all
classes of excavation which are unsuitable for the formation of
embankment slopes shall, as directed by the Engineer, be
classified as waste material and shall be disposed of by the
contractor outside the limits of the roadway. Waste material
shall not be disposed of within any drainage or flood channel
without the approval of the Engineer.
(c) Where solid rock, shale or similar material is encountered, the
excavation shall be carried to a depth of 12 inches below the
established subgrade elevation of the proposed pavement
width area of the roadway, and such material so excavated
shall be used as embankment material only when and as
directed by the Engineer.
(d) Earth, granular materials or other friable materials shall be
placed in successive layers of loose material not more than
eight inches in depth for the width specified and shall be
spread uniformly by use of a self-propelled, pneumatic-tired
grader or other approved road equipment customarily used for
this purpose and rolled until thoroughly compacted by the use
of an approved three-wheel, ten-ton power roller. Approved
sheepsfoot rollers shall be used when soil conditions warrant
their use and/or when specified by the Engineer. Frozen
materials shall not be placed in embankments. At points
inaccessible to the roller, the embankment shall be constructed
in a horizontal layer of loose material not exceeding four inches
in depth and thoroughly compacted by the use of mechanical
tampers.
(e) The top 1/2 foot of all embankments shall be formed of
granular material or soil within which no material of a size
larger than three inches shall be placed.
§ 163-61 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-61
155:511
(f) The finished slopes in cut sections or embankments shall not
be steeper than 2:1 and shall be 3:1 when the character of the
material encountered warrants the flatter slope, as approved
by the Engineer.
(5) The subgrade shall be solidly compacted for a firm and unyielding
state by rolling with a minimum of ten-ton power roller. Unstable
areas shall be removed and replaced with suitable fill and then
rerolled as required to provide a uniform, even, unyielding surface.
E. Paving specifications:
(1) Stone subbase. The subbase shall be PennDOT Type 2A crushed
aggregate or other material approved by Warwick Township.
(a) Type 2A crushed aggregate. Crushed aggregate shall have a
compacted thickness of six inches for streets of all
classifications, unless otherwise approved by Warwick
Township.
(b) Materials. Materials meeting the requirements as specified in
Sections 350.2 and 703.2 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, latest revision, shall be used.
(c) Construction methods. Construction and installation of Type
2A crushed aggregate subbase shall comply with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Publication 408, latest revision,
Section 350.3.
(2) Paving base course. The base course shall be Superpave Volumetric
Asphalt Mix Design PG 64-22, 25 mm, HMA base course, or other
material approved by Warwick Township.
(a) Materials meeting the requirements as specified in Sections
309.2 and 409.2 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, as amended, shall be used.
(b) Construction methods. Construction and installation shall
comply with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408, as amended, Sections 309.3 and 409.3, with
the following additions:
[1] Base course shall not be placed on surfaces that are wet or
at a temperature of 35° F. or lower or when air
temperature is 35° F. or lower.
[2] If the proposed base course thickness is greater than six
inches in compacted depth, it shall be placed in two or
more lifts of approximately equal depth, with no layer
more than three inches. Base course shall be placed in
layers of not less than four inches in depth when the air
temperature is less than 40° F.
§ 163-61 WARWICK CODE § 163-61
155:512
(3) Bituminous wearing course. Superpave PG 64-22 19 mm and
Superpave PG 64-22 9.5 mm. This surface course shall consist of a
wearing course of hot-mixed, hot-laid asphaltic concrete
constructed on a prepared bituminous base course. The bituminous
surface course shall have a total thickness as specified in this
chapter. All street pavement cross sections, except where
superelevated for curves, will be a minimum slope from the center
of the road to the gutter of a minimum of 1/4 inch per foot to a
maximum of 5/16 inch per foot, unless otherwise approved by
Warwick Township.
(a) Materials. The materials shall conform to the requirements as
given in Section 409 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, as amended.
(b) Construction methods. The wearing course shall be applied in
strict accordance with Publication Section 409.3. No visible
moisture shall be present prior to the laying of each course.
The road surface and air temperature shall be a minimum of
40° F. or greater prior to laying of the bituminous surface. The
air temperature shall also be rising. Prior to placement of
surface course, all unsuitable materials from the surface of the
existing pavement base course, including loose and foreign
material and excess joint sealer and crack filler, shall be
removed. Existing vertical surfaces (of curbs, gutters,
structures, etc.) shall be painted with a uniform bituminous
material, as specified in Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, latest revision, Section
401.3(f). When specified by the Township Engineer, scratch or
leveling courses shall be applied to wheel ruts and other local,
small depressions, in order to raise these areas to the level of
the surrounding uniform pavement. Scratch or leveling shall
be completed prior to placement of the wearing course. Prior
to placement of the wearing course, a tack coat conforming to
Publication 408, Section 460.3, shall be applied to the
bituminous base course (or binder course where approved)
when directed by the Township Engineer.
(c) Warwick Township shall require delivery slips for all materials
used in the construction of streets.
(4) Underdrain. When directed by the Township Engineer, a
combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be placed along the
curbline of all new roads/streets. An acceptable alternative to the
combination storm sewer and underdrain would be a six-inch
perforated, corrugated polyethylene pipe (or other approved by the
Township Engineer).
(5) Shoulder. Supporting shoulder shall be constructed on all sections
of roads where a base course or pavement is approved to be
constructed without other permanent support along the sides (such
§ 163-61 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-61
155:513
§ 163-62. Street signs.
§ 163-63. Streetlights.
The owner shall install or cause to be installed, at the owner's expense,
metal pole streetlights serviced by underground conduit in accordance with
as concrete curb or Belgian block curb, etc.) as required by
Warwick Township. All shoulders shall be thoroughly compacted
and graded to provide drainage from the macadam surface. The
width and type of construction, grade, and construction methods of
these shoulders shall be as directed by the Township Engineer or
other person designated by Warwick Township.
(6) Immediately after compaction of the binder or wearing course, the
outer edges, where exposed, shall be rounded or beveled with a hot
smoothing iron or tamper to avoid a sharp, ragged, open or
unfinished appearance. Adequate precaution shall be taken to
prevent a breakdown of the edges. Should breakdowns occur, they
shall be immediately repaired.
(7) Longitudinal and transverse joints shall be well bonded and sealed,
if necessary, to obtain this result, and the joints shall be cut back to
the full depth of the previously laid course, painted with asphalt
and heated. Before placing the mixture against them, all contact
surfaces of curbs, gutters, manholes, etc., shall be painted with a
thin uniform coating of asphalt cement dissolved in naphtha. In the
case of concrete base course, all surface cracks or temperature
cracks normal to the pavement shall be sealed prior to placing the
wearing surface.
(8) The wearing course adjacent to manholes, other structures and
previously laid bituminous material shall be sealed with hot
bituminous material as specified by PennDOT Publication 408. The
sealing material shall be applied by means of squeegees
immediately after final rolling to fill the surface voids and provide a
watertight joint. Care shall be taken to prevent spattering, with
sealing material, on surfaces that will not be in contact with the
asphalt-aggregate mixture.
(9) No vehicular traffic shall be permitted on the newly completed
surface course until it has cooled sufficiently but in no case less
than six hours after the surface has been finished.
A. The owner shall erect at every street intersection a street sign or street
signs having thereon the names of the intersecting streets. At
intersections where streets cross, there shall be at least two such street
signs, and at the intersections where one street ends or joins with
another street, there shall be at least one such street sign.
B. All street signs shall conform to the standards of § 163-42.
§ 163-61 WARWICK CODE § 163-63
155:514
a plan approved by the Board of Supervisors in conformity with a general
standard of streetlighting established by the Board of Supervisors. The
equipment of metal poles may be waived in such instances as approved
by the Board of Supervisors due to the existence of wooden poles already
in place. Provision shall be made for energizing said lighting after 50% or
more of the dwellings in a given subdivision or land development or section
of a subdivision or land development have been occupied. The owner shall
be responsible for all charges or rates of the streetlighting until such time
that the streets are accepted or condemned as public streets by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 163-64. Monuments.
§ 163-65. Sidewalks and driveway aprons.
A. Monuments shall be placed at each change in direction of boundary,
two to be placed at each street intersection and one on one side of each
street at angle points and at the beginning and end of curves. Utility
easements shall be monumented at their beginning and at their end,
with iron pins placed at each change of direction, as appropriate, and
areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented at their
external boundaries.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is
completed, at a time specified by the Township Engineer. The
monument shall be concrete, with rebar insert, the size and length as
may be approved by the Township Engineer.
C. All monuments shall be checked for accuracy by the Township Engineer
or their accuracy certified in writing by the owner's engineer. Accuracy
of monuments shall be within 3/100 of a foot.
A. Sidewalks with a minimum width of five feet shall be constructed on one
side of all frontage streets and both sides of all other streets within the
subdivision or land development, unless, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors with the advice of the Planning Commission, they are
unnecessary for public safety and convenience.
B. Where curb and sidewalk are required, concrete driveway aprons shall
be poured within a minimum thickness of six inches on a minimum fourinch-
thick bedding of PennDOT 2B stone. All concrete shall be PennDOT
Class A 3,500 psi mix. One-half-inch expansion shall be placed between
the apron and the curb. One-quarter-inch score contraction joints at
least one inch deep shall be installed at 1/3 intervals.
C. Sidewalk and driveway apron specifications.
(1) Cement concrete sidewalks.
(a) Subgrade shall be excavated to the depth and width
conforming to the accepted cross sections. All boulders,
organic material, soft clay, spongy material and any other
§ 163-63 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-65
155:515
objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with
approved material to the depth as directed by the Engineer.
The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly
compacted to the accepted lines and grades of the approved
cross sections.
(b) Sidewalks shall be constructed of a four-inch-thick, Class AA
cement concrete (3,500 psi) in four-inch PennDOT 2B stone
base. At driveways, sidewalks shall have a minimum depth of
six inches of concrete and be reinforced with six-by-six-inch
wire mesh.
(c) One-quarter score contraction joints at least one inch deep
shall be formed at five-foot intervals.
(d) One-half-inch premolded expansion joint material shall be
installed for the full depth of the sidewalk every 20 feet,
between the sidewalk and curb, between the sidewalk and
rigid structures, and between the sidewalk and driveway
apron. Premolded expansion joint filler shall be in accordance
with PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(e) Curb depressions designed to accommodate wheelchairs shall
be provided at street and other crossings and shall be in
accordance with the latest PennDOT and Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, including detectable warning/
truncated domes. The color of detectable warnings shall be
"brick."
(f) Side forms shall not be removed until at least 12 hours after
placing concrete. After removal of forms, fill inner
honeycombed areas with mortar. As directed by the Township
Engineer, remove and replace defective major honeycombed
areas.
(g) After the concrete has cured for at least 72 hours, backfill
spaces adjacent to the sidewalk, using acceptable backfill
material, as specified in PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(h) Sidewalks shall not exceed a seven-percent grade. Steps or a
combination of steps and ramps shall be utilized to maintain
the maximum grades.
(i) Sidewalks shall be laterally pitched at a slope not less than 1/4
inch per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage. All
sidewalks shall be finished using methods that will provide a
skid-resistant surface.
(j) The forms for the concrete shall be of wood or metal, straight,
free from warp and of sufficient strength when staked to resist
the pressure of the concrete without springing. When ready for
the concrete placement, the forms shall not vary from the
§ 163-65 WARWICK CODE § 163-65
155:516
§ 163-66. Curbs.
approved line and grade and shall so remain until the concrete
has set.
(k) Just prior to placing the concrete, the subgrade shall be
slightly moistened. The concrete shall be placed in the forms
and thoroughly tamped into place so that all honeycomb will be
eliminated and sufficient mortar will be brought to the surface
to afford good workability in the finish. The surface shall be
brought to a smooth, even finish by means of a wooden float.
All faces adjacent to the forms shall be spaded as the concrete
is placed to prevent honeycomb and to provide smooth and
even surfaces when the forms are removed. All edges shall be
tool-rounded with a one-fourth-inch radius edging tool.
(l) All concrete sidewalk shall be cure sealed with Aquron 2000 or
approved equal.
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all streets unless, in the
opinion of the Board of Supervisors, with the advice of the Township
Engineer, they are unnecessary.
B. All curbs shall be depressed at intersections to sufficient width to
accommodate wheelchairs and shall be in accordance with the latest
PennDOT and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
C. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development
abuts (hereinafter called "boundary streets"), curb shall be widened to
meet existing curb. The location of curb along a boundary street shall
be determined by the width of the existing or future right-of-way of the
road or established by the Board of Supervisors and in accordance with
that specified § 163-44 of this chapter.
D. The design of profile of curb along existing streets shall be shown on
the plan. Profiles shall be smooth and designed with vertical curves
where there is a change in grade. Breaks in grade shall not be
permitted. The existing edge of road and bottom or curb elevations
shall be identified every 50 feet and at locations specified by the
Township Engineer. Cross slope for cartway-widening sections shall be
3/8 inch per foot to establish positive drainage from the existing edge of
the road to the curbline.
E. Curb specifications.
(1) Standard curb shall be constructed with a seven-inch top, eightinch
base, eighteen-inch depth, eight-inch reveal with a battered
front face and a top front radius of 3/4 inch, conforming to the lines,
grade and typical cross sections of the approved drawings, unless
otherwise directed by the governing authorities, such as may be
the case of curbs abutting state highways. Belgian block curbing
§ 163-65 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-66
155:517
(11 inches minimum block size) may be permitted as approved by
the Township.
(2) Curb cuts (driveway depression) shall be a maximum of 1 1/2
inches above the roadway surface, a minimum of one inch above
the roadway surface with a width as specified in this chapter.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, the minimum
longitudinal distance of standard curb separating two depressed
curbs shall be three feet.
(4) Curb shall be plain cement concrete curb placed and finished in
accordance with requirements set forth in the latest edition of
PennDOT Specifications, Form 408. Material shall consist of
cement concrete Class AA with a minimum seven-day design
compressive strength of 3,500 psi and a minimum twenty-eight-day
design compressive strength of 3,750 psi. After completion of the
bituminous paving, Class BM-1 asphalt shall be applied to the joint
between the curb and bituminous paving for a distance of one foot
from the curb toward the center of the road to seal the joint
between the curb and bituminous paving.
(5) As an alternate to concrete curb, Belgian block curb may be used
where authorized by the Township. Belgian block curb must be
installed in accordance with the construction detail included in
Appendix H.144
(6) Excavation for curbs shall be made to the required depth, and the
material upon which the curb is to be constructed shall be
compacted to a firm, even surface as specified for special subgrade
or be firm, virgin earth or compacted fill (95% modified proctor
method).
(7) The forms for the concrete shall be of metal, straight, free from
warps or kinks and of sufficient strength. They shall be staked
securely enough to resist the pressure of the concrete without
spring. Caution shall be taken when staking the forms to prevent
damage to the pipe underdrains in place. When ready for the
concrete to be deposited, they shall not vary from the approved line
and grade and shall so remain throughout the pour of concrete and
until the concrete has received its initial set. Where a face form for
a curb is used, it shall be so designed as to permit it to be securely
fastened to the other forms.
(8) Just prior to placing the concrete, the subgrade shall be slightly
moistened to afford better adhesion. The concrete shall be placed
in horizontal layers not to exceed five inches and spaded
sufficiently to eliminate all voids. The top surface of concrete shall
be finished true to line and grade in a smooth, neat and even
manner by means of a wooden float. All faces adjacent to the forms
144. Editor's Note: Appendix H is on file in the Township offices.
§ 163-66 WARWICK CODE § 163-66
155:518
§ 163-67. Storm drainage system.
shall be spaded so that, after the forms are stripped, the surface of
the faces shall be smooth, even and free of honeycomb. All edges
shall be tool-rounded. Place depressed curbs for drives or handicap
ramps where indicated or as directed by the Township Engineer.
(9) Tool the edges of construction joints to a one-fourth-inch radius.
Place three-fourths-inch premolded expansion joint material, cut to
the cross-sectional area of the curb, at structures and at the end of
the workday.
(10) The curb shall be constructed in uniform lengths of 10 feet, except
where shorter sections are required for closures, curves for radius
returns or curves at other locations in the work.
(11) Do not remove forms until such time that it will not be detrimental
to the concrete. Correct irregular surfaces by rubbing with a
Carborundun stone. Brush-finishing or plastering will not be
permitted. Fill minor defects with mortar.
(12) As soon as possible after the removal of forms, backfill the voids in
front and back of the curb, using acceptable embankment material,
as specified in PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(13)No concrete shall be poured on frozen or thawing subgrade or
during unfavorable weather conditions or when the atmospheric
temperature is 38° F. or lower.
(14) All concrete curb shall be cure-sealed with Aquron 2000 or
approved equal.
A. The owner shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, including
curbs, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, swales and stabilized
channels and retention/detention basins, in order to prevent flooding,
erosion, sedimentation and other hazards to life and property. All such
facilities are to be of a size and gradient to adequately accommodate
maximum potential flow rates, velocities and volumes as indicated in
the required hydrologic report. Facility size, type and general
construction requirements shall follow the standards and specifications
of this chapter, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form
408 Specifications, as amended, PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M (Pub. 72M), as amended, and the
United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 15, Design of
Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings, as amended, and the United
States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration,
Visual Urban (HY-22) Drainage Design Programs, and the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration,
Hydraulic Design Series No. 5, Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of
Highway Culverts.
§ 163-66 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:519
B. Storm drainage system specifications.
(1) Pipe foundation underdrain. Intercepting underdrains shall be
required at all locations in which subsurface water is encountered
which may permeate or endanger the subgrade of the street, as
directed by the Township or Township Engineer. Underdrains shall
be required in all cuts three feet deep and greater and in all other
locations stipulated by the Engineer. Pipe foundation underdrains
shall parallel the established street grade to outlet in approved
drainage structures. Pipe foundation underdrain shall consist of a
trench excavated to a minimum depth of 24 inches below the
underneath elevation of the curb and to the minimum width of 18
inches, in which the underdrain shall be laid. Underdrain pipe shall
be a minimum diameter of four inches for lengths less than 100 feet
and a minimum diameter of six inches for lengths of 100 feet or
more. The trench shall be backfilled with PennDOT Specification 2B
aggregate to its full depth around and above the laid pipe to the
underneath elevation of the base course.
(a) Materials. The pipe shall be first-quality high-density
polyethylene pipe (HDPE), unless otherwise specified by the
Township Engineer.
(b) Construction methods.
[1] The pipe underdrain shall be placed after curb
construction is completed, but before the modified
subbase, base course or wearing surface pavement has
been placed, except as otherwise directed by the Engineer.
A layer of PennDOT Specification 2B aggregate two inches
in depth shall be tamped in the bottom of the trench as a
foundation for the pipe. Perforated corrugated metal pipe
shall be jointed together with connecting bands securely
bolted with approved galvanized bolts, and perforations
shall be placed down unless otherwise specified. All pipes
shall be laid on the above-described foundation and
backfilled with No. 2B aggregate.
[2] If the length of pipe underdrain exceeds 600 feet in one
run, the minimum diameter of six inches shall be increased
to eight inches beyond that point.
(2) Storm sewer pipe. The minimum diameter of all storm sewer pipe
shall be 18 inches, and the minimum grade shall be 1/2 of 1%, with
a minimal slope of 1% for terminal runs. Storm sewer pipe shall be
reinforced concrete culvert pipe or corrugated metal pipe, as
approved by the Township Engineer. Materials for storm sewer
pipe shall conform to the standard culvert pipe designations of the
PennDOT Specifications secured from sources approved by the
Township.
(3) Excavation for pipe trench.
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:520
(a) The contractor shall make all necessary open trench
excavation to line and grade herein specified or as directed by
the Engineer. Caution shall be taken to prevent excavation
deeper than necessary, as pipe shall not be placed on filled
material without approval of the Engineer.
(b) The contractor shall provide ample space in pipe trenches to
permit proper laying of pipe and fittings. Pipe trenches shall be
excavated to the widths and using the methods as specified in
PennDOT Specifications.
(c) The contractor shall be responsible for properly supporting the
sides of all excavations. Such supports shall be adequate to
fully protect workmen working within the trench, to maintain
reasonable vertical trench walls, to prevent undue sloughing
off of materials into the trench and to prevent damage to
abutting property or structures.
(d) The contractor shall construct and maintain suitable
barricades around all open excavations and shall maintain
sufficient lights for said barricades to prevent accidents or as
directed by the Township Police Force.
(e) The minimum depth of cover over the top of pipe laid in place
shall be 1.5 feet for all RCP pipe laid beneath unpaved surfaces
or flexible-type pavements (and as per manufacturer's
recommendations for CMP and HDPE), as measured vertically
between the outer top surfaces of the pipe and the underside of
the wearing surface pavement or its projected elevation.
(f) If rock is encountered within the excavated trench, the trench
shall be subcut to a minimum depth of 12 inches beneath the
lowest projection of the pipe barrel and backfilled with
PennDOT 2A stone to a point 12 inches above the top of the
pipe. The maximum size of any particles in the selected
material shall be 1/2 inch. Excavation of open trench shall be
restricted to a maximum of 600 feet ahead of laying pipe. In
areas where suitable backfill material is encountered, all pipe
shall be bedded with four inches of PennDOT 2B stone. The
bedding shall extend to the height of the spring line of the pipe,
at a minimum.
(4) Pipelaying.
(a) The laying of pipe in finished trenches shall be commenced at
the lowest point, so that the tongue or spigot ends point in the
direction of flow.
(b) All pipes shall be laid in a dry trench with tongue or spigot ends
fully entered into the adjacent groove or bell and true to the
required lines and grades. The tongue and groove or bell and
spigot shall be satisfactorily cleaned before laying each
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:521
section. All joint work shall be done in an approved manner
by skilled workmen to the end that the pipe, when laid, shall
form a continuous pipeline with a smooth and uniform interior
surface. The pipe sections shall be satisfactorily jointed, the
tongue end of each section being inserted the proper distance
into the groove to make a watertight and adequately sealed
joint. No gapping or irregular joints shall be acceptable in the
work.
(c) When unstable foundation material is found within the trench,
the Engineer may direct that undercutting of the trench shall
be performed and backfill to the established grade be made
with suitable material, compacted and stabilized, to form the
proper pipe bedding, or the Engineer may direct that a Class B
concrete pipe (PennDOT Specifications) saddle be placed
throughout the unstable length of trench.
(d) When pipe is placed within a trench below the established
water table, the Engineer may require that all joints be formed
with a continuous-ring rubber-seal gasket or that a collar or
mold of cement mortar, not less than one inch thick and four
inches wide, shall be placed around the outside perimeter of
(entirely encircling) the pipe at the joint of each section.
(5) Backfilling of trenches.
(a) All trenches and excavations shall be backfilled immediately
after the pipes are laid, unless other protection of the pipe is
necessary. The backfilling material shall be selected earth, free
from large lumps and stone shavings of any dimension greater
than two inches. When pipe trenches are located beneath
existing or paved roadway areas, the trench shall be backfilled
with PennDOT Specification 2B stone to the bottom of the
existing or proposed base course as directed by the Township
Engineer. All backfill shall be thoroughly compacted under the
haunches and along the sides with mechanical tampers or
other approved methods as fast as placed up to a level above
the top of the pipe. The filling and tamping of the backfill shall
be carried up evenly on both sides of the pipe, care being taken
not to raise the pipe or move it off line during the operation.
(b) The remainder of the trench shall then be filled and compacted
by tamping or rolling. The backfill material shall be evenly
spread in built-up layers not exceeding eight inches before
tamping or power-rolling. Care shall be taken that the material
close to the bank, as well as other portions of the trench, shall
be thoroughly compacted.
(c) Puddling or water flooding shall be restricted to consolidate
the backfilling of sandy or gravelly materials. No compacting
shall be done when the material is too wet to be compacted
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:522
properly. If this method is used, the first flooding shall be
applied after the backfilling has been compacted by tamping
up to two feet above the top of the pipes and the second
flooding during or after the subsequent filling of the trench.
Any excess of water shall be avoided, in order to prevent
disturbances of the earth under and around the pipes, and also
to prevent an undue excess of pressure upon them.
(d) Walking or working on the completed pipeline, except as may
be necessary in tamping or backfilling, shall not be permitted
until the trench has been backfilled to a height of at least 1 1/2
feet over the top of the pipes.
(e) The method of backfilling outlined in this section shall apply to
all utilities and service lines contained within the right-of-way
of all roads and streets.
(6) Seasonal limits. No construction shall be done during unfavorable
weather, as determined by the Township Engineer.
(7) Inlets.
(a) Inlets shall conform to PennDOT types, as shown on PennDOT
Standards for Roadway Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M
(Pub. 72M), as amended. The work shall include all necessary
excavations for the structures and their appurtenances, the
construction of all foundations, all brick and concrete masonry,
the setting of cast-iron frames and structural steel gratings,
backfilling of excavation areas and any other work necessary
for their completion.
(b) All materials shall be procured from approved sources and be
of the design type approved by the Engineer. All metal castings
for frames and gratings shall conform to ASTM standards.
(c) Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the earth
foundation material shall be stable and compacted to a firm,
even surface.
(d) The forms for the concrete structure shall be sufficiently rigid
to prevent displacement or sagging between supports and so
constructed that the concrete will not be damaged by their
removal. Forms shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of
mortar. The contractor shall be entirely responsible for their
adequacy.
(e) All forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before concrete
is placed therein, with an approved nonstaining oil or liquid
coating.
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:523
(f) Forms for concrete surfaces exposed to view in the finished
work shall be of plywood, sanded smooth and fined with tight
joints between panels.
(g) All inlet structures shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2A stone.
(h) Unless otherwise authorized by the Township, or Township
Engineer, all roadway inlets shall utilize bicycle-safe grates. All
Type M inlet tops outside of roadway areas, inclusive of
detention basin outlet structures, shall utilize standard inlet
grates.
(8) Manholes.
(a) This item shall consist of the construction of manholes and
appurtenances, and they shall be constructed to the lines and
grades given and to the dimensions shown on PennDOT
Standards for Roadway Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M
(Pub. 72M), as amended. The work shall include all necessary
excavations for the structures and their appurtenances, all
concrete, brick and concrete block masonry, the setting in
place of all cast-iron frames and covers, backfilling of all
trenches and excavations and any other work necessary for
their completion.
(b) All materials shall be procured from approved sources and be
of the design type approved by the Engineer. All metal frames
and covers shall conform to ASTM standards and conform to
the dimensions shown on the referenced PennDOT Standards
for Roadway Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M (Pub. 72M),
as amended.
(c) Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the earth
foundation material shall be stable and compacted to a firm,
even surface. When the foundation material is found to be of
water-bearing texture, the Engineer may require additional
depth excavation to a more-stable foundation material,
backfilled to the prescribed foundation elevation with select
material.
(d) Wood forms shall be constructed for all concrete structures.
The forms shall be so constructed that watertightness shall be
maintained and braced and wired in such manner to prevent
warping and expansion under the pressure of the loads
contemplated during the placing of the concrete. The forms
shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to using and oiled to facilitate
their removal. The concrete, when placed within the forms,
shall be restricted to a maximum of five feet of free drop and
shall be spread and tamped or vibrated into place in such a
manner as to eliminate honeycombing.
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:524
(e) Masonry for manholes shall consist of brick, precast concrete
blocks or cement concrete.
(f) All brick for brick structures shall be thoroughly wet by
immersion immediately before laying. Every brick shall be laid
in full mortar joints on bottom sides and end, which shall for
each brick be formed in one operation. In no case are the joints
to be made by grouting or by working in mortar after laying the
brick. No joint shall exceed 3/8 inch in opening. All joints on
faces shall be trowel-struck.
(g) All unfinished brick masonry shall be racked back or toothed;
and when new work is joined to the unfinished portion, the
latter must be thoroughly cleaned.
(h) Brick masonry of sides and arches shall be bonded and keyed,
special care being exercised with each ring against too large a
joint at the back. All joints shall be normal to the section, and
all lipping of brick shall be carefully avoided.
(i) Precast concrete blocks shall be of the best quality and the
sources of supply approved by the Engineer. Each block shall
be sound and free from cracks and other structural blemishes
and shall conform to the proper radius designed by the
Engineer.
(j) Precast concrete blocks shall be laid up in a manner that will
ensure watertight joints and be so laid in horizontal courses,
with vertical joints staggered in a full bed of mortar on the
bottom sides and end. In general, the procedure hereinbefore
specified for brick masonry shall apply to the laying of precast
concrete blocks.
(k) Precast reinforced concrete manhole sections shall be of the
best quality, and the sources of supply shall be approved by the
Engineer. Each section shall be sound and free of cracks and
other structural defects and conform to the proper diameter
and wall thickness designated by the Engineer. Each joint shall
be seated with two rows of butyl material. Precast manhole
bases are prohibited.
(l) Cement mortar for masonry construction shall be made with
portland cement and clean, sharp sand to the proportion of one
bag of cement to two cubic feet of sand. The sand shall be
measured loose in a bucket or some other suitable measure of
known volume. The cement and sand shall be thoroughly mixed
when uniformly dry, then wetted with water to make a stiff
paste which will be plastic under the trowel, but not so soft as
to run after being placed, and shall be used before it has begun
to stiffen. Mortar that has once set shall not be remixed and
used.
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:525
(m) Concrete for manholes shall be Class A concrete (PennDOT
Specifications) and shall be procured from suppliers who are
listed within the current certified approved list of suppliers for
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The concrete
shall have a minimum allowable compressive strength of 4,000
pounds per square inch at 28 days and shall contain a
minimum of six and a maximum of eight bags of portland
cement per cubic yard of concrete; and the maximum allowable
water content shall be 5.6 gallons per bag of cement, including
the free water in the aggregate. All concrete shall be certified
by the supplier as to weight, proportioning of aggregates and
water-cement ratio.
(n) Reinforcing steel shall be deformed bars conforming to the
diameters and spacing as shown on the referenced PennDOT
Standards for Roadway Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M
(Pub. 72M), as amended.
(o) The manholes shall be plastered on the outside with a one-halfinch
coat of mortar as specified above for cement mortar, to
which shall be added 1/10 bag of an approved commercial
brand of lime per bag of cement.
(p) No forms shall be removed from the foundation base slab or
from the walls of a manhole within a minimum period of 48
hours after the completion of each succeeding concrete pour.
No concrete shall be placed when the temperature is below 45°
F. without special approval of the Engineer.
(q) The cast-iron manhole frames and covers shall be bolted to the
cone section and set using butyl material and set to the
elevations shown or ordered. PVC-coated steps shall be built
into the walls of the manhole in a staggered pattern. Manhole
frames shall have a twenty-six-inch diameter cover with a
twenty-four-inch clear opening.
(r) Upon completion, subject to the approval of the Engineer and
after all forms have been removed, the manhole excavation
area shall be backfilled to the lines and grades specified by the
Engineer. The backfill shall be placed in suitable layers,
thoroughly compacted and uniformly brought up on all sides of
the manhole, caution being directed to maintaining a
compacted backfill without damage to the structure.
(s) All manhole structures shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2A
stone.
(9) Metal plate pipe culverts and pipe arches.
(a) Metal plate pipe culverts and pipe arches may be permitted
when an existing watercourse is to be crossed, as specified by
the Township Engineer.
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:526
(b) Generally, a metal plate culvert or pipe arch will be specified
for such condition when there is not sufficient cover for a
circular pipe culvert or where aesthetic considerations are
important.
(c) Metal plate pipe culverts and pipe arches shall consist of
structural units of galvanized corrugated metal conforming to
the PennDOT Specifications for metal plate pipe culverts,
arches and pipe arches.
(d) Materials shall be procured from suppliers who are on the
current certified and approved list of suppliers of PennDOT.
[1] Construction methods shall consist of forming the bed and
trench as hereinafter specified. For pipe not exceeding 60
inches' inside diameter, the trench shall have a minimum
width of twice the outside diameter of the pipe at the hub
or band; except that for storm sewers entirely outside the
pavement area, the width of the trench shall be not more
than one foot, plus the outside diameter of the pipe at the
bell or band. The trench shall be excavated through
natural ground, or, where the pipe structures are to be
placed under the embankment, the contractor shall
complete the construction of the embankment to a
minimum elevation of one foot above the elevation of the
pipe before placing. Where running water is encountered
and cannot be diverted, a temporary pipe shall be placed
in the trench prior to constructing the embankment.
[2] When firm but slightly yielding material is encountered in
the bottom of the trench, it shall be shaped carefully to fit
the bottom of the pipe for a depth of at least 1/10 the
outside diameter of the pipe.
[3] When rock or hard shale is encountered, it shall be
excavated below the bottom of the pipe 1/2 inch for each
foot of embankment over the pipe, but not less than eight
inches, and filled with suitable compacted material. The
bed shall be shaped as described in Subsection B(9)(d)[1]
above.
[4] When the material encountered is unstable, it shall be
entirely removed under the pipe for the full width of the
trench or as otherwise required for the particular
condition and replaced with suitable material and the bed
shaped as described in Subsection B(9)(d)[1] above.
[5] Bedding of pipe.
[a] When directed by the Engineer, the pipe shall be
bedded in a cradle constructed of Class B concrete
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:527
(PennDOT Specifications), reinforced as directed, to
the dimensions approved by the Engineer.
[b] The plates, except the haunch plates for pipe arches,
shall be placed shingle-wise, so that the flow of water
will be over the edge of the plate and not against it.
The haunch plates may require placement inside or
outside of adjacent haunch plates. Only sufficient bolts
shall be placed to hold the plates in position. Bolts and
nuts shall not be drawn tight until the structure is
completely assembled. The bottom two rows of bolts
may be placed with the threaded end inside the
structure to facilitate tightening. On other seams, the
bolts shall be placed alternately so that the nuts will
always be on the crests of corrugations, first inside,
then outside the culvert.
[c] Struts for pipe arches shall be placed to retain the size
of the pipe arch. Strutting shall be carried uniformly
from end to end of pipe and pipe arches without
endwalls.
[d] The pipe shall be deformed the required amount by
means of suitable jacks. The method of jacking shall
meet with the approval of the Engineer. A tolerance of
25% above and below the specified amount will be
permitted.
[e] When directed by the Engineer, metal plate pipe
culverts and pipe arches shall be fully asphalt-coated
and invert-paved.
[6] Backfilling.
[a] Backfilling around metal pipe culverts and pipe arches
shall be performed after the plates have been
satisfactorily erected. Required fill material around
the pipe and pipe arch shall be placed to a height not
exceeding the outside diameter of the pipe in fourinch
layers, alternately on each side of the pipe or pipe
arch, thoroughly but not excessively compacted with
mechanical tampers. Great care shall be used to
obtain thorough compaction under the haunches and
along the sides to the top of the pipe.
[b] The remainder of the backfill shall be placed and
rolled in layers of not more than eight inches of loose
material to the full width of the cross section.
[c] Puddling of the fill material will not be permitted.
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:528
[d] Any fill material which causes excessive distortion of
the plates shall be removed, plates braced into correct
position and fill material replaced. The bracing shall
be removed as directed by the Engineer.
[e] The skew angle shall not exceed 45° for metal pipe or
pipe arches. When the skew angle for arches is more
than 15°, the length of the structure shall be such that
no portion of the live load will be carried by the cut
portion of the arch end. When rights-of-way or other
conditions do not permit this required length, then the
cut end shall be supported by a rigid headwall
designed to meet the conditions, and the end plates
shall be anchored to this headwall.
(10) Endwalls required.
(a) This item shall consist of the construction of endwalls of the
types specified in PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M (Pub. 72M), as amended,
and shall be required at the ends of all stormwater conveyance
structures. The work shall include excavation, forming and
placement of concrete in order to build the structure as
indicated. Generally, these structures will be built of Class B
concrete (PennDOT Specifications), except in special cases
where rubble masonry may be used by permission of the
Township Engineer.
(b) Concrete for endwalls shall be Class AA concrete (PennDOT
Specifications) and shall be placed as specified in this chapter.
Special care shall be used by the design engineer to select the
proper endwall to fit the condition.
(11) Stormwater detention basin.
(a) Excavation.
[1] Necessary excavation shall include removal and
stockpiling of earth material, placement of topsoil and the
removal, storing and rehandling or suitable excavation
which may be necessary for the construction of the
detention basin.
[2] The excavation and placement of embankment shall be
done to the proposed elevations according to the plan of
profile, grading plan and template lines as shown on the
construction cross sections by the use of machinery
wherever possible.
[3] When topsoil for designated areas is shown on the plans,
only approved topsoil shall be stockpiled, meeting the
requirements of Section 802, PennDOT Publication 408,
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:529
from the excavation. After the supply is exhausted, any
additional topsoil required to complete the work will be
furnished as specified in PennDOT Publication 408
Specifications.
(b) Preparation of embankment foundation. All brush, roots, grass,
debris or other unsuitable material of any kind not removed by
the clearing and grubbing operation shall be removed to a
sufficient depth to ensure removal of all unsatisfactory
material before placement of embankment material. All voids
in the foundation areas to be occupied by embankments and by
compacted fill against structures shall be filled with approved
material from the borrow areas or from required excavation.
The methods of the placement and compaction of this fill
material shall be as specified herein.
(c) Embankment material. All embankment material shall meet
the specifications as referenced in Section 206, PennDOT
Specifications, Publication 408, or as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(d) Placing and compaction of embankment material shall be done
in accordance with Section 206.3, PennDOT Specifications,
Form 408.
(e) Outlet pipe. Placing and furnishing of the detention basin
outlet pipe shall conform to the required grades and lines, as
shown on the plans and in accordance with the Warwick
Township Stormwater Management and Grading Ordinance.145
Outlet piping for detention basins shall be O-ring RCP, unless
directed otherwise by the Township Engineer.
(f) Headwalls and outlet structures. Construction of the outlet
structures and headwalls associated with the detention basin
outlet pipe shall be done in accordance with § 163-67B of this
chapter. [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
(g) Temporary riser pipe. This work shall consist of construction of
a bituminous-coated corrugated metal riser pipe at the inlet
headwall of the detention basin within reasonably close
conformity to the design and dimensions as shown on the
plans. Material for construction of the riser pipe shall be in
accordance with Section 600, PennDOT Publication 408.
(h) Emergency spillway.
[1] The spillway shall be constructed to the lines, grades and
elevations as shown on the plans. Material excavated to
construct the spillway shall be utilized, as indicated on the
plans or as directed by the Engineer, in construction of the
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-67
155:530
embankment. Material not utilized as fill or as topsoil shall
be disposed of on areas approved by the Engineer.
[2] Placement and furnishing of the cultivated sod shall be
done in accordance with Section 809, PennDOT
Publication 408.
[3] Placement and furnishing of cement concrete or mortared
stone spillways shall be done in accordance with
specifications as required by the Township Engineer.
(i) Rock energy dissipater. Erosion protection in the form of a rock
energy dissipater shall be furnished and placed at the outlet
end of all pipes draining to or from the detention basin. The
rock energy dissipater shall be placed and furnished in
accordance with Section 851, PennDOT Publication 408.
(j) Topsoil and seeding. Placing topsoil and seeding within the
disturbed detention basin area shall be done in accordance
with § 163-74 of this chapter.
(12) Storm and sanitary sewer easements. Within all subdivisions in
which off-street street storm or sanitary sewers are to be
constructed or are anticipated for future construction, a minimum
twenty-foot-wide maintenance easement shall be provided and
such easement shall be shown in the subdivision plans which are
submitted to the governing municipal authorities for their
approval. Existing watercourses under the jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, into which
stormwater is permitted to be deposited, shall not require an
easement within or adjacent to the banks. However, all storm
sewers so placed to feed into said existing watercourse shall
require the stipulated maintenance easement. Sanitary sewers
which parallel or are adjacent to such watercourses shall be
provided with the stipulated easement. Whenever practicable, the
maintenance easement shall be parallel with the conjunctive to
property boundary lines of the subdivision.
(13) Sedimentation and erosion control facilities.
(a) All earthmoving activities within the Township shall be
conducted in such a way as to prevent accelerated erosion and
the resulting sedimentation. To accomplish this, any landowner
or developer engaged in earthmoving activities shall develop,
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control
measures which effectively minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation. These erosion and sedimentation measures
shall be set forth in the plan as described in this chapter and
must be available at all times at the site of the activity.
(b) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation
shall meet the specifications of the Bucks County Soil and
§ 163-67 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-67
155:531
§ 163-68. Public water supply.
§ 163-69. Private water supply.
Water Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Township Engineer.
A. The owner shall construct a water distribution system in such a manner
as to provide an adequate water supply to each lot or dwelling unit
within the subdivision or land development. The entire system shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the
Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority and shall be subject to
its approval.
B. The system shall be so designed as to provide the necessary capacity
and distribution of hydrants for adequate fire protection, in accordance
with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) and the Insurance Services Office (ISO) Grading Schedule for
Municipal Fire Protection. In addition, the system shall be reviewed by
the local Fire Marshal and shall be subject to his approval.
A. When no public or municipal water supply is either available or
accessible, adequate water supply shall be furnished by the landowner
on either an individual lot basis or a community well supply system. In
the case of a community on-site private water supply system, the
landowner shall engage the services of a hydrogeologist to make a
determination as to the feasibility and location of such groundwater
withdrawal(s) and the availability of groundwater supply through
geological study and for the submission of his report of findings to the
Township for review. The Township shall further determine whether a
review and/or approval of the proposed groundwater withdrawal(s) will
be required by the Delaware River Basin Commission (DRBC) and/or
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Well
construction shall be by the rotary-percussion method of drilling and
shall be cased and sealed with the latest standards of the DEP, Bureau
of Water Quality Management, Publication 15. A well to serve an
individual lot shall be required to have a production of not less than 10
gallons per minute, as established by bailer tests and as certified by the
well driller. Before consumer use, the well shall be disinfected by
introducing sodium hypochlorite into the well, and a sample shall be
collected and analyzed for bacteriological content by a qualified
laboratory. A copy of the results of the bailer test and the
bacteriological examination shall be submitted to the Township for
review prior to the issuance of building permit(s) in connection with the
lot(s) in the subdivision or land development.
B. In the case of a major subdivision or land development, the landowner
shall be required to obtain a bond in accordance with § 163-79 herein
which will provide a guaranty of the following obligations:
§ 163-67 WARWICK CODE § 163-69
155:532
§ 163-70. Public sanitary sewers.
(1) Upon obtaining building permits, the landowner shall provide or
cause to be provided a fund in an amount equal to $500 per
dwelling unit constructed.
(2) This fund shall continue until exhausted or until seven years after
90% of the dwelling or commercial units in the subdivision or land
development have been sold and occupied, whichever is earlier.
(3) The landowner shall be required to replace the well used as a
private water supply of any residence under the following
conditions:
(a) The well shall have failed or become inadequate in normal
residential use, consistent with prior usage, during the time of
existence of the fund.
(b) Any part of the property served by the well shall be within
1,000 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided or
developed.
(c) The owner of the well to be replaced shall pay $200 towards
the replacement well.
(d) The replacement of the well shall be subject to Township
regulations and the Township Engineer's review and approval.
(4) The owner shall send notice to the residents of all properties
covered by the terms of Subsection B(3)(b) above stating that it is
in compliance with this section, that the property is covered by this
section and including a copy of this section.
A. The owner shall construct a sanitary sewer collection and/or
conveyance system in order to provide adequate sanitary sewer service
available to each lot or dwelling unit within the subdivision or land
development.
B. The entire system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the requirements and standards of the Warwick Township Water and
Sewer Authority.
C. The landowner or developer shall follow the Act 537 official sewage
facilities plan revision/supplement process established under the DEP
Rules and Regulations (Chapter 71). During the subdivision/land
development process, the landowner/developer shall complete and
submit to the Township the necessary components of the DEP's
planning module for land development. See Appendix D.146
D. The Board of Supervisors will review the proposal(s) and solicit
comments from the Township Engineer, Township Water and Sewer
146. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 163-69 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-70
155:533
§ 163-71. Private sewage disposal systems.
§ 163-72. Capped sewers.
If, at the time of final approval, public sanitary sewer facilities are not
available to the subdivision or land development but will become available
within a period of five years or a period determined by the Board of
Supervisors from the date of recording, the owner shall be required to
install or cause to be installed, at his expense, sanitary sewer collectors
and sewer laterals to the street line in accordance with the requirements
and standards of the Township Water and Sewer Authority and shall cap all
laterals. Review and approval by the Authority shall be required.
§ 163-73. Public utilities.
Authority, Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County
Department of Health. The Supervisors reserve the right to require
the implementation of a different alternative if their review shows
that it will have long-term environmental or economic savings to the
Township.
A. If public sewer facilities are neither available nor accessible, the owner
shall provide a sewage disposal system on either an individual or
community basis in accordance with rules, regulations, terms and
conditions of the Title 25, Chapter 73, Standards for Sewage Disposal
Facilities, DEP, adopted January 1983, and any amendments thereafter.
B. All on-site tests required for the sewage system by the DEP Rules and
Regulations shall be observed and certified by a representative of the
Bucks County Health Department and a representative as designated
by the Township.
C. The landowner or developer shall follow the Act 537 official sewage
facilities plan revision/supplement process established under the DEP
Rules and Regulations (Chapter 71). During the subdivision/land
development process, the landowner/developer shall complete and
submit to the Township the necessary components of the DEP's
planning module for land development. See Appendix D.147
D. The Board of Supervisors will review the proposal(s) and solicit
comments from the Township Engineer, Township Water and Sewer
Authority, Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County
Department of Health. The Supervisors reserve the right to require the
implementation of a different alternative if their review shows that it
will have long-term environmental or economic savings to the
Township.
A. The owner shall cause natural gas, electric power and telephone
facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service
147. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 163-70 WARWICK CODE § 163-73
155:534
§ 163-74. Final grading and seeding.
available to each lot or dwelling unit in the subdivision or land
development.
B. All public utilities required to service subdivisions and land
developments shall be placed underground.
C. Wherever practicable, all utilities shall be located within the street
right-of-way; otherwise, easements or rights-of-way of sufficient width
for installation and maintenance shall be provided.
D. Final plans shall show the locations of all utilities and shall be
coordinated with the required street tree planting drawings.
A. Grading and seeding shall conform in all respects to the final plan and
the requirements, standards, and specifications of this chapter.
B. Final grading and seeding specifications.
(1) Topsoil furnished and placed.
(a) The work to be performed under this item shall consist of
furnishing and placing topsoil materials in specified areas,
including the preparation of said areas to the lines, grades and
dimensions indicated on the standard detailed drawings of
these specifications or as otherwise directed by the
municipality.
(b) The topsoil material shall consist of friable loam reasonably
free from subsoil, clay lumps, stones or similar objects larger
than two inches in any dimension, and also brush roots,
objectionable vegetation, litter or other material unsuitable or
harmful to plant growth.
(c) Whenever practicable, the topsoil material shall be procured
from areas within the limits of excavation provided on the
project. Topsoil material shall be removed from any designated
area prior to the performance of normal excavation in said
area, shall be kept separate from other excavation and shall be
stockpiled at locations as may be designated at the job site.
(d) After normal grading of the specified areas has been
completed, the contractor shall dress and shape these areas to
the lines, grades, cross section and depth necessary to provide
for the uniform placement of 10 inches, plus or minus 1/2 inch,
of topsoil, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. These
areas shall be cleared of all unsuitable material and shall be
loosened by raking or other approved manner. [Amended
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
(e) The approved topsoil material shall be placed and spread over
the prepared areas to the approved depth after natural
§ 163-73 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-74
155:535
settlement and compaction. The spread topsoil shall be
compacted by means of a light roller, weighing not over 120
pounds per foot width of roller. The finished surface of the
topsoil shall be smooth, even and true to lines, grades and
cross section specified or required.
(f) Topsoiling operations shall be performed at such times
satisfactory to the Engineer and only under suitable weather
conditions.
(2) Seeding.
(a) This work shall consist of furnishing and placing seed and soil
supplements on a prepared seedbed as provided under this
chapter above or on such other areas as may be required by
the governing authorities.
(b) The seed shall be obtained from a dealer or manufacturer
whose product is shown by analysis to fulfill the guaranty of
conformity to all laws and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry, Act 187 of
the Laws of Pennsylvania, as amended. Seeds and mixtures
shall conform to those specified by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, current edition.
Sod may be used as an alternative with the approval of the
Township Engineer. [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-11]
(c) Soil supplements and commercial fertilizers shall conform to
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications,
current edition.
(d) After the areas required to be seeded have been brought to the
grades indicated on the approved drawing or specified, they
shall be thoroughly loosened to a depth of at least two inches
by plowing, disking, harrowing or by other approved methods
until the tillage is acceptable. Any irregularities in the surface
resulting from tillage shall be smoothed out before seeding
operations are begun to prevent the formation of watercollecting
pockets. The seeding shall be applied at the rate as
specified under Section 804, PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408. The contractor shall employ a satisfactory
method of sowing, making use of approved mechanical, powerdrawn
drills or seeders or mechanical hand seeders. Broadcast
seeding, either by hand or by sowing equipment, may also be
used when the method of application is approved by the
Engineer. After the seed has been sown, it shall be covered to
an average depth of 1/4 inch by means of a brush harrow,
spike-tooth harrow, chain harrow, rake or other approved
device. After the seed has been covered to the specified depth,
the seed area shall be immediately rolled, unless otherwise
§ 163-74 WARWICK CODE § 163-74
155:536
§ 163-75. Planting.
§ 163-76. Off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas.
directed, with an approved lawn roller weighing not over 65
pounds per foot width of roller for clay soils or any soil having
a tendency to pack and not over 120 pounds per foot width of
roller for sandy or light soils.
(e) The contractor shall properly water, mow and otherwise
maintain all seeded areas until final acceptance of the work.
Damage resulting from erosion, gullies, washouts and/or other
causes shall be repaired by refilling with topsoil, tamping to
proper compaction, refertilizing and reseeding as specified
above.
(f) The operation of the actual sowing of the seed shall be
performed within the dates approved by the Engineer and
subject to seasonal weather conditions.
A. Street trees and other required plantings shall be in accordance with
§ 163-51 of this chapter.
B. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until
the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been
completed.
C. Plans of proposed street tree planting shall be reviewed and approved
by the Warwick Township Planning Commission.
A. Drawings showing the drainage, size, shape and geometric design of
the proposed areas to be provided as off-street parking areas or offstreet
loading areas shall be approved by the Township and shall govern
the limits of construction as herein specified.
B. Off-street parking area and off-street loading areas shall be constructed
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Construction inspection.
(1) Upon the approval of the plan drawings and prior to actual
construction of the facilities or improvements as specified in this
chapter, the owner or the owner's contractor shall hold a
preconstruction meeting, with representatives from the Township
and Township Engineer's office at a minimum. In addition, the
contractor shall notify the Township three days in advance of actual
initial construction inspections so that the Township may arrange
for proper construction inspections.
(2) After initial commencement of any operation in the abovereferenced
construction, the owner shall notify or cause to be
notified the Township Engineer no less than 24 hours prior to any
§ 163-74 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-76
155:537
§ 163-77. Miscellaneous detailed specifications.
additional construction to permit inspection of the construction
activity.
A. Materials.
(1) Unless otherwise approved or specified by the governing officials,
only new materials shall be incorporated in the work. Materials
shall conform, when applicable, to those specified by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and shall be obtained
from suppliers who are listed within the current certified and
approved list of suppliers of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
(2) All materials furnished by the contractor to be incorporated in the
work shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Township Engineer. No materials shall be processed or fabricated
for or delivered to the work without prior approval of the Engineer,
except at the risk of the contractor. As soon as possible after the
developer's agreement has been executed, the contractor shall
submit to the Engineer data relating to materials he proposes to
furnish for the work. Such data shall be in sufficient detail to enable
the Engineer to identify the particular product in question and form
an opinion as to its conformity to the contract requirements.
Facilities and labor for the handling and inspection of all materials
shall be furnished by the contractor. Defective materials shall
immediately be removed from the site of the work at the
contractor's expense, if the Engineer so requires. Either prior to
beginning or during the progress of the work, the contractor shall
submit samples of the materials or such special tests as may be
necessary to demonstrate that they conform to the specifications.
The contractor shall place his orders sufficiently early to permit
consideration, inspection, testing and approval before the
materials are necessary for incorporation in the work. [Amended
11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
B. Handling and distribution of materials. The contractor shall, at his own
expense, handle, haul and distribute all materials and all surplus
materials on the different portions of the work as required. He shall
provide suitable and adequate storage room for materials during the
progress of the work and be responsible for any loss of or damage to
materials furnished or accepted by him until the final acceptance of the
work.
C. Lines, grades and measurements. The contractor shall make all
measurements and check all dimensions necessary for the proper
construction of the work called for by the drawings and specifications.
During the prosecution of the work, he shall make all necessary
measurements to prevent misfitting in said work, and he shall be
§ 163-76 WARWICK CODE § 163-77
155:538
responsible therefor and for the accurate construction of the entire
work.
D. Precautions during adverse weather. During adverse weather, the
contractor shall take all necessary precautions so that the work may be
properly done and satisfactory in all respects. When required,
protection shall be provided by use of tarpaulins or other approved
protective materials. During cold weather, materials and the adjacent
structure in which they are to be incorporated shall be made and kept
sufficiently warm so that a proper bond will take place and proper
curing, aging or drying will result.
E. Temporary heat. If temporary heat is required for the protection of the
work, the contractor shall provide and install approved heating
apparatus and shall provide adequate and proper fuel and maintain
fires as required. Temporary heating apparatus shall be installed and
operated in such manner that the finished work will not be damaged
thereby.
F. Water supply for construction. All water used for concrete work and
curing of concrete and all water used for other construction purposes
shall be clean and free from acid, alkali and iron and from injurious
amounts of vegetable matter and oil. Untreated raw water will not be
permitted for these purposes.
G. Use of explosives. In the event of blasting or the use of explosives
during construction, approval and all necessary permits shall be
obtained; the quantity of explosives to be used shall be subject to said
approval. Safety protection shall be as directed by the Township
Engineer.
§ 163-77 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-77
155:539

ARTICLE VII
Completion of Improvements
§ 163-78. Installation of improvements required.
No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have
been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition
or improved as may be required by this chapter and any walkways, curbs,
gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm drains and other improvements as may be required by this
chapter have been installed in accordance with this chapter.
§ 163-79. Guaranties and financial security.
A. In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a condition
for the final approval of a plan, this chapter shall provide for the deposit
with the Township of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover
the costs of any improvements or common amenities, including but not
limited to roads, parking areas, lighting, sewage disposal systems,
traffic signal and controls, stormwater detention and/or retention
basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
space improvements or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall provide an applicant or developer with a
written notice indicating conditional final plan approval contingent
upon the applicant or developer receiving satisfactory financial
security, which must be presented to the Township within 90 days. After
the Township is in receipt of the required financial commitments, the
Board of Supervisors shall grant final plan approval, and the linen plan
can be recorded.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section. The financial security shall provide for and
secure the completion of the improvements within one year of the date
fixed in the subdivision plan for completion of such improvements.
D. Amount of financial security. The amount of financial security shall be
equal to 110% of the cost of the required improvements for which
financial security is to be posted. The cost of the required
improvements shall be estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for the completion of said improvements.
E. Basis for establishing amount of security.
(1) The cost of the improvements shall be established by submission to
the Supervisors or the Planning Commission of a bona fide bid or
§ 163-78 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-79
155:541
bids from the contractor or contractors chosen by the party posting
the financial security to complete the improvements, or, in the
absence of such bona fide bids, the costs shall be established by
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer.
(2) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Supervisors (or the planning agency) may authorize submission
of final plans by section or stages of development, subject to such
requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future sections
or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of
any finally approved section of the subdivision or land
development.
F. Dispute over amount of financial security. Whenever a dispute may
arise between an applicant or developer and the Township in that
neither party can reach an accord on the amount of financial security to
be posted, the following procedures shall be employed:
(1) On behalf of the applicant, a licensed professional engineer (PE)
shall prepare and submit a fair and reasonable estimate of costs of
completion of required improvements;
(2) In the event that the Township Engineer, for good cause shown,
shall recommend that the estimate be refused, the applicant and
Township shall mutually agree upon a third PE to reestimate these
costs; and
(3) The estimate of the third PE shall be presumed to be a fair and
reasonable final estimate to be adopted by both the applicant and
Township, each of which shall pay 1/2 of the fees owed the third
PE.
G. Contracts. Before the Township Supervisors shall cause their approval
to be endorsed upon the final plans of any subdivision or land
development (except in the case of minor subdivisions wherein the
Supervisors impose no condition or conditions for the approval of the
plan) and as a requirement for the approval thereof, the owners shall
enter into a written agreement with the Township, in the manner and
form set forth by the Township Solicitor, where they shall agree to:
(1) Construct or cause to be constructed, at their own expense, all
streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, streetlights, drainage
facilities, street signs, monuments, capped sewers, parks and other
improvements shown on said final plan when required to do so by
§ 163-79 WARWICK CODE § 163-79
155:542
the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the final plans, as
finally approved, and in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Township.
(2) Maintain, at their own cost, said streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
facilities, street signs, parks, monuments, fire hydrants,
streetlighting, capped sewers and other improvements, until the
same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public use,
and for a period of 18 months thereafter, to repair and reconstruct
the same or any part of one of them when such repair or
reconstruction shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as
necessary by reason of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials at or before acceptance of such improvements by the
Township.
(3) Install or cause to be installed, at their own expense and without
any cost to the Township for any part of such installation,
streetlighting facilities on all streets within and abutting the
subdivision or land development if proposed to be dedicated to the
Township, as required by this chapter.
(4) Obtain the easements and releases required when any street,
drainage facility or other improvement wherein a subdivision abuts
or traverses lands of persons other than the person holding legal
title to the lands of the subdivision, at his own cost, and obtain from
the owner of lands so abutted or traversed full releases from all
damages which may result from the change in grade, construction
or otherwise of the street, drainage facility or other improvement;
and such releases shall inure to the benefit not only of the owner of
the subdivision but to the Township as well. [Amended 11-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-11]
(5) Promptly reimburse to the Township reasonable attorneys' and
engineers' fees as specified in Article VIII, § 163-87, hereof.
(6) Construct or cause to be constructed, at their expense, road
improvements along the frontage of the tract in accordance with
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(7) Additional conditions as may be determined to be necessary by the
Township Solicitor.
H. Inspections.
(1) Three days prior to the commencement of any operation in the
construction or installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
facilities, street signs, monuments and capped sewers, the owner
shall notify the Township Engineer, who shall observe the work,
materials, construction and installation to assure that the same are
in accordance with Township requirements.
§ 163-79 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-79
155:543
§ 163-80. Completion of improvements.
(2) After initial commencement of any operation in the abovereferenced
construction, the owner shall notify or cause to be
notified the Township Engineer no less than 24 hours prior to any
additional construction to permit observation of the construction
activity.
(3) The Township Engineer shall be authorized to have such tests of
materials made as are provided in Article VI of this chapter in order
to have proper control of materials.
A. Partial completion and release of financial security.
(1) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Township
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time,
of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work.
(2) Any such requests shall be in writing, addressed to the
Supervisors; and the Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Supervisors that such portion of the work
upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the
approved plans.
(3) Upon certification, the Township shall authorize release of an
amount of the financial security estimated by the Township
Engineer which fairly represents the value of the completed
improvements minus retainage.
(4) The Supervisors shall, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its Engineer, require retention of
15% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements for
purposes of securing the maintenance bond on said improvements.
(5) If the required financial security of 100% plus 10% is secured in
separate accounts and the specified 10% remains secured for the
life of the security agreements and the construction period or until
dedication, then the 10% specified above shall not be retained from
the requested partial release.
B. Completion of improvements and release of financial security.
(1) Upon satisfactory completion of all the necessary and appropriate
improvements as approved by the Township Engineer and receipt
by the Supervisors of the appropriate letter of certification of
completion of said improvements, the Supervisors shall release or
authorize to be released the balance of the financial security, minus
the 15% as specified above. The 15% shall be retained until such
time as the developer establishes an additional financial security to
§ 163-79 WARWICK CODE § 163-80
155:544
§ 163-81. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plan, the Supervisors are hereby granted the power to draw upon financial
security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such
bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security,
the Supervisors may, at their option, install part of such improvements
in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security and not for any other purpose.
§ 163-82. Dedication of improvements.
§ 163-83. Maintenance guaranties and financial security.
ensure the structural integrity and functioning of the specified
improvements as specified in § 163-82 herein.
(2) Upon completion and prior to release of the specified financial
security, the developer shall deliver two sets of development plans
delineating as-built information, including but not limited to final
street rights-of-way and easement location, by meets and bounds
and widths, and the final location and description, if changed from
approved final plans, of all sanitary water and stormwater facilities.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of acceptance of the
required improvements if satisfied that the applicant has complied with
all specifications and ordinances of the Township.
B. The applicant shall:
(1) Furnish the Township with one linen and two paper prints of the
completed required improvements, including all plans, profiles and
details, which shall be clearly revised to reflect all as-built
conditions of said improvements.
(2) Pay all costs for the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks
County on the petition and resolution of the Board of Supervisors to
said court for its approval of the acceptance of the required
improvements.
(3) Provide a policy of title insurance by a firm licensed to issue title
insurance in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in a form and
amount satisfactory to the Township.
A. The Supervisors shall require the posting of financial security to secure
the structural integrity of said improvements, as well as the functioning
§ 163-80 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-83
155:545
§ 163-84. Payment of fees and costs.
of said improvements, in accordance with the design and specifications
as depicted on the final plan, for a term not to exceed 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be
of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard
to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
B. If the specified improvements are not found acceptable to the Township
Engineer, the developer shall correct the same to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer and Supervisors before the maintenance guaranty
financial security is released.
A. Development costs. The owner/developer shall construct, at his own
expense, all the specified improvements delineated on the final plans or
specified in the required contracts and agreements with the Township
and in strict accordance with all standards and specifications of
Warwick Township.
B. Maintenance costs. The owner/developer shall maintain, at his own
expense, all the specified improvements delineated on the approved
final plans or specified in the required contracts and agreements with
the Township for a period of 18 months until the same are accepted for
dedication or condemned for public use. The expense of reconstruction
as may be determined by § 163-81 herein shall be the responsibility of
the owner/developer.
C. Utility costs. The owner/developer shall pay all costs, charges or rates
of the utility furnishing electric service for the lighting of the streets on
or abutting said subdivision or land development for the lights installed
by the owner, until such time as the streets shown on the subdivision
plans shall be accepted as public streets of the Township by resolution
approved by the Bucks County Clerk of Courts or condemnation
proceedings, and shall indemnify and save harmless the Township from
and against all suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service to
the streets shown on said plans or any part thereof to the time that said
streets shall be accepted as public streets of the Township in the
manner hereinabove set forth.
D. Fees. Fees shall be as specified in Article VIII, § 163-87, as amended.
§ 163-83 WARWICK CODE § 163-84
155:546
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 163-85. Criteria for modification of requirements.
The Township Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of these
chapter requirements if it has been satisfactorily proven that these
regulations are unreasonable, will cause extraordinary and undue hardships
from strict compliance or literal enforcement due to peculiar conditions of
the land in question, or when an alternative standard can be demonstrated
to provide equal or better results. Modifications may be granted by the
Board of Supervisors so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that such modification or variation will not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan or
these chapter requirements.
§ 163-86. Procedure for granting variances and modifications.
§ 163-87. Fees and escrow deposit.
A. Any request for variances and modifications must be in writing and be
included as a part of the application for subdivision and land
development. All applications must include an explanation of the facts
of hardship, the provision or provisions of the chapter requirements
involved and the minimum variance or modification necessary for relief.
B. The Township Planning Commission shall review all requests for
modification and prepare a written report of recommendation to the
Board of Supervisors.
C. In granting variances and modifications, the Board of Supervisors, with
the advice of the Township Planning Commission, may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all actions
taken on requests for modifications.
A. The owner shall pay to the Township reasonable consultant fees,
including but not limited to engineering, planning, legal and surveying,
incurred by the Township for the services of the Township Engineer
incidental to the examination and other work incidental to the approval
of each subdivision or land development or section thereof and shall
also pay to the Township reasonable legal fees incurred by the
Township for legal services incidental to the preliminary discussions
and negotiations with respect to the approval of such plans of each
subdivision or development or section thereof, the approval thereof and
the drafting of the contracts and bonds required by Article VII of this
chapter and for legal services required by the Township which may
arise by reason of the approval of such plans of each subdivision or
development or section thereof, inclusive of the cost of legal services
§ 163-85 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-87
155:547
§ 163-88. Inspection by Township Engineer.
§ 163-89. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
incidental to the final acceptance by the Township of the streets laid out
on the subdivision or land development.
B. The consultant fees, including but not limited to engineering, planning,
legal and surveying, required to be paid by this article shall be promptly
paid to the Township by the owner, upon the submission of bills thereof
to the owner by the Township, from time to time, as such fees are billed
to the Township by its or their engineers or attorneys.
C. To the consultant fees, including but not limited to engineering,
planning, legal and surveying, required to be paid to the Township by
this article, there shall be added a sum, to be determined from time to
time by resolution duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors, which the
owner shall pay to the Township as reimbursement to the Township of
the costs incurred by the Township for the collection of such fees and
the disbursement of the same to the Township Engineer and Township
Solicitor.
D. An escrow deposit in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule shall
be required at the time of submission of the preliminary plans in order
to cover engineering and legal fees incurred during review and
approval of subdivision or land development plans. If the required
escrow deposit amount falls below the prescribed level at any time
during the review process, the application shall be considered
incomplete.
A. Three days prior to the commencement of any operation in the
construction or installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
facilities, street signs, monuments and capped sewers, the owner shall
notify the Township Engineer, who shall observe the work, materials,
construction and installation to assure that the same are in accordance
with Township requirements.
B. After initial commencement of any operation in the above-referenced
construction, the owner shall notify or cause to be notified the Township
Engineer no less than 24 hours prior to any additional construction to
permit observation of the construction activity.
C. The Township Engineer shall be authorized to have such tests of
materials made as are provided in Article VI of this chapter in order to
have proper control of materials.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
§ 163-87 WARWICK CODE § 163-89
155:548
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building or other structure or
tract of land to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to the person, property or situation
immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such
provisions to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
§ 163-89 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 163-89
155:549
Chapter 167
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 69.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 117.
Plumbing — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
Water conservation — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context:
ARTIFICIAL POOL — Any pool (regardless of design or construction
materials and regardless of its permanence or location) built, erected or
used for the purpose of swimming or wading.
DISTRICTS — As specified in the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended. 148
PARTLY ARTIFICIAL POOLS — Any pool formed from a natural body of
water so limited in flow that the quantity or quality of water must be
maintained by artificial means and maintained for the purpose of swimming
or wading.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS — Any pool used and maintained for
swimming purposes by an individual for use by his household and guests
and located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. Artificial and partly
artificial pools, both above and below ground level, having a maximum
depth greater than 24 inches shall be included.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS — Any pool used and maintained by an
individual, firm, corporation, club or association of persons for use by the
public or members and their invitees and guests.
ROAD LINE — The right-of-way line between a lot and a public road, street
or highway legally open or officially plotted or between a lot and the edge
of the cartway of a private road, street or way over which the owners or
tenants of two or more lots held in single and separate ownership have
the right-of-way. The "road line" as defined herein shall be considered the
boundary of the lot for the purpose of computing the lot area specified in
this chapter and without regard to any boundary described in the deed of
any lot.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 163-89 WARWICK CODE § 167-1
167:550
WADING POOL — Any artificial or partially artificial pool installed below
ground level having a maximum depth no greater than 24 inches and
maintained for wading purposes.
§ 167-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain a private swimming pool,
wading pool or public swimming pool as herein defined without having
obtained a permit therefor in the manner hereinafter described.
§ 167-3. Permit application.
Application for a permit for the construction of a swimming pool or wading
pool shall be made to the Zoning Officer on such form as may be provided
by the Township. Each application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets
of plans, specifications and plot plans of the property and a fee paid in
accordance with the Warwick Township Fee Schedule. 149 The location of
the pool on the property and with respect to adjoining property and road
lines shall be shown, together with the location, height and type of fencing
or walls and accessory buildings. No permit shall be issued until the plans,
specifications and plot plan have been approved by the Building Official and
approval has been certified on said plans.
§ 167-4. Permission required for filling by public water system.
[Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2]
No swimming pool in Warwick Township shall be filled from a public water
system under the jurisdiction of the Warwick Township Water and Sewer
Authority without written permission of the Authority.
§ 167-5. Contents of zoning permit. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No.
88-2]
Zoning permits for swimming pools shall hereafter contain the prohibition
set forth in § 167-4 above as an addendum under the remarks portion of the
permit.
§ 167-6. Exception. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2]
The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to wading pools having a water
level of less than 10 inches.
§ 167-7. Minimum setback requirements.150
Minimum setback requirements shall be as set forth in Chapter 195, Zoning.
149. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 167-8
167:551
§ 167-8. Conformance with other standards required.
Swimming pools and wading pools shall be constructed and protected in
accordance with the pertinent BOCA Codes as adopted by the Township.
§ 167-9. Conformance with electrical standards required.
All electrical wiring and equipment shall be constructed in accordance with
the Electrical Code as adopted by the Township.151
§ 167-10. Artificial lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be installed, maintained or operated in such a
manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance to occupants of neighboring
property, as determined by the Zoning Officer.
§ 167-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-6152]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $300 nor more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution. In
default of payment of said fine, said person shall be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period of not more than
30 days. Each day that a violation exists after written notification by the
Township shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
Chapter 171
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Video programming tax — See Ch. 60, Art. II.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Electrical Standards.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-8 WARWICK CODE § 167-11
167:552
ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 2:100 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code]
§ 171-1. Tax levied.
The Board hereby levies a per capita tax of $5 in lieu of an occupation
tax upon each resident or inhabitant of the Township above the age of 18
years, for the calendar year beginning January 1, in addition to all other
property or per capita taxes levied by the Township. Every person against
whose spouse said per capita tax is levied shall be liable for payment of
such tax. Collection thereof from either spouse may be made and enforced
in the manner provided by law for the collection and enforcement of other
taxes owing by either spouse, including the collection from either spouse's
employer.
§ 171-2. Assessment and collection.
Yearly, when other Township taxes are assessed and levied by the Board,
the Secretary shall compute and add the amount of the tax levied pursuant
to § 171-1 to the tax duplicate furnished to the Tax Collector. The tax levied
and assessed hereunder shall be collected by the Tax Collector at the same
time and in the same manner as other taxes are collected and shall be
subject to the same discount for prompt payment and to the same penalties
for nonpayment as provided by law for other Township taxes.
§ 171-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-2
167:553

ARTICLE II
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1 as Part 2:600 of the 1984
Warwick Township Code]
§ 171-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context:
ADMISSION — The monetary charge of any character whatever, including
donations, contributions, subscriptions, charges, dues or assessments,
whether periodic or otherwise, fixed or exacted or in any manner received
or charged a person, directly or indirectly, for the right or privilege to enter
any place of amusement.
AMUSEMENT — All manners and forms of entertainment, diversion, sport,
recreation or pastime.
AMUSEMENT TAX COLLECTOR — The Secretary-Treasurer of the
Township or such other individual as the Board may designate from time to
time by resolution.
PERSON — Those entities as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Whenever used in any clause in this article prescribing or imposing a
penalty, or both, the term "person" as applied to copartnerships, limited
liability partnerships, limited liability companies or associations, shall mean
the partners, managers or members thereof, and as applied to corporations,
shall mean the officers and directors thereof.[Amended 11-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-7]
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Township where any person may, upon the payment of an admission, enter,
attend or engage in any amusement, including but not limited to theatrical
performances, operatic performances, dance halls, carnivals, massage
parlors, tanning salons, auditoriums, circuses, amusement parks, arenas,
stadiums, exhibition halls, baseball parks, roller skating and ice skating
rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds, fair grounds, social, sporting,
athletic, riding, gun and country clubs, riding academies, golf courses, golfdriving
ranges, miniature golf courses, swimming pools, bathing places,
amusement parks, tennis courts, racquetball courts, nightclubs, handball
courts, cabarets, archery ranges, bowling alleys, pool and billiard parlors
and all other places where any form of diversion, recreation, sport or
pastime is offered or provided.
§ 171-4. Tax levied.
A. A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed upon admissions to places of amusement
within the Township at the rate of 5% of the admission charged. Where
no fixed admission is charged, the tax shall be based upon the gross
admissions collected. [Amended 11-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
§ 171-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-4
167:555
§ 171-5. Amusement permit required.
§ 171-6. Collection and remittance of tax.
B. In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of the place of
amusement or municipal or state officers on official business) admitted
free or at reduced rates at any place of amusement at a time and under
circumstances where an established price is charged to other persons,
the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the established
price charged to such other persons of the same class for the same or
similar accommodations, services or facilities.
C. No tax shall be due or payable on membership in or membership dues,
fees or assessments of charitable, religious, beneficial or other similar
nonprofit organizations.
A. After January 1, 1984, any person desiring to conduct or to continue to
conduct any amusement within the Township first shall file with the
Amusement Tax Collector an application for a permanent amusement
permit or a temporary amusement permit, as the case may be (as
hereinafter provided), and shall pay the fee therefor as set forth in the
Warwick Township Fee Schedule. 153 A permanent amusement permit
shall be required for an amusement that is to continue for longer than
30 days. A temporary amusement permit shall be required for any
amusement that is to continue for 30 days or less.
B. Permanent amusement permits shall he valid until December 31 of the
year in which issued. Temporary amusement permits shall be valid until
the last day the amusement is conducted, but not more than 30 days
following issuance of the temporary amusement permit.
C. Every permit shall be issued in duplicate. The original shall be given to
the person applying for the permit, who shall conspicuously display it at
the location for which the permit was issued. The duplicate shall be
kept on file by the Amusement Tax Collector. In case of loss, defacement
or destruction of any permit, the person to whom the permit was issued
shall apply immediately to the Amusement Tax Collector, who shall
issue a replacement permit upon payment of a fee as set forth in the
Warwick Township Fee Schedule.
A. Every person receiving an admission charge upon which a tax is levied
under this article shall collect the amount of the tax imposed upon the
person paying an admission charge. Said tax shall be deemed to be held
in trust by the person required to collect the tax until remitted to the
Amusement Tax Collector as set forth in § 171-6B. The tax imposed
under this article shall be collected at the time the admission charge is
paid.
153. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 171-4 WARWICK CODE § 171-6
167:556
§ 171-7. Liability for tax.
Every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article who fails
to collect said tax or fails to remit the tax shall be personally liable to the
Township for the amount of the tax.
§ 171-8. Penalty for untimely remittance.
Any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article
who fails to remit the amount of the tax when due shall, in addition to all
other penalties, pay a penalty of 10% of the amount due and shall forfeit the
two-percent commission set forth in § 171-6. For each successive 30 days
elapsing before payment, there shall be added an additional penalty of 10%
of the amount due.
§ 171-9. Price to be printed on ticket.
The price, exclusive of the taxes to be paid by the person paying for
admission, at which every admission ticket or card is sold shall be
conspicuously and indelibly printed, written or stamped on the face or back
of that part of the ticket which is taken up by the management of the place
of amusement to which admission is granted.
§ 171-10. Temporary places of amusement.
B. Every person collecting any tax imposed by this article shall, on or
before the fifth day following the end of each calendar quarter, file with
the Amusement Tax Collector a statement upon forms provided by the
Amusement Tax Collector indicating the amount of taxes collected by
said person during the preceding three months. Said forms may require
such further information as the Amusement Tax Collector may deem
necessary to determine the amount of the taxes collected and payable.
A remittance for the amount of tax collected during said preceding
three-month period shall accompany the statement; provided, however,
that every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article
shall be entitled to retain 2% of all taxes collected to defray the costs of
collection and remittance, only if such remittance is made on or before
the fifth day as provided above.
A. A "temporary place of amusement" means a place of amusement that
shall operate for 30 continuous days or less.
B. Every person paying an admission charge to a temporary place of
amusement shall also be subject to the tax levied by this article, and
every person operating or conducting such a temporary place of
amusement shall collect and remit said tax as provided in § 171-10C.
C. Prior to conducting a temporary place of amusement, a temporary
amusement permit shall first be obtained from the Amusement Tax
Collector. Every person conducting such temporary place of amusement
shall file a statement upon forms provided by the Amusement Tax
§ 171-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-10
167:557
§ 171-11. Determination of amount due.
If any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article
fails to file a statement and a remittance or if the Amusement Tax Collector
has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been filed,
the Amusement Tax Collector may proceed to determine the amount due to
the Township and shall make such investigations and take such testimony
or other evidence as may be necessary; provided, however, that notice and
opportunity to be heard shall be given to any person who may become liable
for the amount owing prior to any determination by the Amusement Tax
Collector.
§ 171-12. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Amusement Tax Collector shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article for the
purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and
remittance of the tax levied. A copy of said rules and regulations shall be on
file and available for public examination in the Amusement Tax Collector's
office. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations
promulgated under this section shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 171-13. Annual reenactment not required.
The tax levied under this article shall be in full force and effect 30 days
from and after the original adoption of this article's predecessor and shall
continue thereafter without annual reenactment unless amended or
repealed.
§ 171-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-6; 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution. In
default of payment of said fine, said person shall be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period of not more than 30
days.
Collector and shall remit the taxes collected on the day following the
conclusion of operations or at such reasonable time or times as the
Amusement Tax Collector shall determine; provided, however, that
before a temporary amusement permit shall be issued, the applicant for
said permit shall deposit with the Amusement Tax Collector a sum of
money, or bond in lieu thereof, conditioned upon the faithful compliance
with the provisions of this article, in an amount to be determined by
the Amusement Tax Collector as sufficient to cover the amount which
shalt become due and owing to the Township upon the conclusion of
temporary or transient operations.
§ 171-10 WARWICK CODE § 171-14
167:558
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-1]
§ 171-15. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Warwick Township."
§ 171-16. Imposition of tax. [Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-5]
Warwick Township adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that
article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this
section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 171-16.1. Administration. [Added 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
The tax imposed under § 171-16, and all applicable interest and penalties,
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the "Local Tax Enabling
Act";154 provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last
date prescribed for timely payment, Warwick Township, pursuant to Section
1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and
directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
§ 171-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 171-15 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-17
167:559
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under this
article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation, whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Warwick Township,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
§ 171-17 WARWICK CODE § 171-17
167:560
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, a Township
of the second class under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTIONS — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings. exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquire company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
§ 171-17 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-17
167:561
§ 171-18. Tax levied.
§ 171-19. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by Warwick Township under the authority of
that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except
as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such one-half
rate shall become effective without any action on the part of Warwick
Township; provided, however, that Warwick Township and any other
political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 171-17 WARWICK CODE § 171-19
167:562
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 171-20. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 171-18 shall not be imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property
condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
reconveyance may include property fine adjustments, provided that
said reconveyance is made within one year from the date of
condemnation.
B. A document which Warwick Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or Tax Claim Bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
that the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was
acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the
granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the
spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or
sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or sister and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
§ 171-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-20
167:563
§ 171-21. Acquired companies.
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from or for the benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his
individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this subsection.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department and/or Township reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of
the tax imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association taxable. For
the purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities
separate from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
A. A "real estate company" is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a "family
farm corporation" is an acquired company when, because of voluntary
or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of issuance of
transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are
devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
§ 171-20 WARWICK CODE § 171-21
167:564
§ 171-22. Credits against tax
§ 171-23. Determinations by Department of Revenue.
Whenever the amount of tax due to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
pursuant to 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., upon final determination,
redetermination or review by the Department of Revenue, is more than
the amount actually paid to the commonwealth on account thereof, such
amount, including all interest or penalties thereon, shall be deemed to
be the amount due and payable to the Township pursuant to this article
and shall be collectable by the Recorder of Deeds upon rerecording as
hereinafter provided. If the amount of tax as finally determined is less
than the amount actually paid, then upon application to the Township,
together with proof of payment and final determination by the Department
of Revenue, the Township shall refund such portion of the overpayment
that the Township actually received. All applications for refunds must be
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps
and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the transfer
to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the
transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property. a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 171-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-23
167:565
received by the Township within two years of the date of payment for which
a refund is requested.
§ 171-24. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 171-25. Proceeds of judicial sales.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 171-26. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Warwick
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Warwick Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Warwick Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 171-23 WARWICK CODE § 171-27
167:566
§ 171-27. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 171-28. Civil penalties.
§ 171-29. Tax to be a lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of Warwick Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and to continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 171-29.1. Interest on delinquent municipal claims. [Added
10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
Any tax imposed under § 171-16 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153 (53 P.S. § 7101 et
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 171-27 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-29.1
167:567
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929,
P.L. 343, No. 176 (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code," or
the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 171-30. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 171-31. Promulgation of regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township is charged with enforcement
and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into and made
a part of this article.
§ 171-29.1 WARWICK CODE § 171-31
167:568
ARTICLE IV
Tax Certifications
[Adopted 9-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-5]
§ 171-32. Issuance by Tax Collector; fee.
The locally elected Tax Collector is hereby appointed as the municipal
officer authorized to provide tax certifications and duplicate invoices upon
request by the public and said Tax Collector is hereby authorized to assess,
collect and retain, as compensation for providing such additional services,
a fee of $10 for each year of certification and a fee of $5 for duplicate
invoices.
§ 171-32 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-32
167:569

ARTICLE V
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3]
§ 171-33. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance" of
Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, hereinafter called
"Township."
§ 171-34. Incorporation of statute.
This article is enacted and adopted under and by virtue of the authority
of the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, effective January 1, 1966,
The Local Tax Enabling Act, and the provisions of Sections 13 and 14
thereof, (53 P.S. §§ 6913 and 6914), its supplements and amendments, are
incorporated herein by reference except that where options are provided in
Sections 13 and 14, this article designates the options selected and except
as and where hereinafter specifically provided otherwise.
§ 171-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
§ 171-36. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of 1% is hereby imposed
on earned income, including inter alia salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other compensation received
by residents of the Township, and on earned income, including inter alia
salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and
other compensation received by nonresidents of the Township for work
done or services performed or rendered in the Township and on the net
profits received from businesses, professions or other activities conducted
by residents of the Township and the net profits received from businesses,
professions or other activities conducted in the Township by nonresidents of
the Township beginning January 1, 1990, and continuing on an annual basis
for each succeeding year.
§ 171-37. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, selected by
the Township in accordance with § 171-38 hereof, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a declaration of his
§ 171-33 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-37
167:571
estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the current year and pay to the Officer in
four equal quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows:
the first installment at the time of filing the declaration and the
other installments on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates a net profit after April 15 of the
current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and paid to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year the total amount of tax due
thereon and the total amount of tax paid therein. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the
final return as hereinabove required.
B. Earned income.
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer a final return showing the amount of
earned income including inter alia salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and compensation (other
than net profits) received during the period beginning January 1
and ending December 31 of the current year the total tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon that has been withheld
pursuant to the provisions relating to collection at the source, and
the balance of the tax due. At the time of filing said final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Quarterly returns. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary,
wage or other compensation and who received any earned income
not subject to the provisions relating to collections at source shall
make and file with the Officer quarterly returns and shall pay
quarterannually the amount of tax shown as due on such returns,
all as provided in Section 13(III)(B)(2) of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, as amended.155
§ 171-37 WARWICK CODE § 171-38
167:572
§ 171-38. Collection at source.
§ 171-39. Administration.
The Income Tax Officer shall be selected from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors and shall receive such compensation for his or
her services and expenses as determined from time to time by the Township
Supervisors. Such Officer shall have the powers and duties and be subject
to the penalties provided in The Local Tax Enabling Act, its supplements and
amendments.157
§ 171-40. Applicability.
The tax imposed in § 171-36 of this article shall not be levied on the
net profits of any person, institution or organization as to whom it is
beyond the power of the Township Supervisors to impose said tax under the
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the corporate limits of the Township
shall deduct the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to
his employee or employees and shall file quarter returns and final
returns and pay quarterly to the Officer the amount of taxes deducted,
all as set forth in Section 13, IV of the said Local Tax Enabling Act, its
supplements and amendments,156 except that on or before February 28,
1991, and in succeeding years, every employer shall file with the
Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1, 1990, and ending
December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the current year setting forth the employee's
name, address and social security number, the amount of earned
income paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax
deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employee, and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
B. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file
returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, Subsection IIIB(2).
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, Subsection IV.
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 171-38 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-40
167:573
Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 171-41. Credits.
§ 171-42. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement and penalties for the nonpayment of any tax imposed
hereunder may be pursued and imposed by the Township as authorized in
the Local Tax Enabling Act, Section 13 VII, VIII and IX.158
A. Payments of any tax on income to any state other than Pennsylvania or
to any political subdivision thereof by residents thereof pursuant to any
state or local law to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other
compensation or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities, if residents of the Township receive credits and deductions of
a similar kind to a like degree from the tax on income imposed by the
other state or political subdivision thereof.
B. Where a credit or a deduction is allowable, it shall be allowed in
proportion to the concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed by the
other state or respective political subdivisions, but not in excess of the
amount previously paid for a concurrent period.
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, Subsections VII, VIII and IX.
§ 171-40 WARWICK CODE § 171-42
167:574
ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-4159]
§ 171-43. Levy and collection of tax.
The Warwick Township Board of Supervisors, for the purpose of providing
revenue for local services, including, but not limited to, emergency services,
road maintenance and construction, reductions in property taxes and
property tax relief, does hereby impose on each adult resident and
nonresident employed and/or engaged in an occupation within the
jurisdiction of Warwick Township a local services tax at a flat rate which
said tax shall be in addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by the
Township pursuant to any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 171-44. Amount of tax.
Beginning on the effective date of this article,160 each adult resident or
nonresident employed within the boundaries of Warwick Township shall be
required to pay an annual local services tax in an amount of $52.
§ 171-45. Discount, flat rate and penalty periods.
The local services tax shall not be subject to the imposition of the Local Tax
Enabling Act161 discount and penalty provisions in regard to the levy and
collection of this local services tax.
§ 171-46. Manner of collection of tax.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected by the duly elected or
appointed Tax Collector of Warwick Township (as directed by the Board
of Supervisors) in the same manner as other Township taxes are
collected. It shall be the duty of each adult employed within Warwick
Township to pay the local services tax in accordance with 53 P.S.
§ 6902.162 Each individual covered under this article and required to
pay the local services tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax
for each payroll period in which the individual is engaged in an
occupation within the Township. The pro rata share of the tax assessed
on the individual for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing
the combined rate of the local service tax levied for the calendar year
($52) by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for
the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an
employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll
period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. The collection of the
159. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
160. Editor's Note: This article provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
162. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 6901 through 6909 were renumbered as 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to
6924.312 by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, §§ 2, 3.1 to 11, effective immediately.
§ 171-43 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-46
167:575
§ 171-47. Warrant for collection of tax.
The entry of the tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of the said
duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection
of the tax as hereby assessed. Each employer within Warwick Township
shall cooperate with the Township in identifying those people employed
within the Township.
§ 171-48. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the local services tax:
local services tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for each
payroll period in which the person is engaged in an occupation, except
as otherwise provided for within 53 P.S. § 6902.163
B. Each employer within Warwick Township, as well as those employers
situated outside Warwick Township but who engage in business within
Warwick Township, shall withhold this local services tax from the
compensation of their employees who are subject to the tax. This local
services tax shall be withheld from each employee that is subject to the
local services tax, and said tax shall be collected by the duly elected or
appointed Tax Collector of Warwick Township (as directed by the Board
of Supervisors) in the same manner as other Township taxes are
collected.
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active duty, if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year.
C. Any person who earns less than $12,000 in earned income and net
profits from all sources within Warwick Township for the calendar year
in which the local services tax is levied.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with Warwick Township,
the Township Tax Collector and with the person's employer
affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive earned
income and net profits from all sources within Warwick Township of
less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate is filed. The exemption certificate shall have attached to
163. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 6901 through 6909 were renumbered as 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to
6924.312 by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, §§ 2, 3.1 to 11, effective immediately.
§ 171-46 WARWICK CODE § 171-48
167:576
§ 171-49. Priority of claim.
it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from
employment within Warwick Township for the year prior to the
fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the local services tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
certificate and until otherwise instructed by Warwick Township,
the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during
the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which
the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the
exemption certificate forms, which are provided by the Department
of Community and Economic Development, are readily available
to employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee
with a form at the time of hiring. For purposes of this section,
earned income and net profits shall have the same meanings as in
§ 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the local services tax, upon notification to an
employer by the person or by Warwick Township that the person
has received earned income and net profits from all sources within
the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year
or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for
that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the Township in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection C(3) below.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year under Subsection C(2) above, the employer shall
withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar year. The
employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period
after receipt of the notification under Subsection C(2), a lump sum
equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person
due to the exemption claimed by the person under this subsection,
plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In the event the employment of a person subject
to withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Township may pursue
collection under this article.
A. No person shall be subject to the payment of the full local services tax
by more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
B. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period.
§ 171-48 SWIMMING POOLS § 171-49
167:577
§ 171-50. Refunds.
A person claiming the right to a refund for the local services tax shall follow
the regulations governing refunds in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8425
and 8426, as amended, and/or any Township ordinance or resolution
governing said refunds.
§ 171-51. Violations and penalties.
Any resident or nonresident who fails or refuses to pay the local services tax
or to render accurate information to an assessor concerning the status of
his or her employment or age shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in default of payment, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. The Tax Collector and
Township may also proceed with all other available remedies, including but
not limited to filing an action for the recovery of any tax due or unpaid under
this article, together with interest and penalty.
C. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order: first, the political subdivision in which a person
maintains the person's principal office or is principally employed;
second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works,
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and third, the political
subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax
nearest in miles to the person's home.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides a recent pay
statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the local
services tax withheld and a statement from the employee that the pay
statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment
within two weeks of its occurrence.
§ 171-49 WARWICK CODE § 171-51
167:578
Chapter 174
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 81. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 177.
§ 174-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
shall include the future; words used in the plural shall include the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings indicated herein below:
DISABLED OR WRECKED OR ABANDONED OR IMPOUNDED
VEHICLE — An automobile, truck, truck tractor, trailer, motorcycle,
motor home or other vehicle or device, in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, road
or street, which is no longer capable of safe operation on a highway,
road or street and presents safety hazard to the public by virtue of
its location on or adjacent to a public highway, road or street in the
Township of Warwick.
FLATBED WRECKER — A flatbed vehicle equipped with a roll body and
winch designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger
and commercial vehicles.
LEASED — Vehicles must be leased for a fixed period of greater then
three years and for a fixed flat rate. A lessor must be a business,
company, entity or corporation whose usual and customary business is
that of leasing motor vehicles.
LIGHT-DUTY WRECKER; WHEEL-LIFT WRECKER — A vehicle
designed for and capable of lifting and transporting passenger vehicles.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of
Warwick, County of Bucks.
TOWER — A person engaged in the business or offering the services
of a vehicle wrecker, tow truck, car carrier or other vehicle whereby
disabled or wrecked or abandoned vehicles are towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled or wrecked or
abandoned by use of a vehicle so adapted to that purpose.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Warwick, County of Bucks.
§ 171-51 TOWING § 174-2
174:579
§ 174-2. License required.
No person shall offer his services to or be called by the Township or its
Police Department as a tower for the purpose of removal of disabled or
wrecked or abandoned vehicles unless that person is the holder of a current
towing license as hereinafter provided.
§ 174-3. Application for license.
A. An application for a towing license shall be made to the Township upon
a form available from the Township, which form shall require the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the business for which
the towing license is sought.
(2) The type of business organization under which the business is
operated (i.e., sole proprietorship, partnership corporation, etc.).
(3) The name, home and business address and telephone numbers of
all of the owner(s) or, in the case of a corporation, stockholder(s) of
the business for which the towing license is sought.
(4) A list of the tow trucks, vehicle wreckers, car carriers or other
vehicles available for service to the Township, including a
description of each vehicle or piece of equipment (type, make,
model, year, etc.), the name and address of the owner/lessee of
each vehicle or piece of equipment and their location and hourly
availability.
(5) The address and description of the premises upon which any
disabled or wrecked vehicles will be towed to and/or stored,
including the size of the area on the premises available for storage
of vehicles, the approximate number of vehicles which may be
stored in the area, whether said area is fenced and a description of
any security precautions or protection methods for vehicles stored
in said area.
(6) A certificate of insurance or other proof acceptable to the Township
that the applicant has obtained the general liability and garage
keeper's liability insurance required for the issuance of a towing
license.
(a) In the event that there are less than two licensed towers
approved by the Township, the Township may issue licenses
during the calendar year in order to increase the number of
licensed towers to two.
(b) Applications shall be reviewed and approved or denied in the
chronological order in which they are received by the
Township. An application shall not be deemed received by the
§ 174-2 WARWICK CODE § 174-3
174:580
§ 174-4. Standards for issuance of towing license.
A towing license shall be issued to all applicants who meet all of the
following requirements:
Township unless it is completed and contains all of the items
set forth in § 174-3 hereof.
B. An application for a towing license shall be made and signed by the
owner(s) of the business for which the license is sought or, in the case of
a corporation, the president of the corporation.
C. Applicants must execute an agreement to indemnify the Township for
any and all losses or expenses incurred by virtue of any acts performed
in the course of service.
D. The application for a towing license shall be accompanied by an
application fee as set by the Board of Supervisors. 164
E. The application shall be received by the Township and the Township
Police Department within 20 days of receipt of the application and
application fee, and the Township shall promptly thereafter advise the
applicant of whether the license has been approved, disapproved or
included on the waiting list.
F. Towing licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, commencing on
January 1 and terminating on December 31 of each year. Any applicant
whose application for a license has been approved shall be issued a
license effective the following January 1.
A. The following vehicles shall be owned or leased exclusively by the
applicant, garaged on the premises from which the applicant's towing
business is conducted and available on call for the service at the
request of the Township or its Police Department:
(1) One light-duty wrecker.
(2) One flatbed wrecker.
B. All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall bear a sign indicating the
name and telephone number of the applicant's towing business, and the
applicant shall make said vehicles available for verification by the
Township.
C. All of the aforesaid required vehicles shall be maintained in a safe and
usable operating condition.
D. A fenced-in storage yard or other secure facility, open or closed, shall be
located on the premises from which the applicant's towing business is
conducted, and such yard or storage area shall be authorized by the
164. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 174-3 TOWING § 174-4
174:581
§ 174-5. Issuance of license.
§ 174-6. License status.
A towing license is issued by the Township on condition of and with the
express agreement of the licensee that the licensee shall, at all times, act
as independent contractor to and not as an employee of the Township or
appropriate zoning, use and occupancy and other municipal permits. A
storage area must be available to hold a minimum of five vehicles. The
applicant shall permit inspection of the storage yard or facility by the
Township. The applicant shall install screening and comply with all the
provisions of the state and federal highway beautification acts.
E. The applicant's place of towing business shall be located within the
Township boundaries in order that the response time to a call for
service is immediate. In the event that any tower or towers who have
been in continuous-duty tow service to the Township of Warwick at the
time of the enactment of this chapter are in violation of this subsection,
said tower or towers shall not be denied a license under this subsection.
F. All applicants shall maintain the following insurance and present proof
thereof to the Township, upon request:
(1) General public liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000.
(2) Garage keeper's legal liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$100,000.
G. All of the aforesaid vehicles shall be equipped with a two-way
communication system, such as two-way radios or mobile telephones.
A. A towing license shall be issued to each applicant whose application has
been approved by the Township upon payment to the Township of a
license fee as set by the Board of Supervisors. 165 The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Warwick is empowered to change, revise
or amend the amount of this fee by resolution duly adopted by the
Board of Supervisors without necessitating an amendment to this
chapter.
B. The towing license shall be prominently displayed on the premises
where the applicant's towing business is conducted.
C. Along with the issuance of a towing license, a vehicle sticker shall be
issued for each vehicle listed on the application, which sticker shall be
prominently displayed on the right front door of each such vehicle.
D. A towing license shall be effective for a period of one year from the date
of its issuance.
165. Editor's Note: The Warwick Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township office. See
also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 174-4 WARWICK CODE § 174-6
174:582
its Police Department and that payment for services rendered pursuant to
said license shall be by the owner, operator or custodian of the disabled,
wrecked or abandoned vehicle.
§ 174-7. Duties of licensee.
§ 174-8. Township police duty tow.
A. All licensees shall keep and maintain all of the vehicles listed on its
application in a safe and operable condition and in a condition which
shall pass the motor vehicle inspection standards of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and shall have said vehicles immediately available to
answer calls for service by the Police Department during the duty-tow
shift assigned to the licensee. All licensees shall not use or employ a
vehicle which does not have the required towing license vehicle sticker
displayed as set forth hereinabove to answer calls by the Township or
its Police Department.
B. All licensees shall respond within 15 minutes from their receipt of the
Police Department's call requesting service to the arrival of the
licensee's appropriate towing vehicle at the location of the disabled or
wrecked or abandoned vehicle, except in bad weather or adverse road
conditions.
C. If any licensee cannot respond to the service call from the Police
Department with the appropriate towing vehicle or in a minimal
response time, the licensee shall make arrangements with another
licensee to respond to the call and shall so advise the police dispatcher.
If a licensee's vehicle is delayed while in transit to the requested
location, the vehicle operator shall advise the police dispatcher of the
delay and of his present location, whereupon a determination shall be
made by the appropriate police official as to whether another licensee
shall be called.
D. Fees charged by the licensee when towing or storing towed vehicles as
an independent contractor to the Township of Warwick shall not exceed
current prevailing rates.
E. All licensees shall be responsible for removing vehicular parts and
debris from the highway. Licensees are required to perform basic liquid
cleanup following an accident. Basic liquid cleanup shall include
cleanup requiring no more than 100 pounds of oil-absorbent material
and removal of the liquid and oil-absorbent material. [Amended
9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-7]
F. All licensees shall comply with all rules and regulations established by
the Police Department with regard to use of the duty tow.
A. All disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be removed from the roadway
immediately following an accident, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code.166
§ 174-6 TOWING § 174-8
174:583
§ 174-9. Suspension and revocation of license.
B. If the owner or operator cannot remove the disabled or wrecked or
abandoned vehicle or refuses or fails to have the vehicle removed
within a reasonable time, a Township police officer shall call the towing
licensee assigned to the police duty tow to affect such a removal.
C. The Police Department shall establish rules and regulations for the
establishment of a police duty tow, the rotation of assignment of towing
licensees to the duty tow and the use of the duty tow by Township police
officers.
A. The Township reserves the right to suspend the license of an operator
at any time if an inspection by a Township police officer or a Township
official determines that the required equipment is missing or inoperable
or unsafe. Any such suspension of any operator's license shall continue,
without rebate of either the application fee or license fee, until such
time as the Township determines the applicant is in full compliance with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(1) The operator agrees to execute a hold-harmless agreement for any
and all claims, actions or causes of actions arising from suspension
of a license for the reasons set forth in Subsection A above at the
time of initial application for a towing license.
(2) The Township shall give the operator warning or notice that the
operator is in violation of the provisions and terms of this chapter
prior to any formal action to suspend the license. The Township
shall permit the operator to correct deficiencies within the time
frames as follows:
(a) In the case of a nonsafety violation, the operator shall have 10
days in which to correct deficiencies.
(b) In the case of safety-related violations, the operator shall have
48 hours in which to correct deficiencies.
B. A towing license shall be revoked upon a finding by the Township of any
of the following grounds:
(1) The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement
or omission of a material fact, and, in this event, the license shall be
null and void and as if an application had never been filed.
(2) The licensee failed to perform or violated any of the duties of a
licensee set forth hereinabove.
(3) The licensee no longer meets all the standards for issuance of a
towing license.
166. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 174-8 WARWICK CODE § 174-9
174:584
Chapter 177
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 49.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 153.
Towing — See Ch. 174.
(4) The licensee's application is found to be defective in any way or
contains misinformation or omissions of fact, and, in this event, the
license shall be null and void and as if an application had never
been filed.
(5) The licensee failed to correct safety-related or non-safety-related
deficiencies within the allotted time as provided by § 174-9A(2)(a)
and (b).
(6) The licensee's license had been suspended three times.
§ 174-9 TOWING § 174-9
174:585

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 177-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 177-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 177-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 177-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81),167 as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
167. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 177-1 TOWING § 177-4
174:587
§ 177-5. Experimental regulations.
The Township Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution,
designate places upon and along the highways in Warwick Township where,
for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and
shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if they had
been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate and no person shall
move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or
made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature,
and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $100 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability
of permanent changes in the ordinances of Warwick Township relative to
traffic and parking.
§ 177-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$100 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Township Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any
street or specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place
barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion,
while construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event
is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 177-4 WARWICK CODE § 177-6
174:588
§ 177-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
§ 177-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of Warwick Township are hereby authorized to direct
traffic on the highways of Warwick Township and at intersections thereof
and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.168
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit pursuant to Chapter 49 of the Warwick Township
Code.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit pursuant to Chapter 49 of the Warwick Township
Code.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $250 and costs.
A. The Warwick Township Police Department is hereby authorized to use
all speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with Title 75, Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
Warwick Township, be they Township, county, or state highways, and
does also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local
authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (1977) as hereafter amended,
168. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 155, Speed-Timing Devices.
§ 177-6 TOWING § 177-9
174:589
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 177-9 WARWICK CODE § 177-9
174:590
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 177-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
Alex Lane — 25
Almshouse Road From Doylestown Township
line to York Road (SR 263)
45
Almshouse Road From Rushland Road to
Northampton Township
line
45
Almshouse Road From York Road (SR 263)
to Rushland Road
35
Augusta Drive — 25
Bayberry Drive — 25
Bentley Drive — 25
Brenton Hill Drive — 25
Bridge Street — 25
Bristol Road — 45
Brocket Court — 25
Brook Lane — 25
Buckingham Drive — 25
Candytuft Drive — 25
Canterbury Lane — 25
Carmel Drive — 25
Cedar Drive — 25
Chelsea Lane — 25
Clearview Drive — 25
Cold Brook Lane — 25
Conway Court — 25
Creek Road — 35
Crocker Lane — 25
Crossroads Drive — 25
Dark Hollow Road — 35
§ 177-10 TOWING § 177-10
174:591
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
Deer Run Drive From York Road (SR 263)
to Doe Drive
25
Deer Run Drive From York Road (SR 263)
to Sawgrass Drive
35
Dillon Drive — 25
Doe Drive — 25
Dogwood Drive — 25
Eagle Court — 25
East Rockspray Road — 25
Eddowes Drive — 25
Fairmount Drive — 25
Fairway Drive — 25
Fallow Hill Lane — 25
Farmdale Road — 25
Fawn Drive — 25
Foxglove Lane — 25
Foxwood Drive — 25
Goldenrod Court — 25
Graeme Way — 25
Grakelow Drive — 25
Greenleaf Drive — 25
Grenoble Road — 25
Guinea Lane — 35
Hallowell Street — 25
Hamilton Way — 25
Hampton Drive — 25
Harrison Way — 25
Hedgewood Drive — 25
Heritage Drive — 25
Herron Pointe — 25
Highwoods Drive — 25
Hill Road — 25
Hillside Road — 25
Huntly Drive — 25
Jamison Street — 25
§ 177-10 WARWICK CODE § 177-10
174:592
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
Jericho Drive — 25
Julian Drive East — 25
Julian Drive West — 25
Katydid Court — 25
Knox Court — 25
Lafayette Drive — 25
Land Road — 35
Laurens Lane — 25
Lee Drive — 25
Lockleigh Road — 25
Long Pond Drive — 25
Magnolia Way — 25
Marielle Drive — 25
Maxwell Manor — 25
Mayfield Circle — 25
Meadowview Drive — 25
Mearns Road — 40
Meetinghouse Road
[Added 9-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-3]
North of Almshouse Road 25
Meetinghouse Road South of Almshouse Road 35
Meyer Way — 25
Mill Road [Added
9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-3]
From Township boundary
to York Road (SR 263)
25
Monroe Drive — 25
Monticello Drive — 25
Mulberry Lane — 25
Nathaniel Trail — 25
Park Drive — 25
Pennsbury Drive — 25
Railroad Drive — 35
Ramblewood Lane — 25
Robinwood Drive — 25
Rockcress Drive — 25
Rosewood Lane — 25
§ 177-10 TOWING § 177-10
174:593
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
Ross Lane — 25
Rushland Road — 50
Russett Drive — 25
Sand Trap Road — 25
Schoolhouse Lane — 25
Scott Place — 25
Sterling Street — 25
Stony Road — 35
Stout Drive — 35
Stover Street — 25
Sturbridge Drive — 25
Sugarbottom Road From York Road (SR 263)
to Buckingham Township
line
35
Sugarbottom Road From York Road (SR 263)
to Doylestown Township
line
40
Sunrise Way — 25
Sweetbriar Drive — 25
Sycamore Drive — 35
Ticonderoga Drive — 25
Tulip Road — 25
Turkeytrot Road — 35
Valley Road From Almshouse Road to
0.1 mile west of Woodland
Avenue
35
Valley Road From 0.1 mile west of
Woodland Avenue to York
Road (SR 263)
25
Valley View Drive — 25
Virginia Lane — 25
Wakefield Road — 25
Walton Road — 25
Watson Road — 25
Wayne Drive — 25
West Fernbrook Drive — 25
West Hill Lane — 25
§ 177-10 WARWICK CODE § 177-10
174:594
§ 177-11. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 177-12. Traffic signals at certain locations.
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
West Rockspray Road — 25
Wilkinson Road — 25
Willow Avenue — 25
Wimbledon Drive — 25
Windsor Drive — 25
Woodfield Drive — 25
York Rd (SR 263) — 55
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine equal to that allowed by the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (1977).
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township
of Warwick, except in the following locations, where the following shall
apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(No exceptions)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine equal to that permitted by the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101
et seq.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Almshouse Road and Land Road —
Bristol Road and Mearns Road —
Bristol Road and Valley View Drive —
York Road and Almshouse Road —
York Road and Bristol Road —
York Road and Meyer Way —
York Road and Mill Road —
York Road and Ridge Drive —
§ 177-10 TOWING § 177-12
174:595
§ 177-13. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 177-14. One-way streets established.
§ 177-15. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine equal to that
permitted by the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine equal to that permitted by
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not To
Make
Turn Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 177-12 WARWICK CODE § 177-16
174:596
§ 177-16. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
§ 177-17. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 177-18. No-passing zones established.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turn and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling
On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not To Make Left
Turns Into or
Travel Straight
Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion
Direction of
Travel
Meyer Way Between York Road and Stony
Road
West
York Road At Meyer Way North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Almshouse Road — Guinea Lane to Township
border
Almshouse Road — Meetinghouse Road to
Township border
Bristol Road — Brennan Drive to Old York
Road
Bristol Road — Laurel Drive to Brookdale
§ 177-16 TOWING § 177-18
174:597
§ 177-19. Through highways established.
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Bristol Road — Log College Drive to west of
Meetinghouse Road
Bristol Road — Stony Road to Woodrose
Manor Drive
Bristol Road — West of Shadow Creek Drive
to Township border
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,169 as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway
until he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the
law:
Highway Between
Almshouse Road —
Bristol Road —
Brook Lane —
Dark Hollow Road —
Dogwood Drive East —
East Rockspray Road —
Eddowes Road —
Fairmount Drive —
Foxwood Drive —
Guinea Lane —
Julian Drive East —
Julian Drive West —
Land Road —
Mearns Road —
Meetinghouse Road —
169. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) and (c).
§ 177-18 WARWICK CODE § 177-19
174:598
§ 177-20. Stop intersections established. [Amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-2]
Highway Between
Meyer Way —
Mill Road —
Old York Road —
Rushland Road —
School Road —
Stony Road, except for its
intersection with Turkeytrot Road
[Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-5]
—
Stover Street —
Sugarbottom Road —
Sunrise Way —
Tulip Road —
Turkeytrot Road, except for its
intersection with Stony Road
[Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-5]
—
Valley Road —
Valley View Drive —
Warwick Road —
West Rocspray Road —
Wimbledon Drive —
Woodfield Drive —
York Road —
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 177-19) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code170 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
§ 177-19 TOWING § 177-20
174:599
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Adams Way at School Road
Adams Way at Tripp Avenue
Alex Lane at Tulip Road
April Drive at April Drive
Arrowood Circle at Dogwood Drive
Ashton Drive at Guinea Lane
Bayberry Drive at Dogwood Drive
Bedford Circle at Lafayette Drive
Black Birch Lane at Mountain Laurel Drive
Breton Hills Drive at Bristol Road
Briarwood Circle at Sunrise Way
Brook Lane at Brook Lane
Brook Lane at Turkeytrot Road
Camars Drive at Mearns Road
Campus Drive at Campus Drive
Campus Drive at Mearns Road
Candytuft Drive at West Rockspray Road
Carley Court at Devin Lane
Carmel Drive at Guinea Lane
Cedar Drive at Cedar Drive
Cedar Drive at Guinea Lane
Chelsea Drive at Valley View
Clearview Drive at Meetinghouse Road (three-way stop)
Cold Brook Lane at Sunrise Way
Colony Road at Almshouse Road
Conway Court at Tulip Road
Creek Road at Mearns Road
Creek Road at Old York Road
Creekview Lane at School Road
Crocker Lane at Brook Lane
Dark Hollow Road at Almshouse Road
Deepwell Circle at Brook Lane
Dogwood Drive at Meetinghouse Road
170. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 177-20 WARWICK CODE § 177-20
174:600
Dogwood Drive at West Rockspray Road
Eagle Court at York Road
East Fernbrook Drive at Long Pond Drive
East Rockspray Road at Meetinghouse Road
Eddowes Road at Meetinghouse Road
Eddowes Road at Old York Road
Elderberry Lane at Mountain Laurel Drive
Fairmount Drive at Woodfield Drive
Fairway Drive at York Road
Fallow Hill Lane at Mill Road
Farmdale Road at Brook Lane
Farmdale Road at Sunrise Way
Forestdale Circle at Brook Lane
Foxglove Drive at Meetinghouse Road
Foxwood Drive at Turkeytrot Road
Gabriel Lane at Gabriel Lane
Gabriel Lane at Tulip Road
Golden Rod Court at Dogwood Drive
Graeme Way at Bristol Road
Grakelow Drive at Almshouse Road
Greenleaf Drive at Long Pond Drive
Greentree Circle at Sunrise Way
Hallowell Street at Old York Road
Hamilton Way at Tulip Road
Hampton Drive at Meyer Way
Harmony Lane at Almshouse Road
Harrison Lane at Nathaniel Trail
Harrison Lane at Tulip Road
Hart Lane at Old York Road
Hedgewood Drive at Valley View
Heritage Drive at Meyer Way
Hill Road at Rushland Road
Hillside Avenue at Sugarbottom Road
Honeysuckle Circle at West Rockspray Road
Huckleberry Way at West Rockspray Road
Iris Court at Dogwood Drive
Ironwood Drive at East Rockspray Road
§ 177-20 TOWING § 177-20
174:601
Jamison Street at Stover Street
Jamison Street at York Road
Juniper Circle at Brook Lane
Katydid Court at Guinea Lane
Knox Court at Tulip Road
Land Road at Turkeytrot Road
Laurens Lane at Tulip Road
Lee Drive at Valley Road
Lilac Lane at Dogwood Drive
Long Lane at Almshouse Road
Long Pond Drive at Bristol Road
Magnolia Way at West Rockspray Road
Manor Drive at York Road
Maxwell Manor Drive at Tulip Road
Meadowview Drive at Almshouse Road
Meetinghouse Road at Bristol Road
Meetinghouse Road at Clearview Drive (three-way stop)
Meetinghouse Road at Old York Road
Meyer Way at Meetinghouse Road
Moland Park Drive at Moland Park Drive
Moland Park Drive at York Road
Monticello Drive at Guinea Lane
Mountain Laurel Drive at Mountain Laurel Drive
Mountain Laurel Drive at Sugarbottom Road
Mulberry Lane at Guinea Lane
Nathaniel Trail at Harrison Lane
Nathaniel Trail at Tulip Road
North Daisey Drive at East Rockspray Road
Oakmont Court at Sunrise Way
Old York Road at Bristol Road
Oleander Circle at East Rockspray Road
Park Drive at York Road
Pennsbury Drive at Almshouse Road
Pheasant Run Circle at Sunrise Way
Phlox Court at Dogwood Drive
Primrose Court at East Rockspray Road
Ramblewood Lane at Brook Lane
§ 177-20 WARWICK CODE § 177-20
174:602
Redbud Lane at Mountain Laurel Drive
Ridge Drive at Mill Road
Ridge Drive Entrance at Ridge Drive
River Willow Drive at Mountain Laurel Drive
Robinwood Drive at Mulberry Lane
Rockcress Drive at Stony Road
Rosewood Lane at Long Pond Drive
Saint Andrews Court at Sunrise Way
Sandtrap Road at Almshouse Road
Sawgrass Drive at Deer Run Drive
School Road at Mill Road
School Road at York Road
Schoolhouse Lane at Meetinghouse Road (three-way stop)
Scott Place at Tulip Road
South Daisey Drive at East Rockspray Road
Snowdrop Circle at West Rockspray Road
Spearmint Circle at West Rockspray Road
Spruce Court at West Rockspray Road
Sterling Street at Tulip Road
Stony Road at Bristol Road
Stony Road at Meyer Way
Stony Road at Turkeytrot Road (four-way stop)
Stover Street at Bristol Road
Sugar Maple Lane at Mountain Laurel Drive
Sunflower Circle at Land Road
Sunflower Circle at Sunrise Way
Sunrise Way at Almshouse Road
Sunrise Way at Brook Lane
Sunrise Way at Sunrise Way
Sweetbriar Drive at Stony Road
Sycamore Drive at Mearns Road
Technical Drive at Campus Drive
Technical Drive at Stout Drive
Thyme Court at East Rockspray Road
Ticonderoga Drive at Meyer Way
Tripp Avenue at School Road
Turkeytrot Road at Guinea Lane
§ 177-20 TOWING § 177-20
174:603
§ 177-21. Yield intersections established.
Turkeytrot Road at Stony Road (four-way stop intersection)
Valley Road at Almshouse Road
Valley View at Long Pond Drive
Violet Court at Foxglove Drive
Walton Road at Almshouse Road
Watson Road at Rushland Road
Wayne Drive at Almshouse Road
West Hill Lane at Foxwood Drive
West Rockspray Road at Meetinghouse Road
White Cedar Lane at Sugar Maple Lane
Willow Avenue at Sugarbottom Road
Wimbledon Drive at Bristol Road
Wimbledon Drive at Tulip Road
Wintergreen Lane at West Rockspray Road
Woodrose Manor Court at Woodrose Manor Drive
Woodrose Manor Drive at Bristol Road
Wilkinson Road at Walton Road
Wynne Way at Guinea Lane
Wynne Way at Warwick Road
Wynne Way at Wynne Way
Yorktown Road at Meyer Way
Zachary Lane at Devin Lane
Zachary Lane at Rushland Road
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 177-19) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code. 171
171. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 177-20 WARWICK CODE § 177-21
174:604
§ 177-22. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs.
A. Except on established cartways and parking areas, no motor vehicle,
including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike, shall be operated on
any property owned by the Township of Warwick without the permission
of the property owner and a permit from the Chief of Police of the
Township of Warwick.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 plus costs of prosecution
and restoration.
§ 177-21 TOWING § 177-22
174:605

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 177-23. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 177-24. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
A. On the following bridges and streets, or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 172 it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(tons)
Creek Road Bridge — 12
Mill Road Bridge — 6
School Road Bridge — 16 - 29 combination
Valley Road Bridge — 5
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for
each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs. 173
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets,
provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street:
Street Between
Creek Road From Old York Road to Mearns Road
Fairway Drive —
Guinea Lane —
Jamison Street From Stover Street to York Road
Meetinghouse Road From Bristol Road to Almshouse Road
172. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
173. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1).
§ 177-23 TOWING § 177-24
174:607
Street Between
Old York Road From Bristol Road to Meetinghouse
Road
Sand Trap Road —
Stony Road From Bristol Road to Turkeytrot Road
Turkeytrot Road From Stony to Meetinghouse Road
Valley Road —
Watson Road —
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 plus costs.
§ 177-24 WARWICK CODE § 177-24
174:608
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 177-25. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 177-26. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Alexander Court
Alley — From Andover Place to Clover
Place
Alley — From Browning Place to Princeton
Place (both directions)
Alley — From Gates Place to Bancroft
Place
Andover Place — From dumpster at 893 to
dumpster at 892
Bancroft Place
eastbound
— From 945 to 951 from dumpster
at 955
Bancroft Place
eastbound
— From 977 east/west
Bancroft Place
eastbound
— From dumpster at 998 to
dumpster at 999
B.C.C.C. Estates
Development
— —
Beechwood Drive — From dumpster at 1002 to
dumpster at 1001
Birch Valley Court
Blossom Court — From 1312 to court
Blossom Court
southbound
— From Marielle Drive to the cul-desac
Brook Lane — From 1389 to Forestdale Circle
Browning Place — From dumpster in front of 993 to
dumpster in front of 994
Browning Place at
Stover Street -
dumpster Tarleton
Place
— From dumpster at 1473 to
dumpster at 1474
§ 177-25 TOWING § 177-26
174:609
Street Side Between
Browning Place at
Stover Street -
dumpster Tarleton
Place
— From dumpster at 1515 to
dumpster at 1516
Browning Place at
Stover Street -
dumpster Tarleton
Place
— From dumpster at 1537 to
dumpster at 1538
Browning Place at
Stover Street -
dumpster Tarleton
Place
— From Russett Drive to 1554
southbound
Carrington Court
Cedar Drive — From 2012 to 2014
Cedar Drive — From 2016 to Apple Court
Cedar Drive — From Apple Court to 2020 Cedar
Drive
Cedar Drive — From Guinea Lane to Windsor
Drive
Cedar Drive eastbound — From Guinea Lane to Cedar Drive
Clover Place — From 913 to Stover Street
Clover Place — From 914 to Stover Street
Clover Place — From dumpster 892 to dumpster
891
Countryside Court
Creekview Lane — From School Road to School Road
Crossroads Drive — From Red Maple Court to Tulip
Road
Crossroads Drive
southbound
— From Red Maple Court to Red
Maple Court
Dark Hollow Road — From Bridge Colony Road to dead
end
Dogwood Drive — From 1397 to Meetinghouse Road
Eagle Court — From 216 to 433
Eagle Court — From 546 to 104
Fallow Hill Lane — From Deer Run Drive to Mill Road
Foxwood Drive — —
Gates Place — From dumpster at 997 to
dumpster at 998
§ 177-26 WARWICK CODE § 177-26
174:610
Street Side Between
Guinea Lane
northbound
— From Turkeytrot Road to
Monticello Drive
Guinea Lane
southbound
— From 2000 block to Warwick Road
Hayhaven Drive — —
Hidden Pond
Development
— —
Holly Hill Road — From Wimbledon to court
Front of Jamison
Elementary School -
Fire zone
Julian Drive East — North bound from Tulip Road to
Tulip Road
Julian Drive West — From Tulip Road to Middlebury
Drive
Kathleen Court — From Ridge Drive to court
Margaret Court — From Ridge Drive to court
Marielle Drive — From 1424 to 1426
Marielle Drive — From Blossom Court to 1416
Marielle Drive
Marielle Drive
northbound
— From Blossom Court to Cedar
Drive
1800 Mearns Road — —
Meetinghouse Road — From 2467 to 2495
Meetinghouse Road — From Almshouse Road to Fox
Glove Lane
Middlebury Drive
westbound
— From Wimbledon to the cul-de-sac
Mill Road — From York Road to 2nd entrance
square
Oaktree Court
Princeton Place — From dumpster in front of 993 to
dumpster in front of 994
Railroad Drive — —
Red Maple Court — From Crossroads Drive to
Crossroads Drive
Ridge Drive — From Margaret Court to Kathleen
Court
Robinwood
Development
— —
§ 177-26 TOWING § 177-26
174:611
Street Side Between
Rockcress Drive — From 1604 Rockcress Drive to
1602 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1644 Rockcress Drive to
1614 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1659 Rockcress Drive to
1657 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1664 Rockcress Drive to
1662 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1692 Rockcress Drive to
1690 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1714 Rockcress Drive to
1712 Rockcress Drive
Rockcress Drive — From 1719 Rockcress Drive to
Stony Road
Rockcress Drive — Stony Road to 1605 Rockcress
Drive
Rolling Green Court
Russett Drive — From 1502 Russett Drive to York
Road westbound
Russett Drive — From dumpster at 1519 to
dumpster at 1520 Russet Drive
Russett Drive — From dumpster at 1542 to
dumpster at 1541 Russet Drive
Shannon Court — From Wimbledon to court
Silver Oak Court
Sovereign Estates
Development
— —
Stout Drive — —
Stover Street — From south of Andover Drive to
Browning Drive southbound
Stover Street — From Brighton Place to Bristol
Road
Stover Street — From dumpster at Brighton Place
southbound
Stover Street — From Russett Drive to Andover
Place
Stover Street [Added
6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-1]
East From Tarleton Place to
Beechwood Place
Stover Street — Dumpster at Williams Place
§ 177-26 WARWICK CODE § 177-26
174:612
Street Side Between
Strawberry Court
Summerhill Court
Sunrise Way
southbound
— From Almshouse Road to Brook
Lane
Sweetbriar Drive — From 1539 Sweetbriar Drive to
1401 Sweetbriar Drive
Treetop Circle
Tulip Road — From Crossroads Drive to Bristol
Road
Valley Road — From 2619 Valley Road to York
Road (SR 263)
Virginia Lane West From Deer Run Drive to Fallow
Hill Lane
Warwick Square, front
access throughway
— Entire length
Warwick Square, rear
access road
— Entire length
Warwick Woods — —
White Pine Court
Willow Oak Court
Wimbledon Drive
northbound
— From Bristol Road to Tulip Road
Windsor Drive
eastbound
— From Cedar Drive to West
Fernbrook Drive
Woodrose Manor — —
§ 177-27. Parking prohibited in certain locations and certain days
and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 177-28. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations. [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-8]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked, on
any Township roadway, any of the following:
§ 177-26 TOWING § 177-28
174:613
§ 177-29. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 177-30. Special-purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special-purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or Vehicle
(Reserved)
A. Trucks or truck tractors, trailers or combinations thereof with a
registered gross weight or a combination registered gross weight in
excess of 9,000 pounds.
B. Motor homes and motor buses.
C. Unconnected trailers and all other detachable equipment or
accessories.
§ 177-28 WARWICK CODE § 177-30
174:614
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 177-31. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code,
174 and gives authority to the Township of Warwick to remove and impound
those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of
parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned
(as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as
to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 177-32. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township of Warwick shall have authority to remove and impound,
or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime
or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 177-31 of this article, provided, no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 177-33. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Warwick Township parking
regulations.
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 177-34. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
Township Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to Township Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to Township Board of Supervisors
as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit
to Township Board of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and
storage of vehicles under this article, and, when the schedule is approved
by Township Board of Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by
the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
174. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 177-31 TOWING § 177-34
174:615
impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. Township
Board of Supervisors shall delete from its list of approved storage garages
any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 177-35. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 177-36. Reclamation cost.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 177-37. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
Warwick Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 177-38. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article of the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 177-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 177-40. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code,175 by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
175. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
§ 177-34 WARWICK CODE § 177-40
174:616
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as
amended).
§ 177-40 TOWING § 177-40
174:617

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 177-41. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 177-43 of this
article, the Chief of Police, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency shall be given by Warwick Township
through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 177-42. Parking prohibited and driving of motor vehicles
restricted on snow emergency routes during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 177-43. Snow emergency routes designated. [Amended 7-7-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-5]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
Guinea Lane Bristol Road and Almshouse Road
Land Road Almshouse Road and Turkeytrot Road
Meyer Way Land Road and York Road
Stony Road Meyer Way and Bristol Road
Tulip Road York Road and Bristol Road
Turkeytrot Road Meetinghouse Road and Guinea Lane
Valley Road York Road and Almshouse Road
§ 177-44. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 177-43 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 177-41 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 plus
costs.
§ 177-41 TOWING § 177-44
174:619
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 177-41 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 plus costs.
§ 177-44 WARWICK CODE § 177-44
174:620
Chapter 183
WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 187
WATER CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and Sewer Resource Panel — See Ch.
29.
Building construction — See Ch. 53.
Plumbing — See Ch. 141.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 167.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 183.
§ 187-1. Short title; applicability.
§ 187-2. Use of water provided by Authority; applicability.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way, and for which a construction permit is required
to be obtained from Warwick Township (or would be required but for an
exemption from a permit requirement for public or governmental agencies)
unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water
using fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of § 187-5
of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any such
building or structure for which such a building permit is issued, or would
otherwise be required to be issued but for exemption, on or after the date
adopted.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Warwick Township Water
Conservation Ordinance."
B. This chapter of the Code of the Township of Warwick applies to all water
facilities under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors, as defined
in Chapter 183, Water and Sewers, and private water companies
permitted by the Board or any other governmental agency to provide
services within Warwick Township. The Authority, as the Board's
designee for constructing and or otherwise devising and/or sanctioning
all such systems within the Township, shall be responsible for its
implementation.
§ 177-44 WATER AND SEWERS § 187-3
183:621
§ 187-3. Waste of water.
Customers shall be encouraged not to permit any water furnished by the
Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority to run to waste in any gutter
or other impervious surface.
§ 187-4. Water-conserving fixtures.
Each resident or property owner of Warwick Township is urged to install
fixtures which will reduce the quantity of water required to flush toilets and
which will reduce the flow rates of showers and faucets.
§ 187-5. Plumbing specifications.
A. Water meters.
(1) Water and/or sewer customers of the Warwick Township Water and
Sewer Authority shall have their water supply metered at the
source before any connection for internal or external use.
(2) Meters shall be of a type and manufacture approved by the
Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority and shall include a
remote digital read out.
(3) The initial installation and cost of the meter shall be at the
customer's expense. The meter shall become the property of the
Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority who will be
responsible for any testing and maintenance.
B. Water closets operated by flush tanks. The water consumption of water
closets operated by flush tanks shall not exceed an average of 1.6
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
pounds per square inch gauge.176 The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in ANSI/ASME
A122.19.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixture Standard.
C. Water closets and urinals operated by flush valves.
(1) Water closet water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.6
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig.177 The flush valve shall be adjusted according to the
manufacturer's specifications. The fixtures shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in the ANSI/
ASME A122.19.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixture Standard. This
restriction shall not apply to blowout type water closets.
(2) Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.5
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
176. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
177. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
§ 187-3 WARWICK CODE § 187-5
187:622
psig.178 The flush valve shall be adjusted according to the
manufacturer's specifications. The fixtures shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in the ANSI/
ASME A122.19.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures Standard. This
restriction shall not apply to blowout type urinals.
D. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 2.75
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig.179 The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements cited in the ANSI/ASME A112.18.1 Finished and Rough
Brass Plumbing Fixtures Standard. This restriction shall not apply to
safety or deluge showers.
E. Sink faucets.
(1) Kitchen sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 2.75 gallons of
water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig.180 The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements cited in the ANSI/ASME A112.18.1 Finished and
Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings Standard.
(2) Residential lavatory sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed
2.75 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 psig.181 The fixture shall perform in accordance with
the test requirements cited in the ANSI/ASME A112.18.1 Finished
and Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings Standard.
(3) Nonresidential lavatory faucets shall be either self-closing or
metering faucets as described below:
(a) Self-closing faucets shall not exceed an average discharge rate
of 0.5 gallons of water per minute between the pressure of 20
to 30 psig182 when tested in accordance with the discharge test
procedure cited in ANSI/ASME A112.18.1 Finished and Rough
Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings Standard.
(b) Metering faucets shall be field adjustable and set so that the
discharge quantity shall not exceed 0.5 gallons of water per
cycle.183
178. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
179. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
180. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
181. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
182. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
183. Editor's Note: Current maximum water consumption figures are on file and available for
inspection in the Township Office.
§ 187-5 WATER CONSERVATION § 187-5
187:623
§ 187-6. Exceptions.
Any person(s) may apply to Warwick Township for an exception to the terms
of this chapter, which may be granted by the Board of Supervisors upon
proof that some other device, system or procedure will save as much or
more water as those set forth herein or that those set forth herein cannot
be complied with without undue hardship.
§ 187-7. Water Resources Management Plan.
F. Pressure-reducing valves. Where the service water pressure to a
building is expected to exceed 60 psig, a water pressure reducing valve
with strainer shall be installed just downstream of the building's main
valve, so as to be accessible. The valve shall provide for pressure
adjustment with the range of 50 to 60 psig. The valve shall conform to
the requirements of product standard ASSE 1003 Performance
Requirements for Water Pressure Reducing Valves. Exemptions to this
subsection are service lines to sill cocks, outside hydrants, and main
supply risers to buildings where pressure from mains does not exceed
60 psig at the fixture branches or at individual fixtures.
A. All water facilities under the jurisdiction of the Warwick Township
Board of Supervisors shall have a Water Resources Management Plan.
Such plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Warwick
Township Water and Sewer Authority as the Board's designee. The
same plan as may be required by the Bureau of Water Resources
Management, PADEP, shall be used to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter.
B. The Water Resources Management Plan shall include, but is not limited
to, the following:
(1) Leakage monitoring program. A program to monitor all water
supply facilities, including storage and distribution systems in each
service area, shall be developed and implemented.
(2) Water conservation program. A continuous program to encourage
water conservation in all types of use within the area served by the
water facility shall be developed and implemented. Such
conservation programs shall be based on the appropriate sections
of this chapter.
(3) Drought and other water supply emergency plan. In order to
conserve the supply of water in times of dry periods or other
interruptions of the water supply, a plan shall be developed for each
water facility for implementation by the Authority as the Board's
designee. Such emergency plans shall be based on this chapter and
shall identify the appropriate "Trigger Points" for each of three
stages of emergency as follows:
(a) Stage I: watch.
§ 187-5 WARWICK CODE § 187-7
187:624
§ 187-8. Amendments; adjustment of emergency stage trigger
points.
§ 187-9. Violations and penalties.
[1] This stage shall call for the voluntary restriction on
nonessential use of water such as odd/even lawn watering
schedules based on street address and limiting the
watering of gardens, trees and shrubs to after 8:00 p.m.
and before 7:00 a.m. The Authority shall make available
water saving kits and appropriate literature, including lists
identifying plumbing fixtures that have been designed for
water conservation.
[2] Fire hydrant testing and waterline flushing will be
deferred except as necessary for public health and safety.
(b) Stage II: warning. This stage shall implement mandatory
restrictions on the nonessential use of water so that it will be
prohibited to water lawns, wash cars (except for commercial
establishments that recycle water), streets, driveways,
walkways or other outside usages, except that watering
gardens, trees and shrubs after 8:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m.
will be permitted.
(c) Stage III: emergency. This stage shall implement water
rationing so that the use of water shall be restricted solely to
domestic consumption for residential and commercial users.
No outside use of water shall be permitted.
(4) Implementation of the water supply emergency plan. To implement
any stage of a water supply emergency plan, the Authority as the
Board's designee shall cause notice of the fact to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall
identify the stage of emergency and the applicable water demand
reduction measures. Water use restriction may be applied to all or
part of a service area as may be necessary.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, modify, add to remove
or otherwise amend the standards and restrictions herein.
B. As actual operating experience with each water facility increases, it
may be necessary for the Authority to adjust the water emergency stage
trigger points required per § 187-7. Such adjustments shall be made by
revision to the applicable Water Resources Management Plan and are
not considered as an amendment to this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership, association, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before
a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $300, plus the cost of prosecution. In default of payment of
§ 187-7 WATER CONSERVATION § 187-9
187:625
Chapter 195
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
61.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Erosion control — See Ch. 77.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Impact disclosure statement — See Ch. 101.
Junkyards — See Ch. 103.
Noise — See Ch. 123.
Nuisances — See Ch. 127.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 167.
said fine, said person or principals of said partnership, association,
firm or corporation shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the
Bucks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues after written notification shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
B. In addition, the Authority, upon 10 days' written notice, may
discontinue service to the customer in violation.
§ 187-9 WARWICK CODE § 187-9
187:626
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 195-1. Intent.
This shall be a chapter regulating and restricting the height of buildings
and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size
of yards and other open spaces, the density of population and the location
and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or
other purposes; creating districts and boundaries thereof; defining certain
terms used herein; and providing for the administration, enforcement and
amendment of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,184 as amended.
§ 195-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Warwick Township
Zoning Ordinance of 2010, as amended."
§ 195-3. Purpose.
A. This chapter is enacted in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code185 for the following purposes:
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and
practical community development, proper density of population,
civil defense, disaster evacuation, airports and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection,
vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements,
historical resources, agricultural land, recreational facilities, water
supply, access to solar energy and the preservation of natural
environment; and
(2) To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation and loss
of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers;
and
(3) To implement the Warwick Township Comprehensive Plan.
B. This chapter is made in accordance with an overall program and with
consideration for the character of the municipality, its various parts and
the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-1 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-4
187:627
§ 195-4. Objectives.
It shall be and is hereby declared to be the objective of Warwick Township to
provide for the orderly development of the community through this chapter
as presently in effect or hereafter amended in order to carry into effect
the purposes, plans and guidelines as set forth in the Warwick Township
Comprehensive Plan, which plan is herein incorporated by reference.
§ 195-5. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
A. Whenever any regulations made under authority of this chapter require
a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or require
a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories, or require a
greater percentage of lot to be unoccupied, or impose other higher
standards than are required in or under any other statute, the
provisions of the regulations made under authority of this chapter shall
govern.
B. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or Township ordinance
require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or
require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose
other higher standards than are required by any regulations made
under authority of this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall
govern.
C. Whenever any regulations pertaining to a specific use or activity under
authority of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts
or other open spaces, or require a lower height of buildings or smaller
number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left
unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required for the
zoning district or generally required under this chapter, the greater or
higher standards shall govern.
D. This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except
those specifically or impliedly repealed by this chapter, or any private
restriction placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
agreement unless repugnant hereto.
E. Those provisions in Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development,
concerned with variant design standards shall not be considered to be
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, and both chapters shall be
construed, if possible, to give effect to all of their provisions. In the
event of a conflict, ambiguity or inconsistency between this chapter or
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 195-4 WARWICK CODE § 195-6
187:628
§ 195-6. Severability.
If any provision, sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter or the
application of any provision hereof is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Township that this chapter would have been enacted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, section
or part hereof not been included.
§ 195-7. Designation of districts; Zoning Map.
§ 195-8. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries of the district as
indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Warwick is hereby
divided into 15 districts and two overlay districts which shall be
designated as follows: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
RA Residential/Agricultural District
R1 Residential District
R1a Residential District
RR Restricted Residential District
RG Residential Golf District
R2 Residential/Older Persons District
MF-1 Multifamily Residential District
MF-2 Multifamily Residential District
C1 Local Commercial District
C2 Highway Commercial District
C3 Commercial/Multifamily District
VC Village Commercial District
VC 2 Village Center II District
LI Limited Industrial District
O Office/Nonmanufacturing District
H Historical District (overlay of other districts)
Floodplain District (overlay of other districts)
B. Districts are bounded and defined as shown in the map "Zoning Map of
Warwick Township," which accompanies and which, with all
explanatory matters thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.186
186. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-6 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-8
187:629
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries; or where district boundaries are extensions of lot lines or
connecting intersections of lot lines, such lines shall be said district
boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and that such distance
therefrom is indicated on the Zoning Map.
§ 195-8 WARWICK CODE § 195-8
187:630
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 195-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY —
AGRICULTURAL SOILS, PRIME — Land available for agricultural purposes
that contains soils with a land capability classification of Class 1 or Class 2
or listed as prime farmland in the Official Soil Survey provided by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web
Soil Survey (http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/). In addition, other lands
available for agricultural purposes identified in the Official Soil Survey with
a land capability classification of Class 3 or listed as farmland of statewide
importance in the Official Soil Survey are considered agricultural land for
the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specified.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement or diminution,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving
from one location or position to another.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities defined below.[Amended 2-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-3]
AREA —
A. ACCESSORY BUILDING — See definition of "building."
B. ACCESSORY USE — See definition of "use."
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the
individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan or required
by this chapter, excluding any area within an existing or designated
future street right-of-way, or any area required as open space under this
chapter, and including the area of any easements.
A.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of the
building or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or
required for the conduct of the business or use, and basements, attics,
and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It
does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not used for human
occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building or in the main
building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in
order to meet the parking requirements of this chapter, nor any such
B.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:631
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet. A basement shall be counted as a story for
the purposes of height measurement or the determination of square footage
or floor area.
BOARDER, ROOMER, or LODGER — A person occupying any room, or
group of rooms, forming a single, habitable unit used or intended to be
used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, and
paying compensation for lodging or board and lodging by prearrangement
for a week or more at a time to an owner or operator. Any person occupying
such room or rooms and paying such compensation with prearrangement
for less than a week at a time shall be classified for purposes of this chapter
not as a boarder, roomer, or lodger, but as a guest of a commercial lodging
establishment (motel, hotel, inn, guesthouse, tourist home).
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof of any construction supported by
columns, piers, walls or other supports, including but not limited to tents
and awnings, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars, mobile homes
or other structures on wheels having a fixed location.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by
building area.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The building envelope shall be defined by the
required setbacks. The building envelope shall not include the area of any
required setbacks (except for driveways which would cross yards), buffer
yards, natural features with one-hundred-percent protection standard and
the portion of those natural features that may not be developed or intruded
upon as specified in § 195-60, Natural resource protection standards.
BUILDING HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured from the average
grade level surrounding the building to the top of the highest point on
the building, including mechanical equipment, communication facilities and
HVAC or similar materials or structures placed or installed on the roof.
BUILDING LINE — A line across the front of a property if measured from
the location of the forwardmost point of the primary structure on the
property.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum front yard, as
herein designated for each use and each district, measured at a distance
floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating
equipment.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building located on the same
lot as a principal building and clearly incidental and subordinate to
the principal building. Any portion of a principal building devoted,
or intended to be devoted, to an accessory use is not an accessory
building.
A.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or intended
to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
B.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:632
equal to and no greater than the minimum front yard from the street line
or at the minimum lot width, whichever is greater. For exceptions, see "lane
lot" definition.187
BUILDING SPACING — The minimum distance between buildings. The
minimum building spacing shall be measured from the outermost wall or
projection, excluding bay windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental
features, cornices, and gutters. These exceptions may encroach no more
than two feet.
BUILD-TO LINE — A line which dictates the placement of a building or
structure from the street right-of-way line on which the building fronts. On
a corner lot, there shall be a build-to line on both sides of the lot which have
street frontage.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet. A cellar is not counted as a story for the
purposes of height measurement or the determination of square footage
or floor area unless the cellar is used for dwelling, office, or business
purposes.188
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or utility or light pole.[Added 2-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-3]
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners. A condominium is a unit with all of the following
characteristics:
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwelling units per unit of area.
Density shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
The unit may be any permitted land use. A condominium is an
ownership arrangement, not a land use.
A.
All, or a portion of, the exterior open space and any community interior
spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., and in
accordance with the provisions for open space, roads, or other
development features in this chapter and Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development.
B.
187. Editor's Note: This definition can be found within the definition for “lot.”
188. Editor's Note: The former definition of "cellular telecommunications facility," which
immediately followed, was repealed 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:633
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 2-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-3]
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms or a single room, occupied or
intended for occupancy as a single habitable unit by a family or other group
of persons living together or by a person living alone.
EMERGENCY — A condition that constitutes a clear and immediate danger
to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or has caused or is likely to
cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss of the
services provided.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
EMPLOYEE — A person who is employed or is engaged in gainful activity.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall refer to the maximum
number of employees on duty at any time at a place of business, whether
the employees are full- or part-time. If shifts are involved in which two shifts
overlap, it refers to the total of both shifts.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-3]
FLOODLIGHT (SPOT LIGHT) — Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a
reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam
in a particular direction.
FLOODPLAIN — See the definition of "identified floodplain
area."[Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding or listed in the
Official Soil Survey provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resource Conservation Service, Web Soil Survey
http://websoilsruvey.nrcs.usda.gov/ as having a flood frequency other than
none. The following floodplain soil types include, but are not limited to,
the following: alluvial land; marsh; Alton gravelly loam, flooded; Pope loam;
Bowmansville silt loam; Rowland silt loam; Hatboro silt loam.
FLOOR AREA — See definition of "area."
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the floor area to the lot area, as
determined by dividing the floor area by the lot area.
FLOODWAY — That portion of the floodplain, including the watercourse
channel and adjacent land areas, which must be reserved to carry
the one-hundred-year-recurrence-interval flood without cumulatively
increasing that flood elevation more than one foot.
A.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain which is outside the
floodway.
B.
APPROXIMATE ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FLOOD BOUNDARY — That
portion of the floodplain as identified in the Flood Insurance Study for
which no detailed flood profiles or one-hundred-year-flood elevations
have been provided.
C.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:634
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illuminance. One footcandle is one lumen per
square foot (lm/ft2).
FOREST — An area comprised of largely mature trees in which the largest
trees measure at least six inches dbh (diameter at breast height or 4 1/2
feet above the ground). The forest shall be measured from the dripline of
the outer trees. Forests are also 10 or more individual trees which measure
at least 10 inches dbh and form a contiguous canopy. Note that a forest is
defined in a manner which is identical to a woodland. For the purpose of
this chapter the two terms shall be interchangeable.
FORESTRY — The managing and using for human benefit forestlands and
natural resources that occur on and in association with forestlands. It
includes, but is not limited to, the planting, cultivating, harvesting,
transporting, and selling of trees for commercial purposes.
DIAMETER-BREAST-HEIGHT) — T) — Four and one-half feet above
grade.
A.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the
ground.
B.
FOREST COVER — A category of forest defined by its species
composition and environmental factors.
C.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written description with a map of
a specific commercial forestry operation prepared before the operation
commences which meets the requirements of § 195-16A(5) of this
chapter and the provisions herein.
D.
FOREST PLAN PREPARER — A person who has a minimum of four
years' experience in the field of forestry, including the preparation of
forest management plans.
E.
FOREST TECHNICIAN — A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate
of a two-year forest technician program accredited by the Society of
American Foresters.
F.
FORESTER — A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate of a four-year
college or university forestry curriculum accredited by the Society of
American Foresters.
G.
COMMERCIAL FORESTRY — The management of forests and
timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural
principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting,
and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any
land development. Clear-cutting or selective cutting of forestlands for a
land use change are excluded from this definition.
H.
HAUL ROAD — A road used to move forest products from the log
landing to a public roadway.
I.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:635
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream identified on USGS mapping,
Natural Resources Conservation Service Maps, or as mapped by the
Township whose water flow normally occurs in the wetter parts of the
year (October through April) or following major storm events.
J.
LANDING — A place where logs are assembled for transportation in
loads.
K.
LOPPING — To cut tops and slash into small pieces to allow material to
settle close to the ground.
L.
OPERATOR — The individual, partnership, company, firm, association,
or corporation engaged in timber harvesting, including his agents, or
subcontractors, or employees.
M.
OWNER — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or
corporation that is in actual control of forestland, whether such control
is based on legal or equitable title, or on any other interest entitling the
holder to sell or otherwise dispose of any or all of the timber on such
land in any manner, and any agents thereof acting on its behalf, such as
forestry consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting.
N.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream whose water flow normally occurs
year-round and is identified on USGS mapping, Natural Resources
Conservation Service Maps, or as mapped by the Township.
O.
PERMIT — Written permission, warrant, or license granted by a
governmental authority.
P.
PRECOMMERCIAL TIMBER STAND IMPROVEMENT — A forest
practice, such as thinning or pruning, which results in better growth,
structure, species composition, or health for the residual stand but
which does not yield a net income to the landowner, usually because
any trees cut are of poor quality, too small, or otherwise of limited
marketability or value.
Q.
R. SKID ROAD — Main route for skidding logs from woods to the landing.
SKID TRAIL — A temporary trail used for skidding logs from the site of
felling to the skid road.
S.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground, by any means, from the
stump to the landing.
T.
SLASH — Debris left after logging, including logs, chunks, bark,
branches, stumps, and broken understory trees or brush.
U.
SNAGS — A standing dead tree without branches or the standing
portion of a broken-off tree. Snags may provide feeding and/or nesting
sites for wildlife.
V.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:636
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminances within the visual field that
is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to
cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance or visibility.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical
distance from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to
the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for gain customarily carried on in a
dwelling, or in a building or structure accessory to a dwelling, clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
HYDRIC SOIL — A soil that is saturated, flooded, or pounded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the
growth and regeneration of wetlands vegetation. Wetlands vegetation are
those plant species that have adapted to the saturated soils and periodic
inundations occurring in wetlands. Final determination of the presence and/
or extent of hydric soils rest with the Township based on soils information
provided by the applicant.
STAND — A grouping of trees of sufficiently uniform species
composition, age, and condition to be distinguished from surrounding
stands and managed as a single unit.
W.
STAND PRESCRIPTION — The type of forest management treatment,
if any, to be applied to a particular stand to achieve the stated
management objectives. The stand prescription should include, but not
be limited to, detailed instructions on how that treatment is to be
carried out on the ground, the desired residual stand, and details on
any other treatments to be applied.
X.
STAND REGENERATION TREATMENT — A selection, shelterwood,
seed tree, or clear-cut that is designed to replace the existing stand
with a new stand of young trees.
Y.
TIMBER HARVESTING or LOGGING — The process of cutting down
trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of
sale or commercial processing into wood products. Clear-cutting or
selective cutting of forestlands for a land use change are excluded from
this definition.
Z.
TOPS — The upper portion of a felled tree not merchantable because of
small size, taper, or defect.
AA.
WATERCOURSE — An intermittent or perennial stream of water, river,
canal, brook, creek, or swale identified on USGS (United States
Geodetic Survey) or NRCS (Natural Resources Conservation Service)
mapping, and/or delineated waters of the commonwealth.
BB.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — The native environment of an animal ideally
providing all elements for life and growth (food, water, cover, and
space).
CC.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:637
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — Any areas of Warwick Township,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
March 16, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the FIS and areas abutting streams and watercourses
where the base flood elevation has not been delineated by a FIS but is
inundated by the base flood.[Added 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces which do not absorb water.
All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas
in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be considered impervious
surfaces within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the
Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition
will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of use of a
piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces within the site (or lot) by the base site area (or lot area if
applicable).
LAKE AND POND SHORELINES — Areas around lakes and ponds measured
100 feet from the permanent pool elevation.
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water 1/10 acre or
larger which retain water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by
dams or result from excavation.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces light. A generic term
for a man-made source of light, i.e., a light bulb.
LIGHT — Radiant energy that is capable of exciting the retina and
producing a visual sensation. The visible portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum extends from about 380 nanometers to 770 nanometers.
LIGHT FIXTURE — The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can
include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or
pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor
or lens.
LOT — A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the site of
one or more buildings and any building accessory thereto or for any other
purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor including any
land within the right-of-way of a public street upon which said lot abuts,
even if the ownership to such right-of-way is in the owner of the lot. A lot
for the purpose of this chapter may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
A lot shall front on a public street.
A. LOT AREA — See definition of "area."
CORNER LOT — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street
or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at
the point beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the
B.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:638
LOT LINES — Any boundary line of a lot.
LUMEN — A standard unit of luminous flux. Photometrically, it is the
luminous flux emitted within a unit solid angle (one steradian) by a point
source having a uniform luminous intensity of one candela. One footcandle
is one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this chapter, the lumenoutput
values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp, as specified
by the manufacturer of the lamp.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more lamps
together with the fixture, other parts designed to control the light
distribution, and other mechanical and electrical components.
LUMINANCE — Physical and measurable quantity corresponding to the
brightness of a surface in a specific area from which light is emitted or
reflected (e.g., a lamp, luminaire, reflecting material).
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling unit intended for
permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly, contained in one unit,
or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
side lot lines with the street lines curves at the point beginning within
the lot or at the points intersect at an angle of less than 135°. A corner
lot shall be considered to be a lot having no rear yard but having two
front yards and two side yards.
LANE LOT — A lot which meets the criteria for an exception to the
minimum lot width requirements. See § 195-77, Minimum lot width;
lane lots.
C.
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
D.
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance from the street right-of-way line of
the lot to its opposite rear line, measured in the general direction of the
side lines of the lot.
E.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
specified distance of the required building setback line. In a case where
there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such
side lot line and the opposite rear lot line or street line.
F.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel or within 45° of being
parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line,
and except that in the case of a corner lot the owner shall have the
option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines
is to be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line farthest from any
street shall be considered a rear lot line.
A.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot
line.
B.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:639
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation. For the purposes of this chapter, any inhabited
mobile home shall be considered a detached dwelling unit and as such
shall be subject to all applicable regulations in this or other municipal
ordinances. As a structure, a mobile home shall be used only in
conformance with § 195-16 and Articles IV through XVIII.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances (accessory
attachments) necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home,
which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home
erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — See § 195-16.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit erected on a foundation and made of
one or more sections built in a factory. The completed unit shall meet the
building code in effect.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All nontower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Nontower WCF shall not
include support structures for antennas and related equipment.[Added
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
OPEN SPACE — Land which is used or reserved for recreation, agriculture,
resource protection, or amenity; it is freely accessible to all residents of
the community, except in the case of agricultural lands where access may
be restricted; and it is protected by the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, to ensure that it remains
in such uses. Open space does not include land occupied by nonrecreational
or nonagricultural buildings, roads, or road rights-of-way, stormwater
management facilities, nor does it include the yards or lots of dwelling units
or parking areas as required by the provisions of this chapter. Open space
for recreational uses may contain impervious surfaces (for recreational,
cultural, or agricultural purposes) and such surfaces shall be included in
the calculation of the impervious surface ratio. Refer to § 195-62, Open
space and recreation facilities, for definitions of common and active open
space and for limitations on the use of open space for buffer yards, utility
easements, community sewage systems and stormwater management
improvements.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of land use. It is arrived
at by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the base site
area.
PERSONS — Individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
companies, firms, partnerships, limited-liability companies, corporations
and other entities established pursuant to statutes of the Commonwealth
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:640
of Pennsylvania, provided that "person" does not include, or apply to, the
township or to any department or agency of the township.[Added
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
PRIME FARMLAND — Land available for agricultural purposes that
contains soils with a land capability classification of Class 1 or Class 2 or
listed as prime farmland in the Official Soils Survey provided by the U.S.
Department of Agricultural, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web
Soil Survey (http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/). In addition, other lands
available for agricultural purposes identified in the Official Soil Survey with
a land capability classification of Class 3 or listed as farmlands of statewide
importance in the Official Soil Survey are also considered prime farmland
for the purposes of this chapter.
PRINCIPAL —
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Zoning districts which primarily permit
residential and agricultural uses. Zoning districts meeting this definition as
of the effective date of this chapter are RA Residential Agricultural District,
R1 Residential-Agricultural Districts, R1a Residential-Agricultural District,
R2 Residential District, RR Residential-Agricultural District, RG Residential-
Agricultural, MF-1 Multifamily Residential District, and MF-2 Multifamily
Residential District.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land to be designated by law or on the public
record as occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk,
sanitary or storm sewer, stream, drainage ditch or for another special use.
SEWER —
A. PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See definition of "building."
B. PRINCIPAL USE — See definition of "use."
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate governing
body or agency, and currently in existence.
A.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area along the right-of-way of a public
street deemed necessary to provide adequate width for future street
improvements.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any municipal or privately owned sewer system in
which sewage is collected and piped to an approved sewage disposal
plant or central septic tank disposal system. It may also be referred to
as "off-lot" or "off-site" sewer. This shall include capped sewers when
installed to Township specifications.
A.
PRIVATE SEWER — An "on-lot" disposal system generally providing for
disposal of effluent for only one building or a group of buildings on a
single lot.
B.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:641
SIGN — See Article XXII.
SITE — A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings
or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within the site as defined in the deed. This
area shall be determined from actual site survey rather than from a deed
description.
SITE AREA, BASE — The area of the site remaining after subtracting land
which is not continuous, land previously subdivided, and road and utility
rights-of-way from the site area. See § 195-61 for the specific calculations.
SITE AREA, NET BUILDABLE — The area of the site which may be altered,
disturbed, or regraded for development purposes. The net buildable site
area could contain buildings, roads, parking areas, sewage systems, and
stormwater management facilities. The net buildable site area would not
contain required open space, recreation areas, and natural resource
protection areas. See § 195-61 for the specific calculations.
SITE CAPACITY — The maximum number of lots or dwelling units, the
maximum impervious surfaces, the net buildable site area, and the
minimum required open space as calculated under the provisions of
§ 195-61, Application of natural resource protection standards.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-3]
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which,
because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and,
therefore, erosion and flooding.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and
including those basements used for the principal use. A "half story" is a
space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of the roof and
wall face not more than three feet above the floor level, and in which space
the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least
40% of the total floor area of the story directly beneath.
STORY, GROUND — That story with its floor level immediately above the
average finished grade level of the adjoining ground at any particular point
or side of the building.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system for the treatment of
effluent from two or more homes that is applied to the land either on
the surface or below.
C.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:642
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, land, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private, and also
providing access to abutting properties.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the lot and the ultimate right-ofway
of the street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not permanently affixed to the
land.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — [Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3189]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 2-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-3]
TOWNSHIP — Warwick Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.[Added
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
TRASH TRANSFER STATION — A facility where municipal solid waste is
delivered for the purpose of separating, compacting or using some other
means to prepare the material into larger vehicles for transport to a final
disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer station may include the
separation and collection of material for the purpose for recycling.)
TREES, MATURE — Those which measure at least 10 inches dbh (diameter
at breast height or 4 1/2 feet above the ground).
USE — Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or
intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use,
and clearly incidental or subordinate to, and in connection with, the
principal use.
A.
189. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "tower or pole," which
immediately followed.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:643
UTILITIES — Those services customarily rendered by public utility
corporations, municipalities, or municipal authorities, in the nature of
electricity, gas, telephone, water, and sewerage, including the
appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of such services
(buildings, wires, pipes, poles, and the like).
WETLANDS — These areas of hydric soils supporting wetland vegetation
where the water table is at or near the surface or where shallow water
covers the site due to permanent or seasonal inundation of surface water or
groundwater, including swamps, marshes, bogs or other areas meeting the
wetland criteria established by the Department of Environmental Protection
or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.[Amended 3-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-1]
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer
limit of the wetland. For the purposes of this chapter, the wetlands margin
shall extend 100 feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit of the hydric
soils, whichever is less.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
or other township-owned land or property.[Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-3]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility, if approved by the township.[Added 2-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-3]
WOODLANDS — Areas comprised of largely mature trees in which the
largest trees measure at least six inches dbh (diameter at breast height or
4 1/2 feet above the ground). The woodlands shall be measured from the
dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also 10 or more individual trees
which measure at least 10 inches dbh and form a contiguous canopy.
YARD — An open space unobstructed from the ground up on the same
lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or street line and inward
to the nearest structure on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves,
gutters or cornices and chimneys which protrude less than two feet from the
B. USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot.
§ 195-9 WARWICK CODE § 195-9
187:644
foundation. The size of a required yard shall be measured as the shortest
distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner lot,
the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In the case of a lot
other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards
extending along all streets are front yards.
A.
YARD, REAR — A yard between a structure and rear lot line and
extending the entire length of the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear
yard shall be considered a side yard.
C.
§ 195-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-9
187:645

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 195-10. Applicability of regulations.
Except as provided by law or in this chapter, in each district no building,
structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted in § 195-16 and for the zoning districts so indicated in Articles IV
through XVIII. On any property, parcel, or tract of land, only one principal
use shall be permitted as provided by § 195-15, Table of Use Regulations.
§ 195-11. Uses by right; special exceptions; conditional uses; and
uses not permitted.
§ 195-12. Uses subject to other regulations.
Uses permitted by right, by conditional use, or by special exception shall
be subject, in addition to use regulations, to such regulations of yard, lot
size, lot width, building area, easements, provisions for off-street parking
and loading, buffer yards, and plantings and to such other provisions as
are specified in other articles hereof. In particular, the laws of the
commonwealth and the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the Bucks County Department of
A. A use listed in Articles IV through XVIII as a use permitted by right is
permitted subject to such requirements as may be specified in § 195-16
as well as other regulations set forth in this chapter and the Township
Code of Ordinances.
B. A use listed in Articles IV through XVIII may be permitted as a special
exception provided the Zoning Hearing Board authorizes the issuance
of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer, subject to the requirements of
§§ 195-16 and 195-118, other regulations set forth in this chapter and
the Township Code of Ordinances, and such further restriction as said
Board may establish.
C. A use listed in Articles IV through XVIII may be permitted as a
conditional use provided the Board of Supervisors, having received
positive recommendations from the Planning Commission, grants the
conditional use subject to the expressed standards set forth in
§§ 195-16 and 195-120, other regulations set forth in this chapter and
the Township Code of Ordinances, and such further conditions that the
Board of Supervisors may impose to ensure the protection of adjacent
uses, or the health, safety or general welfare.
D. A use not listed in Articles IV through XVIII as noted above is not
permitted in the specific zoning district. In the event a legal use of land
or structure is not listed as a use permitted by right, special exception
or conditional use in any zoning district in the Township, the
procedures of § 195-14 shall apply. It is the intent of this chapter to
provide for all legal uses.
§ 195-10 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-12
187:647
Health regarding water supply and waste disposal shall be adhered to.
Furthermore, no zoning permit shall be issued for any new construction,
new use, or change in use which would involve and increase sewage flows
unless approval is obtained from the PADEP and the Bucks County
Department of Health. Additionally, all new construction, new uses, or
changes of use which involve increased sewage flows shall comply with
Warwick Township's Act 537 Plan. No zoning permit shall be issued for
any new construction, new use, or change in use which would increase
stormwater volume, velocity, or points of discharge without compliance with
the stormwater management regulations of this code.
§ 195-13. Temporary accessory uses.
§ 195-14. Other uses.
Other uses, not specifically or adequately defined in § 195-16 of this chapter,
may evolve after the enactment of this chapter. From time to time, however,
such uses may become reasonable and appropriate uses, and it is the
purpose of this section to establish a mechanism for inclusion of such
additional uses in the Township.
A. No garage or other accessory building, partial structure, or temporary
structure shall be erected or moved onto a lot and used for any dwelling
purposes unless authorized by the issuance of a temporary zoning
permit. Such permit shall clearly set forth that the structure proposed
is intended for temporary dwelling purposes and that the authorized
structure is to be vacated upon the expiration of a specified time limit,
not to exceed one year. On receipt of the temporary zoning permit, the
applicant shall certify that he has knowledge of the terms of the permit
and the penalty that can be invoked for violation. Temporary accessory
uses shall comply with all requirements of § 195-16I(3).
B. Nonconforming temporary buildings or uses incidental to a building
development and reasonably required for such development may be
granted temporary zoning permits, according to § 195-16I(3).
A. The landowner, equitable or otherwise, shall submit his/her request for
inclusion of a specific use to the Zoning Officer with illustrations and
explanatory information which fully describe the use and the manner in
which the proposed use substantially differs from permitted uses in this
chapter.
B. The Zoning Officer shall review the submission and render a
determination as to whether or not the proposed dwelling type or use
falls within any of the permitted use classifications of this chapter, is a
variation of a permitted use, or is not permitted by ordinance.
C. Generally, it is the intent of this chapter that:
(1) Residential uses be located in the residential districts.
§ 195-12 WARWICK CODE § 195-14
187:648
§ 195-14.1. Deed restrictions incorporated.
Any deed restriction duly recorded by a note of restriction on a plan or deed
recorded at the office of the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, unless such
restriction is shown to be unconstitutional or otherwise legally invalid, shall
be given full effect as a part of this chapter.
§ 195-15. Table of Use Regulations.
The Table of Use Regulations is appended at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-16. General use regulations.
(2) Institutional, office, commercial, and consumer service uses be
located in the commercial or office zoning districts.
(3) Industrial uses be located in the LI Limited Industrial District.
(4) It is the intent of this chapter to provide for all legal uses.
D. Such uses shall be permitted in the districts noted above subject to
density, area, dimensional and other requirements of the district as
conditional uses under § 195-120 of this chapter.
E. Any uses not adequately defined shall be referred to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. Agricultural uses.
(1) A1 General Farming. The production of agricultural, horticultural,
arboricultural, viticultural and dairy products; the keeping of
livestock, poultry, fowl and the products thereof; the raising of furbearing
animals and the products thereof; the products of poultry
and bee raising. All buildings (barns, sheds, silos, etc.) associated
with this use.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres, provided that no more than two
heads of swine shall be located on any lot under 10 acres and
that animals of the equidae family shall be located on a
property at the ratio no greater than two animals to one acre of
land. [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12]
(b) Any building or structure used for the keeping or raising of
bees, livestock, horses, poultry or fowl shall be situated not
less than 100 feet from any street line or property line. Any
grazing for poultry shall be located not less than 100 feet from
any street line or property line.
(c) Silos shall be situated not less than 1.25 times the height of the
silo from any street line or property line.
(d) Any building or structure, other than noted in Subsection
A(1)(b) and (c) above, shall meet the lot width, yard and
§ 195-14 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:649
setback requirements for Use B1 Detached Dwelling for the
applicable zoning district.
(e) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 3%.
(f) Riding academies, livery or boarding stables and commercial
dog kennels are not included under this use.
(g) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use A2 Farm
Unit.
(h) Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A3 Agricultural
Retail.
(i) For the keeping of bees, shade and water shall be provided in
the immediate vicinity of the hives.
(2) A2 Farm Unit. Detached dwelling units for the sole use of the
property owner, immediate family members of the property owner
and persons engaged in agricultural employment on the property.
Immediate family members shall be limited to parents,
grandparents, siblings, sons and daughters.
(a) A farm unit is an accessory use which shall be clearly
subordinate to primary uses A1, A4, A6, A7, A8 and A9.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(b) Maximum density: 0.5 dwelling unit per acre.
(c) A farm unit shall meet the minimum yard and setback
requirements of Use B1 Detached Dwelling, from any street
line or property line and between other farm units on the
property.
(d) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(3) A3 Agricultural Retail. The retail sales of agricultural products at
roadside stands or other structures to the general public.
(a) Agricultural retail is an accessory use which shall be clearly
subordinate to primary uses A1, A4, A7, A8 and A9. [Amended
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(b) A minimum of 50% of the products sold must be grown,
produced or raised on the property; the remaining 50% of
products sold shall be raised, grown, or produced within the
local area.
(c) The maximum floor area shall be limited to 2,000 square feet
for agricultural retail uses related to agricultural uses A1, A4,
A6 and A7. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(d) Agricultural retail uses shall meet the yard and setback
requirements for the related primary agricultural use.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:650
(e) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(f) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 feet of sales
area, plus one space for each employee.
(4) A4 Intensive Agriculture. Greenhouses; mushroom houses;
feedlots; confinement livestock or poultry operations taking place
in structures or closed pens.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) Any building or structure used for the keeping or raising of
livestock, horses or poultry shall be situated not less than 100
feet from any street line or property line.
(c) Silos shall be situated not less than 1.25 times the height of the
silo from any street line or property line.
(d) Any building or structure, other than noted in Subsection
A(4)(b), (c) and (l), shall meet the lot width, yard and setback
requirements for Use B1 Detached Dwelling for the applicable
zoning district.
(e) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 35%.
(f) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use A2 Farm
Unit.
(g) Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A3 Agricultural
Retail.
(h) All applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be met.
(i) Feedlots, pens and confinement areas shall not be situated less
than 30 feet from any stream or swale and shall not be located
within any identified floodplain area. [Amended 3-16-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-5]
(j) The raising of garbage-fed animals is not permitted.
(k) Commercial dog kennels and the raising of animals for fur or
skins are not included in this use.
(l) No area for the storage or processing of manure, garbage, or
spent mushroom compost or structures for the cultivation of
mushrooms shall be situated less than 200 feet from any street
or property line.
(m) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 shall be met.
(n) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:651
(5) A5 Commercial Forestry. For the purpose of this chapter,
"commercial forestry" shall mean the removal of trees from a forest
or wooded area. Commercial forestry includes the selective cutting
of trees for sale as lumber, pulp, firewood, and the like; and the
removal of trees from a portion of a forest. In order to preserve
forests and the environmental and economic benefits they provide,
it is the policy of the Township of Warwick to encourage the owners
of forestland to continue to use their land for forestry purposes,
including the long-term production of timber, recreation, wildlife
and amenity values.
(a) A zoning permit shall be required for commercial forestry
activities. An individual property owner, however, need not
obtain a permit to cut a tree or trees as part of normal home
maintenance and upkeep. The following activities are
specifically exempt from the permitting requirements:
[1] Removal of diseased or dead trees.
[2] Removal of trees which are in such a condition or physical
position as to constitute a danger to the structures or
occupants of properties or a public right-of-way.
[3] Removal of up to five trees per acre of woodlands per year,
not to exceed a total of 10 trees per lot, or any combination
of adjoining lots in common ownership, which are 12
inches or more in diameter, measured at breast height
(dbh), and not covered by the exemptions in the foregoing
two subsections.
[4] Building permit; forest management plan.
[a] When a building permit is issued for a building,
structure or use, the permittee may cut down any
trees which exist in the space to be occupied by such
building, structure or use, or within 20 feet of such
building, structure or use, and all space within five
feet of all sides of any utility line, stormwater
conveyance or detention structure, driveway, parking
area, water system or sewage disposal system, or
permitted accessory uses, provided that no trees may
be removed in violation of § 195-19.1 (in this chapter)
or 195-60 of the existing Zoning Ordinance.
[b] Applications for all other commercial forestry
activities shall be accompanied by a forest
management plan prepared by a forester, forest
technician, or forest plan preparer. Every landowner
on whose land timber harvesting is to occur shall
prepare a written forest management plan in the form
specified by this chapter. No commercial forestry
activities shall occur until the plan has been prepared,
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:652
and reviewed and approved by the Township. The
Township shall have the authority to hire a qualified
forestry professional to review the plan and make
recommendations. The cost of said forestry
professional shall be paid by the applicant. Once
approved, the provisions of the plan shall be followed
throughout the commercial forestry operation. The
landowner and the operator shall be jointly and
severally responsible for complying with the terms of
the forest management plan. Each plan must contain
the following components:
[i] The criteria for selection of trees to be removed
will be clearly stated and will conform to a plan
for sustainable use of the forest resource. Such
plan will describe how the health, diversity, visual
block, and general wildlife habitat of the forest
will be protected and the potential for future
timber harvests maintained.
[ii] The forest management plan must provide for a
selective cut which will maintain the diversity of
species, age and height of the forest.
[iii] The forest management plan shall address all
applicable erosion and sedimentation control and
stream crossing regulations under Chapter 102,
Erosion Control Rules and Regulations, issued
under Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987 (Clean
Streams Law),190 and Chapter 105, Dam and
Waterway Management Rules and Regulations,
issued under Act of 1978, P.L. 1375, No. 325 (Dam
Safety and Encroachment Act).191
[iv] The forest management plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
[A] Design, construction, maintenance and
retirement of the access system, including
but not limited to haul roads, skid roads, skid
trails and landings.
[B] Design, construction and maintenance of
water control measures and structures such
as culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips and
water bars.
[C] Design, construction and maintenance of
stream and wetland crossings.
190. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
191. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:653
[D] Road use.
[E] Restoration and regrading of the degradated
areas of the tract on which the logging will
take place, including but not limited to haul
roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings.
[F] General location of the anticipated operation
in relation to municipal and state highways.
[G] Property boundary for the tract on which the
logging will take place and boundary of the
proposed harvest area.
[H] A stand description for each stand located in
the proposed harvest area.
[I] Reforestation.
[J] Copies of all required permits shall be
submitted as an appendix to the forest
management plan.
[v] The forest management plan shall include a site
map which contains the following information:
[A] Site location and boundaries, including both
the boundaries of the property on which the
timber harvest will take place and the
boundaries of the proposed harvest area(s)
and future harvest area(s) within the
property.
[B] Location of woodlands upon the property on
which the timber harvest will take place, and
a stand description for each stand of trees
located in the proposed harvest area.
[C] Significant topographic features related to
potential environmental problems.
[D] Location of all earth disturbance activities
such as roads, trails, landings, and water
control measures and structures.
[E] Location of all stream crossings.
[F] The general location of the proposed
operation to municipal and state highways,
including any accesses to those highways.
[vi] Proof of current general liability and/or workers'
compensation insurance.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:654
[vii] Proof of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) highway occupancy
permit or Township driveway permit for
temporary access, as applicable.
[viii] Copy of Bucks County Conservation District
"Letter of Adequacy" for the proposed erosion
control facilities, including associated plans,
reports, and other permits as required.
[ix] The forest management plan shall address and
comply with the requirements of all applicable
federal laws and regulations including, but not
limited to, the best management practices (BMPs)
as set forth at 33 CFR 323.4[a][6][i-xv].
(b) The following requirements shall apply to all commercial
forestry operations:
[1] The landowner shall notify the Township enforcement
officer at least 10 business days before any commercial
forestry operations commence and five business days prior
to completion of all work prescribed under the forest
management plan. No timber harvesting shall occur until
the notice has been provided. Notification shall be in
writing and shall specify the land on which harvesting will
occur, the expected size of the harvest area, and, as
applicable, the anticipated starting or completion date of
the operation.
[2] The forest management plan, site map, and all related
permits shall be available at the commercial forestry
operation site.
[3] Any official or employee of the Township, including but not
limited to a forestry consultant hired by the Township, may
go upon the site of any commercial forestry operation
before, during or after active logging to:
[a] Review the forest management plan or any other
required documents for compliance with this chapter;
and
[b] Inspect the operation for compliance with the forest
management plan and other on-site requirements of
this chapter.
[4] General operational requirements. The following
requirements shall govern all commercial forestry
operations:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:655
[a] A "no logging" buffer zone with a width of 50 feet shall
be maintained along any street abutting or running
through a property on which the commercial forestry
operation is to be conducted. The buffer shall be
measured from the edge of the ultimate right-of-way of
a public street and from the easement boundary of a
private street. No trees shall be cut, removed,
skidded, or transported in a "no logging" buffer zone
except as necessary for access to site from the street.
[b] A "no logging" buffer zone with a width of 50 feet shall
be maintained along all properties abutting a property
on which the commercial forestry operation is to be
conducted. The buffer shall be measured from the
property line. No trees shall be cut, removed, skidded,
or transported in a "no logging" buffer zone except as
necessary for access to site from a street.
[c] A "no logging" buffer zone with a width of 75 feet shall
be maintained along both sides of any watercourse
that abuts or runs through a property on which the
commercial forestry operation is to be conducted. The
buffer shall be measured from the high water mark of
the watercourse. No trees shall be cut, removed,
skidded, or transported in a "no logging" buffer zone.
[d] Felling or skidding on or across any public
thoroughfare is prohibited without the express written
consent of the Township or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, whichever is
responsible for maintenance of said thoroughfare.
[e] No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any
public roadway. All tops and slash between a distance
of 25 feet and 50 feet from a public thoroughfare shall
be lopped to a maximum height of six feet above the
surface of the ground.
[f] No tops or slash shall be left on or across a property
boundary without the consent of the adjoining
landowner.
[g] Litter (trash) resulting from any commercial forestry
operation shall be cleaned up and removed from the
site before it is vacated by the operator.
[h] Any soil, stones and/or debris carried onto public
roadways must be removed immediately.
[i] No aspect of commercial forestry activities shall be
permitted to occur within areas with slopes exceeding
25%.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:656
[j] All zoning permits for commercial forestry activities
shall require an erosion and sedimentation plan
meeting the current requirements of Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, and any
standalone stormwater management ordinances of the
Township.192
[k] Commercial forestry activities discharging to or
impacting any high-quality cold-water fishing and/or
EV-designated streams as classified by DEP shall
comply with all requirements of the Pennsylvania
Code, specifically Chapter 92193 which sets forth the
regulations for streams of exceptional value.
[l] The applicant shall, at least 14 days prior to
commencement of commercial forestry activities,
send notice by first class U.S. mail to all adjacent
property owners indicating the intent of the applicant.
[m] All commercial forestry activities, including any roads
associated with such activities, shall comply with best
management practices (BMPs) as set forth at 33 CFR
323.4[a][6][i-xv].
[n] The applicant for a commercial forestry zoning permit
shall post financial security in an amount determined
by the Township Engineer, sufficient to guarantee
compliance with the terms of the this chapter, the
forest management plan, and to repair any and all
damage to public streets caused by the commercial
forestry activities.
[o] When the harvest is completed, any and all dirt roads,
skid roads, skid trails, log landing areas, and/or log
loading areas must be regraded approximately to
original contours, and be seeded and mulched as
necessary to establish stable ground cover.
(c) All commercial forestry operations and forest management
plans shall comply with the requirements of all applicable state
laws and regulations including, but not limited to, the
following:
[1] Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained
in 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated
pursuant to the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et
seq.).
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Stormwater Management.
193. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:657
[2] Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105,
promulgated pursuant to the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.).
[3] Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S.
§ 680.1 et seq.).
(6) A6 Nursery. The outdoor raising of plants, shrubs and trees for sale
and transplantation. This use does not include the garden center
use which is regulated as commercial Use G32.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Any building or structure shall meet the yard, lot width and
setback requirements for the applicable zoning district for Use
B1 Detached Dwelling.
(c) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 3%.
(d) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use A2 Farm
Unit.
(e) Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A3 Agricultural
Retail.
(7) A7 Farm Support Facility. Commercial grain or commercial feed
mill. Facility for the warehousing, sale and service of agricultural
equipment, vehicles, feed or supplies.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 40%.
(c) The lot shall have frontage on and take access from an arterial
or a collector highway as designated in this chapter.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) No area for the storage or processing of manure, garbage or
spent mushroom compost or structures for the cultivation of
mushrooms shall be situated less than 200 feet from any street
or property line.
(f) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 500 square feet
of total floor area plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(g) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of the use A2 Farm
Unit. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:658
(h) Retail sales shall meet the requirements of the use A3
Agricultural Retail. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(8) A8 Kennel – Commercial. An establishment, structure, lot or
portion of a lot on or in which more than six domestic animals
including dogs and cats are housed, bred, boarded, trained or sold
or in which laboratory animals or animals for furs and skins are
raised.
(a) Shows and/or competitions which occur on a property not more
than twice in any calendar year are not regulated under this
use.
(b) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(c) No animal shelter or run shall be located closer than 200 feet
from any lot line.
(d) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 6%.
(e) Any building or structure, other than noted in Subsection
A(8)(c) above, shall meet the lot width, yard and setback
requirements for Use B1 Detached Dwelling for the applicable
zoning district.
(f) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use A2 Farm
Unit.
(g) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met. In addition to the foregoing, soundproofing materials shall
be used sufficient to meet the noise requirements of this
chapter along all property lines which abut an adjacent
residential use or residential zoning district.
(h) Retail sales of related items shall be limited to a maximum floor
area of 750 square feet.
(i) No area for the storage, processing or spraying of animal
waste shall be situated less than 200 feet from any street or
property line. Such storage or processing shall be approved by
the Bucks County Department of Health.
(j) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(k) The potential effect of noise shall be considered in the approval
of this use.
(l) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee plus
one space for each 200 square feet of sales area.
(9) A9 Riding Academy. An establishment where horses are boarded
and cared for and/or where instruction in riding, jumping and
showing is offered and/or the general public may, for a fee, hire
horses for riding.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:659
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Any building or structure used for the keeping or raising of
livestock or horses shall be situated not less than 100 feet from
any street line or property line.
(c) Silos shall be situated not less than 1.25 times the height of the
silo from any street line or property line.
(d) Any building or structure, other than noted in Subsection
A(9)(b) and (c) above, shall meet the lot width, yard and
setback requirements for Use B1 Detached Dwelling for the
applicable zoning district.
(e) Maximum impervious surface ratio: 3%.
(f) Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use A2 Farm
Unit.
(g) Retail sales of related items shall be limited to a maximum floor
area of 750 square feet.
(h) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(i) Parking: one off-street parking space for every three persons
present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity plus
one additional off-street parking space for each employee.
(10) A10 Kennel – Noncommercial. An establishment, structure or lot on
or in which dogs, cats or domestic pets are kept for private
purposes.
(a) No more than six such pets shall be kept under the permanent
care of the occupants.
(b) No animal shelter or runs shall be located closer to the
property or street line than the minimum yard requirements
specified for the principal use.
(c) A noncommercial kennel may be established only as an
accessory use.
(d) Except for the sale of young animals born to pets kept under
the permanent care of the occupants, no animals shall be sold
or offered for sale on the property.
(e) Minimum lot area: 1.5 acres.
B. Residential uses.
(1) Dwellings.
(a) B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A single-family detached
dwelling unit on an individual lot with private yards on all sides
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:660
of the house. Single-family detached dwellings may include
dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings,
manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings and mobile homes.
[1] If the dwelling is a mobile home, the following conditions
shall also apply:
[a] No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a
single parcel and such mobile home shall be occupied
by not more than a single family.
[b] The area between the ground level and the perimeter
of the mobile home shall be enclosed by a means of a
suitable skirting.
[c] Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation of at least eight poured concrete or
masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight
inches thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than
10 feet apart with the end pillars being no farther than
five feet from the ends of the unit. The pillars shall be
at least one foot by two feet in size and at least 36
inches below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a
tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be
secured.
[2] Area and dimensional requirements.
Yard Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Impervious
Percent
Per Lot**
RA 2 acres 200 10% 40 30 30 15%
R1 40,000 150 15% 40 30 30 20%
R1a 10,000* 100 20% 40 20 25 35%
RR 20,000* 100 20% 40 20 25 30%
RG, R2 2 acres 200 10% 40 30 30 15%
MF-1 10,000* 90 20% 35 30 35 35%
MF-2 10,000* 90 20% 35 30 35 35%
O 12,500* 100 30% 40 30 30 35%
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:661
NOTES:
* If not served by public sewer and public water supply, lot size shall be
40,000 square feet.
** Maximum impervious surface shall be applied to and be calculated on both
a per-lot and per-site basis. The maximum impervious surface per site
shall be:
Zoning District
Maximum Impervious Surface
Per Site
RA 25%
R1 30%
R1a 45%
RR 40%
RG, R2 25%
MF-1, MF-2, O 45%
[3] The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall
be met. All B1 subdivisions of 20 lots or more shall be
surrounded by a fifty-foot perimeter buffer.
[4] Open space.
[a] Active open space.
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of 10 lots or
more: The developer shall provide a minimum of
five acres of open space for each 100 units or
fractional percentage thereof. In no case shall
there be less than 2.5 acres of active open space.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
five lots and less than 10 lots: The developer shall
provide a minimum of 1.5 acres of active open
space.
[iii] Subdivisions or land developments of five lots or
less: The developer shall provide a contribution to
the Township Park and Recreational Fund in the
amount of $5,000 per new building lot.
[b] Common open space.
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of three lots or
less: There shall be no common open space
requirement.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
three lots: The developer shall set aside 20% of
the area of the site.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:662
[c] Calculation of open space on a cumulative basis. Any
subdivision or land development of any tract which
occurs after November 16, 1998, the effective date of
this subsection, will be cumulative for the purpose of
determining the number of lots in order to calculate
active open space requirements. If any subsequent
subdivision propels the total (cumulative) number of
lots or units into a category which requires more
common or active open space than originally provided,
the additional open space shall be provided by the
developer at the time of the subsequent subdivision or
land development.
[5] Parking: two off-street parking spaces for dwellings having
three bedrooms or less; three off-street parking spaces for
dwellings having four bedrooms or more. Spaces inside a
garage shall not be counted as off-street parking spaces.
(b) B1a Single-Family Semidetached (Twin). A one-family dwelling
attached to one other one-family dwelling by a common
vertical wall; each dwelling is located on a separate lot.
[1] Area and dimensional requirements.
Yard Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area*
(d.u.)**
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Impervious
Percent Per
Site***
MF-1 12,500 60 30% 40 15 30 40%
MF-2 12,500 60 30% 40 15 30 40%
C3 12,500 60 30% 40 15 30 40%
O 12,500 60 30% 40 15 30 40%
NOTES:
* If not served by public sewer and public water supply, minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square
feet.
** Per dwelling unit.
*** Maximum impervious surface shall be calculated on both a per-lot and per-site basis. The
maximum impervious surface per lot coverage shall be 30% for the B1a use in the MF-1, MF-2, and
O Districts.
[2] Open space.
[a] Active open space.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:663
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of 10 lots or
more: The developer shall provide a minimum of
five acres of open space for each 100 units or
fractional percentage thereof. In no case shall
there be less than 2.5 acres of active open space.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
five lots and less than 10 lots: The developer shall
provide a minimum of 1.5 acres of active open
space.
[iii] Subdivisions or land developments of five lots or
less: The developer shall provide a contribution to
the Township Park and Recreational Fund in the
amount of $5,000 per new building lot.
[b] Common open space.
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of three lots or
less: There shall be no common open space
requirement.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
three lots: The developer shall set aside 20% of
the area of the site.
[c] Calculation of open space on a cumulative basis. Any
subdivision or land development of any tract which
occurs after the effective date of this subsection,
November 1, 2002, will be cumulative for the purpose
of determining the number of lots in order to calculate
active open space requirements. If any subsequent
subdivision propels the total (cumulative) number of
lots or units into a category which requires more
common or active open space than originally provided,
the additional open space shall be provided by the
developer at the time of the subsequent subdivision or
land development.
[3] Parking: two off-street parking spaces for dwellings having
three bedrooms or less; three off-street parking spaces for
dwellings having four bedrooms or more, plus spillover
parking of one space for each two dwelling units (0.5 space
per dwelling unit). Spaces inside a garage shall not be
counted as off-street parking spaces.
[4] Perimeter buffer. There shall be a perimeter buffer of at
least 50 feet surrounding any development in which B1a
uses are located. The perimeter buffer shall be exclusive of
required front, rear and side yard areas, and buffering
between districts as required by § 195-63. The perimeter
buffer shall include vegetation materials satisfactory to the
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:664
Township, and shall, if deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, include a walking trail.
(c) B1b Two-Family Detached (Duplex). A building on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a
common stairwell, exterior to both dwelling units.
[1] Area and dimensional requirements. [Amended
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
Yard Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area*
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Impervious
Percent** Per
Lot
C-3 12,500 60 30% 40 15 30 40%
MF-1 12,500 60 35% 40 15 30 50%
MF-2 12,500 60 35% 40 15 30 50%
O 12,500 60 35% 40 15 30 50%
NOTES:
* If not served by public sewer and public water supply, minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square
feet.
** Maximum impervious surface shall be calculated on both a per-lot and per-site basis.
[2] Open space.
[a] Active open space.
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of 10 lots or
more: The developer shall provide a minimum of
five acres of open space for each 100 units or
fractional percentage thereof. In no case shall
there be less than 2.5 acres of active open space.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
five lots and less than 10 lots: The developer shall
provide a minimum of 1.5 acres of active open
space.
[iii] Subdivisions or land developments of five lots or
less: The developer shall provide a contribution to
the Township Park and Recreational Fund in the
amount of $5,000 per new building lot.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:665
[b] Common open space.
[i] Subdivisions or land developments of three lots or
less: There shall be no common open space
requirement.
[ii] Subdivisions or land developments of more than
three lots: The developer shall set aside 20% of
the area of the site.
[c] Calculation of open space on a cumulative basis. Any
subdivision or land development of any tract which
occurs after the effective date of this subsection will
be cumulative for the purpose of determining the
number of lots in order to calculate active open space
requirements. If any subsequent subdivision propels
the total (cumulative) number of lots or units into a
category which requires more common or active open
space than originally provided, the additional open
space shall be provided by the developer at the time of
the subsequent subdivision or land development.
[3] Parking: two off-street parking spaces for dwellings having
three bedrooms or less; three off-street parking spaces for
dwellings having four bedrooms or more. Spaces inside a
garage shall not be counted as off-street parking spaces.
[4] Perimeter buffer. There shall be a perimeter buffer of at
least 50 feet surrounding any development in which B1b
uses are located. The perimeter buffer shall be exclusive of
required front, rear and side yard areas, and buffering
between districts as required by § 195-63. The perimeter
buffer shall include vegetation materials satisfactory to the
Township, and shall, if deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, include a walking trail.
(2) B2 Cluster Subdivision.
(a) General.
[1] These regulations allow for the reduction in lot area and
other bulk requirements so that structures may be
grouped in certain areas of the development at higher
densities than are generally permitted, while the
remainder of the site is in common open space. Although
cluster regulations permit increased densities, the
provision of common open space land allows the overall
gross density of the development to be compatible with
that of the underlying zoning district.
[2] Cluster development is permitted in order to promote the
efficient use of undeveloped lands and to facilitate the
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:666
preservation and use of open space lands for recreational
and aesthetic purposes or other general municipal or
school district uses.
[3] Cluster development shall be permitted as a conditional
use. The applicant proposing cluster development shall
have the initial burden of establishing that the proposed
conditional use meets all of the expressed standards and
criteria set forth specifically in the cluster development
regulations section and the conditional use section of this
chapter and any other general standards and criteria set
forth in other sections of the chapter.
(b) Standards for cluster development. Any development which
proposes to use a cluster design must have a significant
natural feature or features to be preserved as part of its
common open space. These features are as follows:
[1] Prime farmland: as defined in Article II of this chapter.
[2] Located within an identified floodplain area as defined in
Article II of this chapter. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-5]
[3] Woodland: Woodlands are areas comprised of largely
mature trees in which the largest trees measure at least
six inches dbh (diameter at breast height or 4 1/2 feet
above the ground). The woodland shall be measured from
the dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also 10 or
more individual trees which measure at least 10 inches
dbh and form a contiguous canopy.
[4] Steep slope: any land with a slope in excess of 8%, which,
because of this slope, may also be subject to high rates of
stormwater runoff and erosion.
[5] Wetland: an area of poorly drained soil, which is inundated
or saturated by surface water or groundwater during a
significant portion of each year and which supports a
prevalence of vegetation typical of saturated soil
conditions. In addition, wetland areas are determined by
current criteria of the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
[6] Recreation land: areas designated for a specific
recreational use, including, but not limited to, tennis,
swimming, shuffleboard, play field, basketball court and
tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid
creating a hazard or nuisance and shall perpetuate the
proposed use.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:667
(c) Permitted districts and uses. Cluster subdivisions shall be
permitted in the RA and R1 Residential Districts subject to the
following provisions:
[1] Cluster subdivision, Use B2, shall be permitted as a
conditional use in the R1 Residential Districts on sites of
15 acres or larger.
[2] Cluster subdivision, Use B2, shall be permitted as a
conditional use in the RA Residential Districts as follows:
[a] On sites of 15 contiguous acres but less than 20
contiguous acres, cluster subdivision is an optional,
conditional use.
[b] On sites of 20 contiguous acres or larger, cluster
subdivision is permitted as a conditional use. Use B1
Detached Dwelling(s) is not a permitted use except
that subdivisions of not more five lots or fewer for Use
B1 Detached Dwelling(s) are permitted in any fiveyear
period. The five-year period shall be measured
from the approval of final subdivision plans for the
first lot for Use B1.
(d) Density and lot requirements for Use B2 in the R1 Residential
Districts.
[1] Minimum site area. The minimum area for a cluster
development shall be not less than 15 contiguous acres.
[2] Density. The overall density of a cluster development shall
not exceed 120% of the density permitted for Use B1
Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
[3] Lot and yard reduction.
[a] In the R1 Residential District, dimensional and/or
performance standards shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
[i] Minimum lot area (square feet): 15,000.
[ii] Minimum lot width at street line (feet): 75.
[iii] Minimum lot depth (feet): 125. [NOTE: Measured
from the road right-of-way line.]
[iv] Front yard depth (feet): 40.
[v] Side yard width (feet): 15.
[vi] Rear yard depth (feet): 30.
[vii] Maximum impervious surface (per lot): 25%.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:668
[viii] Maximum impervious surface (per site): 35%.
[ix] Building coverage: 15%.
[4] Common open space regulations.
[a] Significant natural features shall be protected as set
forth in §§ 195-60 and 195-61 of this chapter.
[b] In addition to the significant natural features, land in
common open space may contain land surrounding
historically significant structures and sites,
archaeological sites and land suitable for recreational
or other general municipal or school district uses.
[c] Stormwater detention and retention basins shall not
be considered part of any calculated common open
space.
[d] No less than 50% of the base site area shall be
designated for common open space. Additionally,
active open space shall be provided as required by
§ 195-16B(2)(d)[5] below.
[e] Active open space areas are intended to serve all
residents. Greenways shall lead to the major
recreational areas.
[f] All common open space areas shall be offered for
dedication to and for no consideration to be paid by
the Township. If the Board of Supervisors does not
accept any or all of the required open space, the open
space may be held by a homeowners' association, a
private conservation organization, or other municipal
or conservation organization. In any event, an
endorsement upon the deed and recorded in the Bucks
County Recorder of Deeds' office shall indicate that all
common open space land is restricted for use as open
space or other designated general municipal purposes
in perpetuity. The developer shall make adequate
provision for the access to and maintenance of open
space and facilities within the open space area. Said
provisions shall be subject to the approval by the
Board of Supervisors and the Township Solicitor and
shall be contained in deed restrictions which shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
[5] Active open space requirements. The developer shall
provide a minimum of five acres of active open space for
each 100 units or fractional percentage thereof.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:669
(e) Density and lot requirements for Use B2 in RA Residential
District.
[1] Minimum site area. Cluster subdivision, Use B2, shall be
permitted as a conditional use in the RA Residential
Districts as follows:
[a] On sites of 15 contiguous acres but less than 20
contiguous acres, cluster subdivision is an optional,
conditional use.
[b] On sites of 20 contiguous acres or larger, cluster
subdivision is permitted as a conditional use. Use B1
Detached Dwelling(s) is not a permitted use except
that subdivisions of not more five lots or fewer for Use
B1 Detached Dwelling(s) are permitted in any fiveyear
period. The five-year period shall be measured
from the approval of final subdivision plans for the
first lot for Use B1.
[2] Density. The overall density of a cluster development shall
not exceed 120% of the density permitted in the
underlying zoning district for Use B1 Single-Family
Detached Dwelling.
[3] Lot and yard reduction. In the RA Residential Agricultural
District, dimensional and/or performance standards shall
meet the following minimum requirements:
[a] With community sewage treatment system:
[i] Minimum lot area (square feet): 30,000.
[ii] Lot width at building setback line (feet): 90.
[iii] Minimum lot depth (feet): 175. [NOTE: Measured
from the road right-of-way line.]
[iv] Front yard depth (feet): 40.
[v] Side yard width (feet): 20.
[vi] Rear yard depth (feet): 30.
[b] With individual on-lot sewage treatment system:
[i] Minimum lot area (square feet): 43,560.
[ii] Lot width at building setback line (feet): 150.
[iii] Minimum lot depth (feet): 200. [NOTE: Measured
from the road right-of-way line.]
[iv] Front yard depth (feet): 40.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:670
[v] Side yard width (feet): 20.
[vi] Rear yard depth (feet): 30.
[c] For lot with minimum area of 30,000 square feet:
[i] Maximum impervious surface (per lot): 25%.
[ii] Maximum impervious surface (per site): 35%.
[iii] Building coverage: 15%.
[d] For lot with minimum area of 43,560 square feet:
[i] Maximum impervious surface (per lot): 20%.
[ii] Maximum impervious surface (per site): 30%.
[iii] Building coverage: 10%.
[4] Prime farmland protection or common open space
regulations.
[a] No less than 50% of the base site area or 50% of the
prime farmland, whichever is the greater area of land,
shall be kept as open space.
[b] Where less than 50% of the site is prime farmland,
50% of the site shall be designated as common open
space and the provisions of Subsection B(2)(e)[4]
above shall be met.
[c] Where 50% or greater of the site is comprised of
prime farmland, the standards for farmland
preservation, and § 195-60, Natural resource
protection standards, Subsection J, Prime farmland in
the RA District, shall be met.
[d] Stormwater detention and retention basins shall not
be located in any area of protected prime farmland.
(f) Specific regulations.
[1] The applicant, after showing the number of lots allowed
according to the provisions for a Use B1 Single-Family
Detached Dwelling development within the applicable
zoning district by submission of a sketch plan, shall then
calculate the overall maximum density permitted for the
Use B2 Cluster Subdivision by multiplying the number of
allowable units by 120%.
[2] All other applicable development procedures and
requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be followed.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:671
[3] In the R1 District, the proposed development must be
served by public centralized water and public centralized
sewage disposal systems provided by the developer if
existing public systems are not available. All proposed
sewage disposal systems shall be coordinated in
compliance with the Township's Act 537 Plan.
[4] Areas for common open space and active open space shall
be improved as required by the Township Board of
Supervisors and Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, regulations. Walking trails shall surround
the residential sections of the cluster development.
[5] Off-street parking requirements: two off-street parking
spaces for dwellings having three bedrooms or less; three
off-street parking spaces for dwellings having four
bedrooms or more. Spaces inside garages shall not be
included in the count of off-street parking spaces.
[6] Spillover parking requirements: 1/2 parking space per
dwelling unit. If provided as parallel parking on street,
parking space dimension shall be eight feet by 23 feet, and
shall not include areas restricted from parking such as
intersections, fire hydrants, etc. Adequate street widths
must be provided in accordance with Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, regulations to allow
parallel parking.
(3) B3 Performance Standard Development. Performance standard
development is a development or subdivision that permits a variety
of housing types subject to a series of performance standards. The
performance standard development requires the provisions of open
space and limits density and impervious surfaces. The following
housing types are permitted subject to the dimensional
requirements as indicated below:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling: a single detached dwelling
unit on an individual lot with private yards on all sides of the
house. Detached dwellings may include dwellings constructed
on the lot, prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings,
modular dwellings, and mobile homes and mobile home parks.
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum building coverage: 30%.
[3] Minimum yards:
[a] Front: 30 feet.
[b] Side: 10 feet.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:672
[c] Rear: 40 feet.
[d] Minimum lot width at building setback: 70 feet.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling, off-center: a single detached
dwelling unit on an individual lot with private yards on all sides
of the house. The building is set close to one side property line
with a side yard which may be reduced to five feet, and the
other side yard shall be no less than 15 feet. The minimum
distance between dwellings on adjacent lots shall be 20 feet.
[1] A fence, wall or hedge shall be placed in the wider side
yard extending from the dwelling unit to the side property
line and shall be parallel to the street. The fence, wall or
hedge may be broken by a walkway not exceeding four feet
in width or a driveway to parking areas in the side or rear
of the lot. The driveway shall be at least 10 feet in width up
to a maximum of 20 feet in width.
[a] The fence or wall shall be of permanent construction
and shall be four feet to six feet in height.
[b] The hedge material shall be planted on three-foot
centers and shall form a dense screen at its mature
height.
[2] Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 7,000 square feet.
[b] Maximum building area: 30%.
[c] Minimum yards:
[i] Front: 20 feet.
[ii] Rear: 35 feet.
[d] Minimum lot width at building setback: 60 feet.
(c) Village house: a single detached dwelling unit on an individual
lot with private yards on all sides of the house. It differs from
other forms of detached housing in the lot size and placement
on the lot. It is similar to the houses found in historic villages
and towns. The house is placed close to the street and is
additionally distinguished by planting or architectural
elements.
[1] Each unit shall meet two or more of the following
characteristics:
[a] An unenclosed porch, running across at least 3/4 of
the house front, being at least seven feet in width.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:673
[b] A front yard raised above the sidewalk grade by at
least 30 inches, and a retaining wall of at least 18
inches in height at the sidewalk.
[c] A front yard enclosed by a wall, fence or permanent
construction at least 30 inches in height and one
flowering shrub per five feet across the width of the
front of the house. A wall, fence or any combination
thereof shall not exceed 48 inches in height. Height
shall be determined based upon the elevation at the
street side of such wall, fence or combination thereof.
[d] Hedge or shrubs planted 18 inches on center for width
of yard facing street and two flowering trees.
[2] Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum setbacks:
[i] House:
[A] Front: 15 feet.
[B] Side: five feet each.
[C] Rear: 30 feet.
[ii] Garage:
[A] Front: 25 feet.
[B] Side: five feet.
[C] Rear: 30 feet.
[c] Minimum lot width at building setback: 55 feet.
[d] Flowering trees: two inches caliper.
[e] Shrubs (flowering or hedge): three feet high.
[f] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
(d) Single-family semidetached: a building designed for and used
exclusively as a residence for only one family and having a
party wall in common with an adjacent building. Where a
private garage is structurally attached to such building, it shall
be considered as a part thereof. Dimensional requirements
shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area: 4,200 square feet.
[2] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:674
[3] Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
[6] Minimum lot width at building setback: 40 feet.
(e) Two-family detached: a building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a residence for two families living independently
of each other, with one family living wholly or partly over the
other and having no party wall in common with an adjacent
building; a detached duplex dwelling. Where a private garage
is structurally attached to such building, it shall be considered
a part thereof. Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area (per dwelling unit): 3,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum building coverage: 40%.
[3] Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
[6] Minimum lot width at setback (per building): 60 feet.
(f) Multiplex: an attached dwelling unit which may be arranged in
a variety of configurations: side by side, back to back or
vertically. The essential feature is the small number of units
attached. No more than five units shall be attached in any
structure, and structures shall average four units each.
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area (per building): 8,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot area (per dwelling unit): 2,500 square feet.
[3] Maximum building coverage: 30%.
[4] Minimum setback line:
[a] Street: 30 feet.
[b] Parking area: 10 feet.
[c] Pedestrian walkway: five feet.
[5] Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
[6] Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
[7] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
[8] Minimum building spacing: 24 feet.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:675
[9] Minimum lot width (per building) at setback: 80 feet.
[10] Maximum building height: 35 feet, or three stories,
whichever is less.
(g) Townhouse: one of a structurally connected series of three or
more single-family attached dwellings, each designed for and
occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and
each having a party wall in common with one or more of the
other dwellings in the series adjacent to it, and/or all of which
dwellings may be under different ownership.
[1] Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At right-of-way: 22 feet or 12 feet at cul-de-sac
ends.
[ii] At building setback: 22 feet.
[c] Maximum building coverage: 50%.
[d] Minimum building setback:
[i] Public right-of-way: 25 feet.
[ii] Private parking area: 10 feet.
[iii] Pedestrian walkway: five feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
[f] Minimum building space: 20 feet.
[2] A row of attached townhouses shall not exceed eight
dwelling units and no more than two rows shall be
constructed side by side without the front facade of the
units within the row having staggered building fronts a
minimum of two feet and a maximum of four feet.
[Amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
(h) Garden apartments: a grouping of dwelling units sharing
common elements which may include a common outside
access. The dwelling units share a common lot area, which is
the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the
building. Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area (per dwelling unit): 2,000 square feet or
one acre, whichever is greater.
[2] Minimum apartment size:
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:676
[a] Efficiency: 400 square feet.
[b] One-bedroom: 500 square feet.
[c] Two-bedroom: 650 square feet.
[d] Three-bedroom: 800 square feet.
[e] Four-bedroom: 950 square feet.
[f] Each additional bedroom, den, family room or rec
room: 150 square feet.
[3] Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50%.
[4] Minimum building setback:
[a] Public right-of-way: 30 feet.
[b] Private parking area: 10 feet.
[5] Maximum number of units per building: 16.
[6] Minimum building space: 35 feet.
[7] Minimum street frontage: 100 feet.
[8] Maximum building height: 35 feet, or three stories,
whichever is less.
(i) Mobile home park. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of
mobile homes.
[1] Dimensional requirements:
Minimum Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width at
Building
(Per Lot)
(percent) Front Side Rear
Minimum
Distances
Between
Units
(feet)
Single-wide
units
5,250 45 25% 20 5 15 20
Double-wide
units
7,000 60 30% 30 5 15 20
[2] Performance standards:
[a] Minimum site area: 15 acres.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:677
[b] Maximum density: 6.0 dwelling units/acre.
[c] Minimum common open space ratio: 30%.
[d] Maximum impervious surface ratio per site: 25%.
[e] Maximum impervious surface ratio, per lot:
[i] For lot with single-wide unit: 40%.
[ii] For lot with double-wide unit: 50%.
[f] The developer shall provide five acres of active open
space for each 100 units or fractional equivalent
percentage thereof. In no case shall there be less than
five acres of active open space.
[3] If the dwelling is a mobile home the following conditions
shall also apply:
[a] No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a
mobile home lot and such mobile home shall be
occupied by not more than a single family.
[b] The area between the ground level and the perimeter
of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of a
suitable skirting.
[c] Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation of at least eight poured concrete or
masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight
inches thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than
10 feet apart with the end pillars being no farther than
five feet from the ends of the unit. The pillars shall be
at least one by two feet in size and at least 36 inches
below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tiedown
ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.
[4] Every mobile home shall have access to an improved street
in the mobile home park constructed in accordance with
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
[5] The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for
occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be
nine.
[6] No space shall be rented for residential use of a mobile
home in any such park except for periods of 30 days or
more.
[7] Plans for any mobile home park shall be submitted in
conformance with Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, and other municipal ordinances regulating
mobile home parks.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:678
[8] Public sewer and public water services shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, and the Township Sewage Facilities Plan.
[9] A buffer yard shall be provided around the perimeter of the
mobile home park in accordance with the provisions of
§ 195-63 of this chapter.
[10] Parking requirement: two off-street parking spaces for
each mobile home site, plus 1/2 space per mobile home
site for spillover parking, to be distributed evenly
throughout the development. For accessory building or
uses, the number of parking spaces required will depend
upon the type of facilities proposed and the extent of those
facilities. Parking requirements of this chapter for similar
uses will be used to determine the number of additional
spaces required for accessory uses. The parking spaces
required for accessory uses shall be in addition to the
spaces required for the dwelling units.
(j) Convenience commercial uses are permitted by the zoning
district in which the tract is located, subject to conditional use
authorization by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
§ 196-120. Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area: one acre.
[2] Minimum lot width:
[a] At right-of-way: 250 feet.
[b] At building setback: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum building setbacks:
[a] Front: 75 feet.
[b] Side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear: 25 feet.
[4] Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50%.
[5] Maximum building coverage: 35%.
[6] Convenience commercial uses shall be clearly accessory to
the residential portion of the performance standard
development and no more than 10% of the gross site area
shall be developed for convenience commercial use.
(k) Performance standards.
[1] Except where otherwise provided in this § 195-16B(3), all
performance standard subdivision shall meet all of the
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:679
following requirements for each site proposed in the
named zoning district:
Zoning
District
Minimum
Site
Area
(acres)
Maximum
Density
(de/ac)
Minimum
Active
Open
Space*
Minimum
Common
Open
Space
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Per Site
(percent)
C3 10 7.0 5 acres
for each
100 d/u
plus
fractional
percentage
thereof
25% 35%
MF-2 10 7.0 5 acres
for each
100 d/u
plus
fractional
percentage
thereof
25% 35%
MF-1 10 5.0 5 acres
for each
100 d/u
plus
fractional
percentage
thereof
50% 35%
O 10 5.0 5 acres
for each
100 d/u
plus
fractional
percentage
thereof
50% 35%
* In no event shall there be less than five acres of active
open space for any B3 use.
[2] The developer and all subsequent lot owners shall comply
with the following impervious surface requirements per lot
prior to and upon occupancy of a dwelling within a
performance standard development:
[a] Single-family detached dwelling:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 35%.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:680
[ii] After occupancy: 45%.
[b] Single-family detached dwelling, off-center:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 35%.
[ii] After occupancy: 45%.
[c] Village house:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 40%.
[ii] After occupancy: 50%
[d] Single-family semidetached:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 40%
[ii] After occupancy: 50%.
[e] Two-family detached: 50%.
[i] Prior to occupancy: 40%.
[ii] After occupancy: 50%.
[f] Townhouse:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 65%.
[ii] After occupancy: 75%.
[g] Garden apartment:
[i] Prior to occupancy: 50%.
[ii] After occupancy: 60%.
[h] Convenience commercial uses: 45%.
[3] A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided around the
perimeter of a B3 Performance Standard Subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of § 195-63 of this chapter.
This area shall not be included in the common or active
open space requirement, nor shall it be included in the lot
area of any residential dwelling unit. The buffer area shall
be a separate lot, owned and maintained by a homeowners'
association.
(l) Dwelling unit mix. A mix of dwelling unit types is necessary to
promote a balanced community. Therefore, a mix is required,
based on the number of dwelling units as set forth in the
accompanying table:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:681
Number of
Dwellings in
Development
Minimum
Required
Number
Dwelling
Unit Type
Maximum
Percent Any
Dwelling
Unit Type
Minimum
Percent Any
Dwelling
Unit Type
1 to 100 2 80% 20%
101 to 200 3 60% 20%
200 to 350 4 60% 20%
350 or more 4 50% 20%
(m) Off-street parking requirements:
[1] Minimum number of spaces: two (efficiency); two
(1BR-2BR); three (3BR or more). Spaces inside a garage
shall not be counted as off-street parking spaces.
[2] Spillover parking requirements: 1/2 parking space per
detached single-family and village house dwelling unit,
and one parking space per other dwelling unit type. If
provided as parallel parking on street, parking space
dimensions shall be eight feet by 23 feet, and shall not
include areas restricted from parking such as
intersections, fire hydrants, etc. Adequate street widths
must be provided in accordance with Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, requirements to allow
parallel parking.
(n) Water and sanitary sewer facilities. A B3 Performance
Standard Development shall be permitted only on land served
by public sanitary sewer which is piped to and treated at an
existing sewage treatment plant, and a public or community
water system with water available for fire-fighting purposes
either through hydrants or acceptable surface storage which
shall provide a consistent, year-round supply for fire-fighting
purposes. If the water supply is drawn from the site, a water
study shall be prepared by the developer and appropriate
funds escrowed with the Township to protect surrounding
individual wells that may be adversely affected by the new
public or community water system.
(o) Traffic impact study:
[1] The impact of the proposed development on the
Township's circulation system shall be analyzed and a
written traffic impact study shall be prepared in
accordance with specifications provided by the Township's
consulting engineers.
(p) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 shall be met around the
perimeter of the performance standard development.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:682
(4) B4 Rooming House or Boardinghouse. A dwelling used for the
housing of roomers, boarders or lodgers with or without common
eating facilities, including dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses
or other buildings of charitable, educational or philanthropic use,
but not including personal care boardinghomes or similar facilities
licensed by the State Department of Public Welfare.
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: two acres.
[2] Minimum front yard: 55 feet.
[3] Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(b) Maximum density: three bedrooms per acre.
(c) Maximum height: three stories or 35 feet, whichever is less.
(d) Each sleeping room shall be limited to two people.
(e) Parking: one off-street parking space per bedroom.
(f) All rooming house or boardinghouse facilities shall connect to
public sewer in conformance with the Township's Act 537 Plan.
(5) B5 Community Treatment Facility. A community treatment facility
is a facility for the treatment of persons who have been committed
to such facilities as the result of having committed a crime or
having been adjudicated delinquent and are not handicapped as
defined by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act 42 U.S.C.
§ 3602(h). The residents of a community treatment facility do not
constitute a "family" because of the residents' transient nature.
Such use shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Occupation of a community treatment facility shall be subject
to confirmation by the Code Enforcement Office that sanitary
facilities, whether on-lot or municipal, and potable water
supply are sufficient to address the needs of all of the
occupants of the community treatment facility.
(b) All community treatment facilities shall have the appearance of
a single-family dwelling. No external changes or modifications
to a community treatment facility shall be made that indicate
that it is anything other than a single-family dwelling.
(c) All community treatment facilities and all entities operating a
community treatment facility shall comply with any and all
applicable local, state, and federal ordinances, statutes, rules
and/or regulations. Proof of compliance with such ordinances,
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:683
statutes, rules and regulations shall be furnished to the
Township as a condition of conditional use approval.
(d) All community treatment facilities housing six or fewer
occupants shall have a minimum of 1,500 square feet of indoor,
heated living space, exclusive of garages, sheds, basements,
attics, crawl spaces, or similar areas. For community treatment
facilities housing more than six occupants, an additional 125
square feet of such living space shall be required for each
additional occupant above six.
(e) No more than two persons shall sleep in any single bedroom in
a community treatment facility.
(f) Parking. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be
provided for each occupant of a community treatment facility
anticipated to have a motor vehicle, plus one off-street parking
space shall be provided for each support person, staff member
or employee of the community treatment facility. Spaces inside
a garage shall not be counted as off-street parking spaces.
(g) Buffering requirements:
[1] Parking areas shall be visually secluded from adjacent
properties via an evergreen planting screen in accordance
with § 195-63.
[2] Side and rear lot lines shall be planted with a minimum of
one canopy tree per 40 feet, plus one evergreen tree per
30 feet. Plantings may be installed in an informal
arrangement, subject to approval of the Township.
[3] Street trees shall be installed along all streets where
suitable street trees do not exist.
[4] All plant material, size, species, caliper, and arrangement
shall be in accordance with the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.194
(h) The housing of an individual whose occupancy or tenancy in a
community treatment facility would constitute a direct threat
to the health or safety of other individuals, or whose occupancy
or tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others is prohibited.
(i) The minimum lot size of this Use B5 is 10 acres.
(6) B6 Retirement Community. A residential development designed
exclusively for mature adults, 55 years of age or over (and the
spouses of mature adults, without regard to age), which may
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:684
contain certain supportive facilities for the residents. A retirement
community shall consist of single-family dwellings on separate lots.
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum setback from curbline of internal (private)
street: 35 feet.
[2] Minimum building spacing: 35 feet.
[3] Maximum density: six dwelling units per acre.
[4] Maximum impervious surface ratio: 50% (site).
[5] A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided around the
perimeter of a B6 Retirement Community in accordance
with the provisions of § 195-63 of this chapter. This area
shall not be included in the common or active open space
requirement, nor shall it be included in the lot area of any
residential dwelling unit. The buffer area shall be a
separate lot, owned and maintained by a homeowners'
association.
(b) Area and dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum tract (site) area: 20 acres.
[2] Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
[3] Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard: 15 feet min., 35 feet agg.
[6] Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
[7] Maximum on-lot impervious surface ratio: 40%.
[8] Maximum on-lot building coverage: 30%.
[9] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[10] Open space:
[a] Minimum 20% common open space.
[b] Minimum active open space: five acres for each 100
units or fractional percentage thereof. In no case shall
there be less than 2.5 acres of active open space.
[11]Off-street parking:
[a] Units of two bedrooms or less: two spaces.
[b] Three-bedroom and greater: three spaces.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:685
[c] Overflow parking: one space for every three dwelling
units, distributed throughout the community.
[d] Spaces inside a garage shall not be counted as offstreet
parking spaces.
(c) Accessory facilities. Permitted accessory facilities may include
some or all of the following services, and no others, which are
accessory to this B6 use and are intended for the sole use of
the residents and their guests:
[1] Personal service shops, such as barbershop, beautician or
clothes cleaning and pressing pickup agency.
[2] Offices for on-site management.
[3] Health and fitness facilities.
[4] Clubhouse with other support facilities, including lounge
areas, reading rooms, craft rooms, common dining and
recreation rooms.
[5] Accessory facilities shall be provided with a separate
parking area that contains a minimum of 1.25 spaces for
each staff member plus one space for each company and/
or service vehicle that may be necessary for the services to
be provided.
[6] Buildings with accessory facilities shall make up no more
than 15% of overall building coverage.
(d) Utilities.
[1] Public water and sanitary sewer are required.
[2] All utilities shall be located underground.
(7) B7 Residential Conversion. The conversion of an existing
residential building in a commercial district into two or more
dwelling units or the conversion of an accessory building into one
or more dwelling units.
(a) Detached dwellings which are converted must maintain the
appearance of a detached dwelling with a single front
entrance. Additional entrances may be placed on the side or
rear of the structure. The dwelling units may share the single
front entrance. Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be
located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in
no case on a front or side wall facing a street.
(b) Except as may be necessary for purposes of safety in
accordance with the preceding paragraph, there shall be no
major structural change in the exterior of the building in
connection with the conversion. After conversion, the building
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:686
shall retain substantially the same structural appearance it had
before such conversion.
(c) All wastewater disposal systems must be approved by the
Bucks County Department of Health prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit. If public sanitary sewer facilities are provided,
approval must be obtained by the authority having jurisdiction
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
if applicable.
(d) Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(e) Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of
the converted structure.
(f) Off-street parking lots with three or more spaces shall be
buffered from abutting residences. Hedge material shall be
placed on three-foot centers. Alternately, a four-foot to five-foot
fence may be erected which provides a visual screen.
(g) Trash receptacles shall not be visible from the street or
abutting properties except on scheduled pickup days.
(h) The minimum lot width and minimum yard requirements of
Use B1 Detached Dwelling shall be met for the applicable
zoning district.
(i) Each converted structure shall have a recreation/patio area of
at least 200 square feet per dwelling unit. The recreation/patio
area shall not be located in the front yard or the minimum side
or rear yards.
(j) The following minimum floor area requirements shall be met:
Type of Unit
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 400
1 bedroom 500
2 bedrooms 650
3 bedrooms 800
4 bedrooms 950
A minimum of 150 square feet of floor area for each additional
bedroom, den, family room, or recreation room shall be
required.
(k) The following minimum lot area requirements shall be met:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:687
Zoning District
Minimum Lot Area
(acres)
C1 1
C2 1
O 1
VC 1
VC 2 1
(l) A building must have been constructed at least seven years
prior to its conversion.
(m) Density: 12,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(n) Parking: two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit
having three bedrooms or less; three off-street parking spaces
for each dwelling unit having four bedrooms or more. Spaces
inside a garage shall not be counted as off-street parking
spaces.
(8) B8 Accessory Family Apartment or Dwelling Unit. One apartment
or dwelling unit accessory to a single-family detached dwelling
shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met. The
intent of these provisions is to allow for family members related by
blood or marriage to the owner of the principal residence to reside
on the premises, but to prohibit the creation of for-profit
apartments in districts where multifamily housing is not otherwise
permitted.
(a) Such use shall occupy no more than 50% of the total floor area
of the primary living area of the principal residence, but in no
event shall the accessory use exceed a total floor area of 800
square feet. The primary living area includes a living room,
dining room, kitchen, one bathroom and the largest bedroom.
(b) Occupancy of such use shall include only relatives of the family
occupying the principal residence.
(c) Such use may contain separate cooking, sleeping, living and
bathroom facilities.
(d) Such use may be part of the principal residence or may be
contained in an accessory structure or building existing at the
date of this chapter. No new separate structures on the same
lot with the principal residence shall be permitted to be
constructed for this use, and the accessory family apartment or
dwelling unit shall not be located in cellars or basements.
Cellars are those areas having 1/2 or more of its floor to ceiling
height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:688
(e) Only one accessory family apartment shall be permitted per
single-family detached dwelling and there shall be no changes
to the exterior of the residence which suggests that the
dwelling unit is other than a single-family detached dwelling.
(f) This use may be permitted only by special exception to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(g) The owner of the principal residence shall provide to the
Township evidence of approval by the Bucks County Board of
Health as to the adequacy of water and sewer facilities serving
the site.
(h) Parking: two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the
additional use.
(i) The record owner of the property shall grant a deed restriction
limiting such use in accordance with the foregoing provisions
of this subsection in favor of Warwick Township. All costs
related to the preparation and recording of the foregoing
document shall be subject to the approval of the Township at
the cost of the applicant.
(9) B9 Golf Course Community.
(a) General.
[1] A golf course community is a community of single-family
detached residential dwelling units designed around an
eighteen-hole public or private golf course.
[2] The open space shall include the area of the golf course,
but shall not include areas devoted to accessory uses,
including buildings and structures. Open space shall also
include natural resources identified at § 195-60 of this
chapter.
[3] A golf course community is permitted in recognition of the
fact that a golf course with its intended accessory uses,
whether publicly or privately owned and operated, is an
important community resource, the development and/or
preservation of which should be encouraged.
[4] A golf course community shall be permitted as a
conditional use. The applicant proposing the golf course
community shall have the initial burden of establishing
that the proposed conditional use meets all of the express
standards and criteria set forth for conditional uses in this
chapter. In granting the conditional use, the Board of
Supervisors shall satisfy itself that the proposed use is in
conformity with the general standards for conditional uses
set forth in this chapter.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:689
(b) Standards for golf course community.
[1] The golf course community shall be designed around an
existing or proposed public or private golf course.
[2] A golf course community shall be permitted as a
conditional use only in the RG Residential-Golf Course
District.
(c) Open space and lot requirements.
[1] Tract area. A tract of land to be devoted to a golf course
community shall be not less than 175 acres. The tract may
consist of more than one lot, provided that all lots
comprising the tract are contiguous and are proposed to
be developed pursuant to a unified plan.
[2] Open space. Not less than 50% of the tract area shall be
open space. Open space shall be calculated as a
percentage of tract area. Open space, which shall include
the area devoted to the golf course, shall be permanently
restricted from future development by use of a deed
restriction or other document, satisfactory to the
Township, and recorded at in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Bucks County.
[3] Lot requirements.
[a] Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 90 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet (lot depth shall be
measured from the road right-of-way line).
[d] Maximum impervious surface per lot: 35%.
[e] Maximum impervious surface per tract: 30%.
[4] Yard requirements.
[a] Front yard depth: 30 feet.
[b] Minimum side yard width: 10 feet.
[c] Minimum aggregate side yards: 30 feet.
[d] Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
[e] Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
(d) Utility services. A golf course community shall be served by a
public water system and a public sewage disposal system. If
existing public systems are not available, centralized systems
shall be provided by the developer.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:690
(e) All other applicable development procedures and requirements
in Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, as
amended, shall be followed; provided, however, that the
density of the proposed golf course community shall be
governed by the provisions of this subsection; and, provided
further, that the golf course and its accessory facilities shall be
deemed to satisfy any requirement for active or passive
recreation land or facilities contained elsewhere in this chapter
or in Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
(f) Open space and natural features.
[1] Significant natural resources are listed in § 195-60 of this
chapter. In no case may natural resources protected by
§ 195-60 other than prime agricultural or forest or
woodlands exceed 50% of the open space.
[2] Stormwater detention and retention basins shall not be
considered part of any calculated open space.
[3] Open space areas which are part of the golf course may be
privately owned; provided, however, that privately owned
open space and golf course land shall be subject to
restrictive covenants, the effect of which will guarantee
that no uses made of open space or golf course land shall
be for purposes other than open space. Such restrictive
covenants shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township as a condition of final subdivision and land
development approval.
[4] A walking trail shall be installed around the perimeter of
the site.
(g) The clubhouse, pro shop, maintenance building, or similar
structure associated with the B9 Golf Club Community shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of § 195-16D(4).
A clubhouse, pro shop, maintenance building, or similar
structure shall be located on the same or contiguous parcel as
the B9 Golf Club Community. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-1]
(10) B10 Home Occupation. A customary home occupation for gain. A
home occupation is an accessory use that shall be clearly
subordinate to the existing residential use of the property. Such
uses shall meet the general standards listed below, as well as any
specific standards relating to the type of accessory home
occupation proposed. The specific standards are listed under Uses
B10(b)[1] through B(10)(b)[8].
(a) General standards. The following shall apply to all home
occupations:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:691
[1] A home occupation must be conducted within a dwelling
which is the bona fide residence of the principal
practitioner or in an accessory building thereto which is
normally associated with a residential use. The home
occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors.
[2] In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure
be altered or the occupation within the residences be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to
differ from its residential character by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, show windows or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract
customers or clients, other than those signs permitted by
this chapter.
[3] All commercial vehicles shall be parked on-lot and must be
parked in a garage or an enclosed structure or be suitably
screened from view from adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way. Off-street parking spaces are not permitted
in the front yard. A ten-foot driveway providing access to
parking areas in the side or rear of the property may be
located in the front yard. All off-street parking areas must
be located at least 10 feet from any property line. Offstreet
parking lots with three or more spaces shall be
buffered from abutting residences. Hedge material shall
be placed on three-foot centers. Alternately, a four to fivefoot
fence may be erected which provides a visual screen.
[4] No equipment or process shall be used in a home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors, dust, or electrical interference or violates any other
standard of Article XIX of the Zoning Ordinance in a
manner that is detectable to the normal senses off the lot.
No equipment or process shall be used which creates
visible or audible interferences in any radio or television
receivers off of the premises.
[5] A home occupation shall not include the following: animal
hospitals, commercial stables and kennels, funeral parlors
or undertaking establishments, antique shops, auto or
body repair facilities, tourist homes, restaurants and
rooming-boarding-lodging houses.
[6] A zoning permit shall be required for all home
occupations.195
(b) High-impact general standards. The following shall apply to all
home occupations except for no-impact home-based
businesses:
195. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(10)(a)[7], regarding minimum lot area, was repealed
3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:692
[1] The maximum amount of floor area devoted to a home
occupation shall not be more than 25% of the ground-floor
area of the principal residential structure or 400 square
feet, whichever is less. The ground-floor area of the
principal residential structure shall not include an area of
an attached garage or other similar building. At least 850
square feet of the total floor area must remain a residential
use.
[2] One sign per home occupation is permitted by special
exception, provided that it is no larger than three square
feet per side bearing only the name, occupation, and office
hours of the practitioner. In addition, it shall not be
illuminated or placed in a window. [Amended 3-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-1]
[3] There shall be no exterior storage of materials or refuse
resulting from the operation of the home occupation, and
no goods shall be publicly displayed.
(c) Specific use standards. In addition to the requirements set
forth above, the standards listed under uses B(10)(c)[1]
through B(10)(c)[8] shall apply to that specific type of
accessory home occupations.
[1] B10a Professional Offices. A professional office is a
service-oriented business use conducted within an
enclosed area specifically designed for the functional
needs of the use, wherein the professional services of the
practitioner is the salable commodity offered to the client.
[a] Professional offices include, but are not limited to, the
following:
[i] Salesmen, sales representative or manufacturer's
representative.
[ii] Architect, engineer or land surveyor.
[iii] Dentist, doctor, psychiatrist or veterinarian (not
including a clinic or veterinarian office with
boarding facilities).
[iv] Lawyer, accountant or insurance agent.
[v] Office of a minister, rabbi or priest.
[b] No more than one person other than resident
members of the immediate family may be employed
unless approved as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:693
[c] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in
this chapter for the particular residential use
concerned, a professional office shall provide one offstreet
parking space for each employee plus one
additional space for each 200 square feet of office
space. A maximum of six off-street parking spaces are
permitted on one lot, inclusive of the required
residential parking. Spaces inside a garage shall not
be counted as off-street parking spaces.
[2] B10b Personal Services. A service business including, but
not limited to, barbers, beauticians or photographers.
[a] Beauty parlors and barbershops may be permitted
provided no more than two beauty parlor or barber
chairs are provided.
[b] No one other than resident members of the immediate
family may be employed.
[c] The minimum site area shall be two acres in all
districts.
[d] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in
this chapter for the particular residential use
concerned, a personal services use shall provide one
off-street parking space for each employee, plus one
additional space for each 200 square feet of office
space. A maximum of six off-street parking spaces are
permitted on one lot, inclusive of the required
residential parking.
[3] B10c Instructional Services. An instructional service is a
home occupation in which the practitioner provides the
client with special instruction in a specific area of study.
The establishment of this home occupation shall not
require a room or series of rooms specifically designed for
that purpose.
[a] Instructional services involving a maximum of four
students at a time are permitted.
[b] Instructional services involving musical instruments
are only permitted in single-family detached
dwellings.
[c] No persons shall be employed other than resident
members of the immediate family.
[d] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in
this chapter for the particular residential use, an
instructional service shall provide one off-street
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:694
parking space per two students being instructed at
any one time. A maximum of four off-street parking
spaces are permitted on one lot inclusive of the
required residential parking.
[4] B10d Home Crafts.
[a] Home crafts are business activities whereby the
commodity for sale is completely manufactured on the
site and may be sold on the site by the resident
craftsman.
[b] Home crafts may include, but are not limited to, the
following: artists, sculptors, dressmakers,
seamstresses and tailors; and include such activities
as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work and
furniture making.
[i] Home crafts are permitted only in single-family
detached dwellings and existing accessory
buildings on the same lot.
[ii] No more than one person other than resident
members of the immediate family may be
employed.
[iii] In addition to the off-street parking spaces
required in this chapter for the particular
residential use concerned, a home craft shall
provide one off-street space per 300 square feet of
total floor area used for the home occupation. A
maximum of four off-street parking spaces are
permitted on one lot inclusive of the required
residential parking.
[5] B10e Trades, Business. The use of a residence as a base of
operation for the business, but not including the conduct
of any phase of the trade on the property. Trades included
in this home occupation include, but are not limited to,
electrician, plumber, carpenter, mason, painter, roofer and
similar occupations.
[a] No more than one business vehicle may be parked on
the property including noncommercial trucks and
vans with loading capacities not exceeding 0.75 ton.
The business vehicles and trailers shall be parked in
an enclosed structure.
[b] No more than one employee other than resident
members of the immediate family shall be permitted
unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:695
[c] The area of the office, storage of materials and
equipment (excluding vehicles) shall not exceed the
limitations of Subsection B(10)(a)[2] above. There
shall be no outside storage of vehicles, equipment or
materials of any kind.
[d] No assembling, manufacturing, processing or sales
shall be conducted on the property.
[e] The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter
shall be met.
[f] There shall be a minimum lot area of two acres in all
districts.
[g] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in
this chapter for the particular residential use
concerned, a trades business shall provide one offstreet
parking space for each employee and one offstreet
parking space for each business vehicle. A
maximum of six off-street parking spaces are
permitted on one lot inclusive of the required
residential parking.
[6] B10f Repair Services. A repair shop for small appliances,
lawn mowers, watches, guns, bicycles, locks, small
business machines, blade sharpening and other goods, but
not including automobile, truck, motorcycle, snowmobile,
all-terrain vehicle, outboard motor and water jet ski
vehicle repairs.
[a] No additional people other than resident members of
the immediate family may be employed.
[b] The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter
shall be met.
[c] In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in
this chapter for the particular residential use
concerned, this accessory use shall provide one offstreet
space per 300 square feet of total floor area
used for the home occupation.
[d] There shall be a minimum lot area of two acres in all
districts.
[e] No more than one employee other than resident
members of the immediate family shall be permitted
unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception.
[7] B10g Family Day-Care. A family day-care use is a facility in
which care is provided for one or more children, but no
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:696
more than six at any one time, who are not relatives of the
caregiver, where the child-care areas are being used as a
family residence.
[a] Licensing, approval and permit procedures. Prior to
the final approval of the use by the Board of
Supervisors and the granting of a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board, if applicable, and the
granting of a permit by the Zoning Officer, the
applicant must obtain a license from the Department
of Public Welfare, Bureau of Child Development
Programs. Licensure is certification of compliance
with Chapter H, Section 8C, of the Department of
Public Welfare's Social Services Manual by this
Department to the applicant subject to licensure
under Article X of the Public Welfare Code.
[b] This use shall be conducted in a building designed for
residential occupancy and for the safety and wellbeing
of the occupants.
[c] A minimum outdoor play area of 200 square feet of
contiguous area shall be provided for each child as a
recreational area for the children. This area shall not
include any impervious surface or parking area.
[d] Family day-care uses are only permitted as an
accessory use in a single-family detached dwelling.
[e] The outdoor play area must be enclosed by a four-foothigh
fence which is deemed appropriate by the
Township. The outdoor play area shall be located to
the side or rear of the property.
[f] No more than one person other than resident
members of the immediate family may be employed.
[g] The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter
shall be met.
[h] The use shall be located on a public street.
[i] The use, by special exception, may be expanded to a
group day-care home which is a facility in which care
is provided for more than six, but no more than 11,
children. The following criteria shall be met:
[i] All standards noted above for family day-care uses
shall be met.
[ii] The regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Welfare shall be met.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:697
[iii] Such uses shall be permitted only in single-family
detached dwellings or in an accessory building on
the same lot.
[iv] Minimum lot area: two acres.
[8] B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business. A business or
commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use to a residential use that is clearly secondary
to the residential use of the dwelling. The activities shall
not involve any customer, client, or patient traffic, either
vehicular or pedestrian, in excess of that normally
associated with a residential use, and shall not involve
pickup, delivery, or removal functions to or from the
premises in excess of that normally associated with a
residential use. The activity shall satisfy the following
requirements:
[a] The activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and the surrounding residential
uses.
[b] The activity shall not employ anyone other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
[c] There shall be no display or sale of retail goods, and
no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
[d] There shall be no outside appearance of a business
use including, but not limited to, parking, signs, or
lights.
[e] The activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, that is not
normally associated with a residential use in the
neighborhood.
[f] The activity shall be conducted only within the
residential dwelling and may not occupy more than
25% of habitable floor area.
(11) B11 Bed-and-Breakfast. A residential building containing five or
fewer guest rooms, converted or designed for the temporary
lodging of transient guests, which is accessory only to a singlefamily
detached residential use that is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter for the zoning district in which the
residential building is located, and subject to the following
regulations:
(a) The minimum lot size shall be two acres for three guest rooms
and one additional acre for each additional guest room, up to a
maximum of five guest rooms.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:698
(b) There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any
guest room. Food served to guests on the premises shall be
limited to breakfast and afternoon tea only.
(c) The maximum uninterrupted length of stay at a bed-andbreakfast
shall be seven days within a three-month period.
(d) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest
room, plus one space for each employee and two spaces for the
owners of the property. The off-street parking spaces shall be
located either to the rear of the main dwelling or screened
from the roadway as specified in § 195-63, Buffer yards, in this
chapter.
(e) There shall be no use of show windows or display or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract guests or
otherwise, other than a single, nonilluminated sign which may
not exceed six square feet.
(f) At least one full bathroom shall be provided for the first guest
room, plus one bathroom for each two additional guest rooms.
The living quarters for the owner residents shall have their
own separate and additional bathroom facilities.
(g) The bed-and-breakfast-inn use shall be conducted by family
members of the resident owner-occupant. Nonresident
employees shall be limited to two in addition to the resident
family members.
(h) No more than two adults and two children may occupy one
guest room.
(i) The utilization of any amenities provided by the bed-andbreakfast
inn, such as a swimming pool or tennis courts, shall
be restricted in use to the owners and the guests of the bedand-
breakfast inn.
(j) A permit issued for a bed-and-breakfast inn shall have a life of
one year. The permit shall be renewed annually upon
application by the owner and payment of the annual fee
provided in the Township Fee Schedule, and provided also that
the Zoning Officer has inspected the facility and found it to be
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(k) The bed-and-breakfast-inn use may not be established until
there is compliance with all Township ordinances, rules and
regulations. The bed-and-breakfast inn will be periodically
inspected by the Fire Marshal for compliance with all Township
safety standards. All Department of Labor and Industry
requirements must be satisfied, and proof thereof shall be
required for the bed-and-breakfast-inn permit or renewal
thereof. Sewage disposal methods shall conform with the
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:699
requirements of the requirements, rules and regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the
Bucks County Department of Health and the Warwick
Township Sewage Facilities Plan.
(l) The applicant shall furnish a valid Bucks County Department of
Health permit. The total number of bedrooms (resident and
guest) in the bed-and-breakfast inn shall not exceed the
number of bedrooms which the on-lot sewage system is
designed to accommodate. If the proposed bed-and-breakfast
use is to be served by a public sewage disposal system, the
applicant shall submit documentation from the servicing
authority that the proposed use will be served.
(12) B12 Residential Accessory Building, Structure or Use. Residential
accessory building, structure or use, including but not limited to:
(a) A private garage or private parking space but not for
commercial vehicles with more than two axles.
(b) Buildings such as storage sheds, bathhouses and private
greenhouses.
(c) Stables, barns, or shelters for pets.
(d) Living quarters for household employees, caretakers or
watchmen, provided that no more than two such persons shall
be provided with living quarters.
(e) Decks, patios or gazebos conforming to the definition of
"accessory building."
(f) Structures such as fences or walls.
[1] Security fences. No security or man-proof fence
incorporating barbed wire, electrification, razor tape or
other similar feature shall be permitted in any residential
district except where the land is being utilized for
agricultural or horticultural use or in connection with
construction material storage.
[2] Exempt fences. Temporary fences, such as snow fences
and fences or barriers around construction sites, which
are not to stand more than one year, are exempt from
permit requirements. All temporary fences must conform
to all other provisions governing the location, placement,
erection and maintenance of fences and retaining walls.
[3] Obstruction of vision. No fences, retaining wall, vegetation
and/or structure of any nature shall exist or be placed and/
or erected in such a manner which may impede the clear
line of sight of vehicular or pedestrian traffic as defined in
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:700
[4] Right-of-way. No fence, retaining wall and/or any structure
of any nature shall be placed and/or erected within the
designated street right-of-way or potential future right-ofway,
with the exception of required traffic signals and
traffic signage as defined on the final recorded plan of all
subdivisions and land developments.
[5] Drainage swales/easements. No fence, retaining wall or
other structure shall be erected or maintained upon any
drainage easement, swale, road right-of-way, sight
distance easement or within deed restricted open space.
Fences may be erected in sewer easements or easements
for underground storm sewer facilities only with written
permission of the holder of the easement. Fences may be
erected or placed at the property line subject to all other
requirements of this subsection.
[6] Maintenance. Fences and retaining walls shall be
constructed, maintained and repaired in conformance to
the Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania, as
adopted by the Township, and applicable Township
ordinances.196
[7] Properties with principal structures within 100 feet of
each other. All fences shall be erected with the finished
side of the fence facing adjacent properties and roadways.
The finished side shall be considered the side without the
structural supporting posts. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-1]
[8] Maximum height:
[a] Residential districts. Fences shall not be taller than six
feet above grade.
[b] Nonresidential districts. Fences shall not be taller
than 10 feet above grade.
(g) A swimming pool for use of family and guests only subject to
the following requirements:
[1] Setback requirements. The following minimum setback
requirements shall govern the location of private
swimming pools, wading pools, and public swimming
pools, provided that such pools, including appurtenances
such as decks, patios, sidewalks, etc., shall not be located
further forward than the front of the building and shall not
be located within the front yard setback: [Amended
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:701
Zoning District
Side and Rear Yard Setback
(measured from the edge of
coping)
(feet)
MF-1, MF-2, RA, R1,
R1a, R2, RG, RR, O
25
C1, C2, C3, LI, VC, VC2 75
Public pool in any
zoning district
75
B2 and B3 use housing,
regardless of district
15
[2] A grading plan shall be submitted with a pool permit,
showing existing draining patterns and demonstrating that
drainage patterns are not to be altered as a result of the
installation of the pool. To ensure that there is no adverse
effect on adjacent properties, prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit for the pool, the property owner shall
submit an as-built grading plan which shall be reviewed by
the Township Engineer to ensure that there is no
disturbance of drainage patterns existing prior to the
installation of the pool and drainage patterns shown on the
subdivision or land development plan which created the lot
on which the pool is installed.
(h) Greenhouses accessory to residential dwelling. Greenhouses
may be accessory to a residential use, subject to the following
conditions:
[1] The total area of all greenhouses on a property may not
exceed 300 square feet.
[2] All plants grown in a residential greenhouse must be used
on the property on which the greenhouse is located; plants
grown in a greenhouse accessory to a residential use may
not be sold.
[3] The maximum height of a greenhouse on a residential
property shall be 20 feet.
[4] A greenhouse is an impervious surface.
(i) Tennis courts, basketball courts, and skateboard facilities shall
be permitted accessory to a residential use, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:702
[1] Building permits are required prior to construction,
alteration, remodeling of, or addition to a tennis court,
basketball court, or skateboard facility.
[2] All applicants for a permit for a tennis court, basketball
court, or skateboard facility shall submit a grading plan to
ensure that there will be no disturbance of existing
drainage patterns.
[3] Each tennis court, basketball court, or skateboard facility
shall be suitably designed, located, and maintained so as
not to be a nuisance or hazard either to adjoining property
owners or the public generally.
[4] Lighting for a tennis court, basketball court, or skateboard
facility shall not exceed 10 feet in height, and all lighting
shall be directed such that all light and glare are within the
immediate area of the court or facility with the cut-off
angle arranged to avoid projecting light outside of such
immediate area or skyward. All lights shall be designed or
equipped with shielding so that the light source within the
luminary is not visible outside the intended illuminated
area. The intended illuminated area shall not extend
beyond the immediate area of the court or facility.
[5] There shall be fencing surrounding a tennis or basketball
court, which fencing shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
[6] All tennis courts, basketball courts, or skateboard facilities
shall conform to the same setback requirements from all
property lines as principal buildings in their respective
zoning districts.
[7] Tennis courts, basketball courts, and skateboard facilities
shall be surrounded by an evergreen buffer consisting of
materials adequate to screen the court from view of
adjacent properties. The buffer surrounding the tennis
court, basketball court, or skateboard facility shall be of
sufficient size and composition to reduce noise emanating
from the property to the level which existed prior to the
construction of the court or facility. The height of the
buffer, at planting, shall be eight feet, but the height of the
buffer may be adjusted upwards or downwards by the
Township Zoning Officer to achieve the stated compliance
standards.
[8] In no event shall the construction of a tennis court,
basketball court, skateboard facility or other recreational
facility cause a violation of the maximum impervious
surface ratio or natural resource protection requirements
of the underlying zoning district.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:703
(j) An accessory building may be erected within a side and/or rear
yard, provided that it is located no further forward than the
front building line of the primary structure on the property, and
provided, further, that the accessory building shall be located
no less than seven feet from the side or rear property line.
(k) Accessory buildings, including swimming pools, may abut
deed-restricted open space areas but may not encroach upon
such area.
(l) All accessory buildings or uses shall not exceed 20 feet in
height, except flagpoles, which may have a maximum height of
35 feet.
(m) A utility structure, including but not limited to, an oil tank,
HVAC unit, generator, or pool equipment, may be erected
within the side and/or rear yard, provided that it is located no
further forward than the front building line of the primary
structure on the property, and provided, further, that the utility
structure shall be located no less than seven feet from the side
or rear property line. In the case where the primary building is
located less than seven feet from a side or rear property line,
the utility structure shall be located no closer to the property
line than the primary structure. [Added 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-1; amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(n) On properties less than three acres in size, no more than four
accessory structures, including but not limited to sheds,
garages, pool houses, barns, stables, shelters for pets,
greenhouses and bathhouses, shall be permitted on one
property. Fences, walls, decks, gazebos and patios shall not be
considered accessory structures for the purposes of this
subsection only. [Added 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12]
(o) On any lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be
maintained, which may cause danger to vehicular traffic or
pedestrians on a street or public road by obscuring the view or
obstructing the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. [Added
11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12]
C. Institutional uses.
(1) C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship. Any structure or structures
used for worship or religious instruction with sanctuary seating not
in excess of 350 seats, and including social and administrative
rooms accessory thereto. Use C8 Cemetery and Use G2 Day-Care
Center are permitted as accessory uses to this principal use,
provided that these accessory uses must meet the dimensional
requirements set forth in § 195-16C(8) and § 195-16G(2),
respectively.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:704
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: five acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: 65 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Signage. In residential districts, signage shall not exceed 20
square feet. In the C1, C2, C3, VC, VC 2, O and LI Districts,
signage shall comply with all district regulations. All churches
along the Pa. Route 263 Corridor shall comply with the
regulations of the Corridor Overlay District as set forth in
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.197
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for each four seats
provided for patron use, or at least one off-street parking space
for each 40 square feet of total floor area used or intended to
be used for service to patrons, guests or members, whichever
requires a greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus
one additional space for each full-time employee. Parking areas
shall be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of
land zoned for or in residential use.
(2) C2 Community Place of Worship. Any structure or structures used
for worship or religious instruction with sanctuary seating in
excess of 350 seats, and including social and administrative rooms
accessory thereto. Use C8 Cemetery and Use G2 Day-Care Center
are permitted as accessory uses to this principal use, provided that
these accessory uses must meet the dimensional requirements set
forth in § 195-16C(8) and § 195-16G(2), respectively.
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 400 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: 65 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:705
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) This use shall only be permitted in the C1, C2, C3, O, LI, VC,
and VC 2 Districts.
(d) Signage. All signage shall comply with Article XXII of this
chapter.
(e) Parking: one off-street parking space for each four seats
provided for patron use, or at least one off-street parking space
for each 40 square feet of total floor area used or intended to
be used for service to patrons, guests or members, whichever
requires a greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus
one additional space for each full-time employee. Parking areas
shall be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of
land zoned for or in residential use.
(3) C3 School. Religious, sectarian or nonsectarian, denominational
private school or public school which is not conducted as a private
gainful business; nursery schools operated as a private gainful
business. Nursery schools or daycares with an enrollment of 100
students or more shall be considered a school under this definition.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(a) Access shall be taken from an arterial or collector highway.
(b) Dimensional requirements.
[1] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be as
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Education,
provided that in no event shall a C3 use be located on a site
which is less than 10 acres in size.
[2] Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 100 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
(c) Outdoor play areas shall be 75 feet from side and rear property
lines. Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened to
protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) Parking:
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:706
[1] Nursery school or kindergarten: one off-street parking
space for each faculty member and employee, plus two
additional spaces per classroom.
[2] Elementary school: one off-street parking space for each
faculty member and employee, plus one space per two
classrooms and offices.
[3] Junior high school: one off-street parking space for each
faculty member and employee, plus one space per two
classrooms and offices, or one off-street parking space for
each 10 auditorium seats, whichever requires the greater
number of off-street parking spaces.
[4] Senior high school: one off-street parking space for each
faculty member and employee, plus one space per 10
classroom seats, or one off-street parking space for each
10 auditorium seats, whichever requires the greater
number of off-street parking spaces.
[5] College and junior college: one off-street parking space
per faculty member and employee, plus one space for each
10 classroom seats, or one off-street parking space for
each 10 auditorium seats, whichever requires the greater
number of off-street parking spaces.
[6] Stadium parking. In addition to the above parking
requirements, any junior or senior high school or college
which proposes a sports facility on school property shall
provide an additional one off-street parking space for each
eight seats.
[7] Parking areas shall be adequately screened when situated
within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
Pickup and drop-off facilities for buses and/or motor
vehicles shall be provided in addition to the required
parking spaces as described above.
(4) C4 Library or Museum. Library or museum, open to the public or
connected with a permitted educational use and not conducted as a
private gainful business.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: one space per five seats or one space per 250 square
feet of total floor area where no seats are provided. Parking
areas shall be adequately screened when situated within 50
feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:707
(5) C5 Hospital. An establishment, licensed by the American Hospital
Association, which provides health services primarily for in-patient
medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including related
facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices as an integral
part of the establishment. A hospital is subject to the following
additional provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) Any such establishment providing convalescent care or care
for the chronically sick shall provide an additional lot area of
not less than 1,000 square feet per bed in use for such longterm
care. For the purpose of this chapter, "long-term care"
shall mean care in excess of one month.
(c) Care shall be taken to locate emergency and service entrances
where they are not offensive to adjoining neighbors.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) Such use shall take access from collector or arterial highways
only.
(f) Parking: one off-street parking space for each patient bed; plus
one off-street parking space for every two employees and staff
members. Parking areas must be adequately screened when
situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(6) C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living. A continuing care
facility is a form of residential use designed and operated for
individuals requiring support facilities including personal care or
assisted living facilities, but not requiring full-time skilled nursing
care (Use C7). Continuing care/assisted living facilities are subject
to the following restrictions:
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[2] Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
[3] Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum lot width at minimum building setback: 250 feet.
[6] Minimum setback from tract boundary: 75 feet.
(b) Maximum density: 16 assisted living units per acres of net buildable site area;
provided, however, that no facility shall contain more than 60
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:708
units. Each bed shall be considered a separate unit. No more
than one facility shall be permitted per site.
(c) Maximum height: Three stories or 35 feet including any
mechanical equipment, such as HVAC equipment located on
the roof, whichever is less. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-1]
(d) Maximum impervious ratio: 50%.
(e) Open space and passive recreational area: At least 50% of the
site area must be maintained as open space which shall not
include detention basins, parking lots, accessory buildings, or
any impervious surfaces except those used for recreational
purposes. At least 20% of the site, which may be considered
part of the open space, shall be developed for passive
recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting areas and
pedestrian walks. No outdoor sitting area shall be located in
areas subject to flooding or on slopes in excess of 5%. Open
space may include side and rear yards.
(f) Off-street parking: one off-street parking space for every two
beds, plus one space for each employee.
(g) Continuing care/assisted living facilities shall meet the
standards and requirements for licensing as established by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other agencies with
jurisdiction.
(h) Continuing care facilities must be served by a public or
privately owned centralized water system and a public or
privately owned sewage disposal system pursuant to the
Township's Act 537 Plan.
(7) C7 Skilled Care/Nursing Home Facility. A skilled care/nursing home
facility is a form of residential use designed and operated
exclusively for individuals requiring skilled full-time care.
(a) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[2] Minimum front yard: 75 feet, which shall be measured
from the front edge of any drop-off area.
[3] Minimum side yard: 75 feet.
[4] Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(b) Maximum density: eight patient rooms per acre, based on
single or double occupancy.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:709
(c) Maximum height: three stories or 35 feet including any
mechanical equipment, such as HVAC equipment located on
the roof, whichever is less.
(d) Open space and passive recreational area: At least 50% of the
site area must be maintained as open space which shall not
include detention basins, parking lots, accessory buildings, or
any impervious surfaces except those used for recreational
purposes. At least 20% of the site, which may be considered
part of the open space, shall be developed for passive
recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting areas and
pedestrian walks. No outdoor sitting area shall be located in
areas subject to flooding or on slopes in excess of 5%. Open
space may include side and rear yards.
(e) Fire protection improvements shall be provided in accordance
with applicable Township codes.
(f) Each skilled-care or nursing home facility shall annually
provide the Township with copies of an ambulance service
contract to serve the residents of the facility.
(g) A traffic impact study and water impact study shall be
prepared in accordance with specifications provided by the
Township's consulting engineers.
(h) There shall be a fifty-foot buffer along the rear and side
property lines. The buffer shall consist of materials as set forth
in § 195-63 of this chapter and in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.198
(i) Parking. There must be 0.85 off-street parking space per
bedroom in addition to one off-street parking space for each
employee on the largest shift. All parking lots shall be located
to the side and rear of the building as it faces the street.
(j) All full-care facilities shall connect to public sewer in
conformance with the Township's Act 537 Plan.
(8) C8 Cemetery. A burial place or graveyard including mausoleum,
columbarium, or chapel. A crematory shall not be permitted as a
cemetery use or part of the cemetery use.
(a) Dimensional requirements (except for pet cemeteries):
[1] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[2] Minimum yards and setbacks: 100 feet.
(b) Dimensional requirements for pet cemeteries:
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:710
[1] Minimum lot area: three acres.
[2] Minimum yards and setbacks: 25 feet.
(c) Lot coverage of accessory buildings and parking facilities. No
more than 10% to a maximum of five acres may be devoted to
aboveground buildings or impervious surfaces not serving as
burial markers or memorials.
(d) No burial plots, structures or parking areas shall be located
within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) No outside storage shall be permitted.
(f) All structures open to the public shall be supplied with water
and sewer and all utilities shall be placed underground.
(g) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(h) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(i) Additional requirements for pet cemetery:
[1] All grave markers shall be placed flush to the ground.
[2] All caskets shall be of durable construction and not subject
to breakage or deterioration. Caskets shall not be stacked
one above another underground, and the top of every
casket shall be at least three feet below the existing grade.
The owner or operator shall maintain at all times a current
burial plot diagram showing all plots in use, which shall be
available to the Township for inspection upon request.
(j) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee and
one parking space for each four visitors in total capacity of the
chapel. Parking areas must be adequately screened when
situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(9) C9 Municipal Use. A municipal use is a use conducted by Warwick
Township, or a municipal authority incorporated by Warwick
Township, for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
Township residents. Municipal uses include, but are not limited to,
municipal buildings, administration buildings, police barracks,
recreation buildings, libraries, road maintenance facilities, and all
municipal-owned utilities and appurtenances used in connection
with supplying such services. Municipal uses not owned or
operated by Warwick Township or a municipal authority
incorporated by Warwick Township shall be subject to the
requirements for E1 Utility or Public Service Uses.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:711
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for every employee, plus
one space for every five seats in meeting areas. Parking areas
must be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of
land zoned for or in residential use.
D. Recreational uses.
(1) D1 Recreational Facility. Recreational facility or park, subject to
the restrictions below:
(a) This use shall not include Use G15 Indoor Athletic Clubs,
amusement parks, wild animal parks or zoos. This use shall not
include recreation facilities which involve the discharge of
firearms, except in a fully enclosed and soundproof building.
This use shall not include areas created as open space in a
residential subdivision or land development and owned by a
homeowners' association.
(b) No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to
any lot line or street line than 25 feet, except for bike paths and
walking, jogging, or fitness trails, which shall be located no
closer than 10 feet from lot or street lines.
(c) Uses providing outdoor active recreation areas such as
baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields, hockey fields,
lacrosse fields, basketball courts, tennis courts and swimming
pools and similar uses shall observe the following standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: five acres.
[2] No outdoor active recreation area shall be located closer
than 100 feet to any lot line.
(d) Model airplane clubs, glider or ultra-light flying clubs, skeet
shooting, archery ranges and similar uses shall observe the
following standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[2] No area used for such purposes shall be located closer
than 500 feet to any lot line.
(e) Private outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened so as
to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and
other disturbances. As a minimum, the buffer requirements of
§ 195-63 of this chapter shall be met. Additionally, such areas
shall be fenced or enclosed when deemed necessary by the
Township.
(f) Parking: one off-street parking space for each five persons of
total capacity, or at least one off-street parking space for each
50 square feet of total floor area used or intended to be used
for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members,
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:712
whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking
spaces, plus one additional space for each employee. Parking
areas shall be adequately screened when situated within 50
feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(2) D2 Private Club. Private club or lodge other than Use D1.
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) The use shall be for members and their authorized guests only.
(c) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for each five members of
total capacity, or at least one off-street parking space for each
50 square feet of total floor area used or intended to be used
for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members,
whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking
spaces, plus one additional space for each employee. Parking
areas shall be adequately screened when situated within 50
feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(e) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) D3 Community Center. Community center, adult education center,
child educational/recreational center, or other similar facility
operated by an educational, philanthropic, or religious institution.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) The use shall not be conducted as a private, gainful business.
(c) No outdoor recreation area shall be located nearer to any lot
line than 100 feet.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) Parking: one off-street parking space for each four seats
provided for patron use; or at least one off-street parking space
for each 50 square feet of total floor area used or intended to
be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, or members,
whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking
spaces, plus one additional space for each employee. Parking
areas shall be adequately screened when situated within 50
feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(4) D4 Golf Course. Golf course, including chip and putt courses and
accessory driving ranges, but not including miniature golf courses,
including clubhouse, restaurant, and other accessory uses,
provided these are clearly accessory to the golf course.
(a) Minimum lot area:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:713
Type
Minimum Lot Area
(acres)
Regulation 18-hole 130
Executive
18-hole 60
9-hole 50
Par 3 18-hole 45
Par 3 9-hole 25
(b) No building shall be closer than 100 feet to any lot line.
Additionally, no fairway or green shall be any closer than 100
feet to any lot line or street right-of-way.
(c) All necessary fencing or other protection shall be installed or
erected to ensure that no golf balls leave the site.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for every five members of
total capacity, or at least one off-street parking space for each
50 square feet of total floor area used or intended to be used
for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members,
whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking
spaces, plus one additional space for each employee. Parking
areas shall be adequately screened when situated within 50
feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(5) D5 Camp. A tract of land and buildings or structures planned as a
whole for seasonal use, comprising two or more cottages and other
related buildings; also includes privately operated camps for boys
or girls using two or more cottages for shelter or sleeping
purposes.
(a) Minimum site area: 10 acres.
(b) The main use of the proposed development shall be seasonal,
that is for periodic use over a limited number of months during
particular seasons of the year, and no occupant shall be
permitted to remain for a total period exceeding 120 days
during any one calendar year with the exception of a caretaker,
groundskeeper or other staff.
(c) Sewage disposal methods shall conform with the requirements
of the Bucks County Department of Health and the Warwick
Township Sewage Facilities Plan.
(d) The maximum overall density shall not exceed one cottage for
every two acres. The maximum number of occupants per
cottage shall be 16.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:714
(e) Completely detached buildings or structures on the same lot
shall not be less than 20 feet from one another.
(f) Adequate measures to prevent noise and other noxious
influences from disturbing nearby residential properties shall
be taken.
(g) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(h) No mobile homes and no recreational vehicles shall be
permitted as part of a cottage development or private camp as
defined herein.
(i) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(j) Parking: 1 1/4 parking spaces shall be provided for each
cottage, plus one additional space for each employee on the
largest shift.
(6) D6 Miscellaneous Golf Uses.
(a) Miniature golf course including office.
[1] A miniature golf course shall have its lot frontage on and
take access from an arterial highway, as defined in the
Township ordinances.
[2] Minimum lot area: five acres.
[3] Minimum setback from street and property lines: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[5] Parking: one off-street parking space for each 50 square
feet used for service to customers, patrons, clients, or
guests, plus one additional space for each employee.
Parking areas shall be adequately screened when situated
within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(b) Golf driving range.
[1] A golf driving range shall have its lot frontage on and take
access from an arterial highway, as defined in the
Township ordinances.
[2] Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
[3] Minimum setback from street and property lines: 100 feet.
[4] Tees and driving areas shall be arranged so as to protect
surrounding properties, streets and buildings from golf
balls. All necessary measures, including fencing or net,
shall be taken to ensure that balls shall not leave the
property.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:715
[5] Lighting. Any lighting shall be installed in such a manner
as to ensure that no light projects off the site.
[6] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[7] Parking: one off-street parking space for each stall, plus
one additional space for each employee. The foregoing
parking requirements shall be in addition to the parking
requirements for miniature golf courses if developed
jointly. Parking areas shall be adequately screened when
situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential
use.
E. Utility service uses.
(1) E1 Utility or Public Service Uses.
(a) Utility or public service uses shall be limited to transformer
stations, pumping stations, relay stations, cellular
telecommunications facilities, electrical substations, telephone
substations, sewage treatment plants, and any similar or
related installations, not including public incinerators and
public or private landfills, provided that: [Amended
2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3]
[1] No public business office or any storage yard or storage
building shall be operated in connection with the utility/
public service use except in commercial and industrial
zoning districts.
[2] A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with existing
ordinances along all property lines and street right-of-way
lines which shall include adequate means for visual
screening and shall include the following minimum
setbacks from all property lines:
[a] Water tower: set back not less than the height of the
tower, plus 200 feet.
[b] Electrical substation: 50 feet.
[c] Well facility: 100 feet.
[d] Sewer pumping station: 50 feet.
[e] Water treatment facility: 100 feet.
[f] Sewage treatment plant: 200 feet.
[g] All other utility/public services uses: 50 feet.
[3] Cellular communication facilities, water storage facilities
and sewage treatment plants shall be permitted only by
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:716
special exception to the Zoning Hearing Board subject to
§ 195-118.
(b) Cellular or telecommunications facility. [Amended 2-18-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-3]
[1] The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based
wireless communications facilities:
[a] Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower
Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at all times be
kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township. The
owner of the tower-based WCF shall perform a
minimum of one on-site inspection of the tower-based
WCF each year. The on-site inspection shall include a
climb of the tower-based WCF. A written report,
prepared by a professional engineer, detailing the
results of the on-site inspection, including the
climbing inspection, shall be submitted to the
Township within 30 days of the inspection. In the
event the inspection reveals any issues with the
structural integrity of the WCF, the owner of the WCF
shall, within 60 days, take any and all steps to repair
the facility and submit a further report to the
Township indicating the nature of the repairs made.
The report shall include a certification of structural
integrity by a professional engineer. Failure to make
the necessary repairs and submit a certification of
structural integrity within 60 days of the original
inspection shall result in the revocation of the zoning
permit and shall require the prompt removal of the
tower-based WCF.
[b] Permit required. Any applicant proposing the
construction of a new tower-based WCF, or the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF, shall
first obtain a permit from the Township zoning office.
New construction and modifications shall be
prohibited without a zoning permit.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:717
[i] Zoning permit. Applicants proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall
obtain an administrative permit from the
Township zoning office. In order to be considered
for such permit, the applicant must submit the
following documentation:
[A] A permit application;
[B] Plans, drawings, or detailed renderings of the
proposed redesign of the facility, containing
the signature and seal of an engineer licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
[C] A statement signed and notarized by the
applicant verifying that the proposed
modifications will not render the design and
specifications of the facility still in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
[ii] Special exception. Applicants proposing the
construction of a new tower-based WCF must
meet the following criteria before the Township
Zoning Hearing Board considers granting a
special exception to permit such construction:
[A] The applicant shall submit a permit to the
Township zoning office.
[B] The applicant shall demonstrate that the
tower-based WCF is the minimum height
necessary for the service area.
[C] The applicant shall present documentation
that the tower-based WCF is designed in
accordance with all applicable provisions set
forth in this chapter.
[D] Where the proposed tower-based WCF will be
located on a property with another principal
use, the applicant shall present
documentation evidencing that the owner of
the property has granted an easement for the
proposed facility, and that vehicular access is
provided to that facility.
[c] Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind according to
the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSS/
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:718
EIA-222-E Code, as amended). Such structures must
be designed to withstand wind gusts of at least 100
miles per hour with no ice and 78 miles per hour basic
wind speed with radial ice of 0.5 inch.
[d] Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. All tower-based WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the
Township justifying the total height of the structure.
The maximum total height of any tower-based WCF,
which is not located in the public right-of-way, shall
not exceed 130 feet, which height shall include all
subsequent additions or alterations. Equipment
buildings, cabinets, and accessory structures shall not
exceed 12 feet in height. The maximum total height of
any tower-based WCF which is located within the
public right-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet.
[e] Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[f] Maintenance. The following maintenance
requirements shall apply:
[i] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated
and unattended on a daily basis and shall be
visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the Township's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[g] Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may,
by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate
radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards
and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[h] Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF
may be located on a building or structure that is listed
on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places or the official historic structures and/
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:719
or historic districts list maintained by the Township,
or has been designated by the Township as being of
historic significance.
[i] Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a
readily visible location identifying the name and
phone number of a party to contact in the event of an
emergency.
[j] Lighting. Tower-based WCF shall not be artificially
lighted, except as required by law. Towers shall be
galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint
of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings. If lighting is required, the applicant
shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal
regulations.
[k] Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of
applicable noise standards under state law and the
Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only.
[l] Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
[m] Retention of experts. The Township may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Township in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this section.
The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[n] Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a tower-based WCF is filed
with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of any information that may be
required to complete such application. All applications
for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for
the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the
Township shall advise the applicant, in writing, of its
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:720
decision. If additional information was requested by
the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the applicant to provide the information
shall not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day
review period.
[o] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based
WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
at their former location, but must otherwise comply
with the terms and conditions of this section.
[p] Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF
is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the Township of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions
of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[i] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and
accessory facilities shall be removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the
Township.
[ii] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not
removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the WCF.
[iii] Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs,
including antennas, shall be removed within six
months of the time of cessation of operations. The
Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
[q] Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a tower-based WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
[r] FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
facility.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:721
[s] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence
covering the tower-based WCF.
[t] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents,
at all times against any and all claims for personal
injury, including death, and property damage arising,
in whole or in part, from, caused by or connected with
any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the tower-based WCF.
Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Township in which it is claimed that personal
injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to
pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[u] Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower
and antenna shall contain a seal and signature of a
professional structure engineer, licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[v] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit
for the construction or placement of a tower-based
WCF, the applicant shall provide to the Township
financial security sufficient to guarantee the removal
of the tower-based WCF. Said financial security shall
remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
[2] The following regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located outside the
rights-of-way:
[a] Development regulations:
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:722
[i] Prohibited in residential zones. No tower-based
WCF shall be located in a district zoned
residential or within 500 feet of a residential
district boundary.
[ii] Prohibited within 300 feet of York Road. No
tower-based WCF shall be located within 300 feet
of the ultimate right-of-way of Pennsylvania Route
263 (York Road).
[iii] Site requirements. A tower-based WCF may be
located as permitted in the district regulations
and table of uses, subject to all of the conditions
listed in this section.
[iv] Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based
WCF must demonstrate that a significant gap in
wireless coverage exists with respect to all
wireless operators in the applicable area and that
the type of WCF being proposed is the least
intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence
of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in
the Township's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCFs.
[v] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted as a sole use on a lot, subject to the
minimum lot area and yards, complying with the
following requirements:
[A] Setback. The tower-based WCF shall be set
back from any property line, recreational
facility, fields, or public right-of-way a
distance that is at least equal to 1 1/2 the
height of the tower.
[B] In order to locate a tower-based WCF on a
property with an agricultural use, the tract
shall be at least 10 acres.
[vi] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF
may be permitted on a property with an existing
use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with
another industrial, commercial, institutional or
municipal use, subject to the following conditions:
[A] The existing use on the property may be any
permitted use in the applicable district and
need not be affiliated with the
communications facility.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:723
[B] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall
comply with the requirements for the
applicable district and shall be the area
needed to accommodate the tower-based
WCF and guy wires, the equipment building,
security fence, and buffer planting.
[C] Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF
and accompanying equipment building shall
comply with the requirements for the
applicable zoning district, provided that no
tower-based WCF shall be located within 500
feet of a lot in residential use or a residential
district boundary. The minimum setback shall
be a distance that is at least equal to 1 1/2 the
height of the tower.
[b] Notice. Upon submission of an application for a towerbased
WCF, the applicant shall mail notice thereof to
the owner or owners of every property zoned
residential on the same street within 1,000 linear feet
of the site of the proposed facility and of every
property zoned residential not on the same street
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant
shall provide proof of the notification to the Township.
[c] Co-location. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall not be approved unless the Township finds
that the wireless communications equipment planned
for the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure
or building. Any application for approval of a towerbased
WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of
all existing towers and other suitable structures
within a two-mile radius from the point of the
proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to the
satisfaction of the Township that a different distance is
more reasonable and shall demonstrate conclusively
why an existing tower or other suitable structure
cannot be utilized.
[d] Design regulations:
[i] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth
technology available in an effort to appropriately
blend into the surrounding environment and
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant
shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
In the sole discretion of the Township, the
requirement to utilize stealth technology may be
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:724
waived if the Board of Supervisors determines
that the waiver is in the best interest of the
Township.
[ii] Any height extensions to an existing tower-based
WCF shall require prior approval of the Township.
The Township reserves the right to deny such
requests based upon aesthetic and land use
impact or any other lawful considerations related
to the character of the Township.
[iii] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas
and comparable antennas for future users.
[e] Surrounding environs:
[i] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within
proximity to the WCF structure shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible.
[ii] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to
the Township complying with the standards of
Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/
EIA 222-E, as amended, to document and verify
the design specifications of the foundation of the
tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if
used.
[f] Fence/screen:
[i] A security fence having a maximum height of
eight feet shall completely surround any towerbased
WCF, guy wires, or any building housing
WCF equipment.
[ii] An evergreen screen that consists of a hedge,
planted three feet on center maximum, or a row of
evergreen trees, planted 10 feet on center
maximum, shall be located along the perimeter of
the security fence. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[g] Accessory equipment:
[i] Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be
underground or screened from public view using
stealth technologies, as described above.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:725
[ii] All utility buildings and accessory structures shall
be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
[h] Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide
the Township with a written commitment that it will
allow other service providers to co-locate antennas on
tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based
WCF shall not install any additional antennas without
obtaining the prior written approval of the Township.
[i] Access road. An access road, turnaround space and
parking shall be provided to ensure adequate
emergency and service access to tower-based WCF.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or
private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure
minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present
documentation to the Township that the property
owner has granted an easement for the proposed
facility.
[j] Parking. For each tower-based WCF, there shall be
two off-street parking spaces, or one space per
employee, whichever is greater.
[k] Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a
tower-based WCF outside the right-of-way shall, at its
own cost and expense, obtain from a surety licensed to
do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond or
other form of security acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, in an amount of $100,000 to assure the
faithful performance of the terms and conditions of
this section. The bond shall provide that the Township
may recover from the principal and surety any and all
compensatory damages incurred by the Township for
violations of this section, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure. The owner shall file the bond with
the Township.
[l] Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the
right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any tower-based WCF based upon visual
and/or land use impact. Denial of a tower-based WCF
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:726
facility permit shall be consistent with the Township's
Recreation Open Space Plan.
[m] Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect
any tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section and any other provisions
found within the Township Code or state or federal
law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is
located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
[3] The following regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located in the rights-ofway:
[a] Prohibited in residential zones. No tower-based WCF
shall be located within a residential zone or within 500
feet of a residential district boundary.
[b] Prohibited in York Road Corridor Overlay District. No
tower-based WCF shall be located within the right-ofway
of York Road (Pennsylvania Route 263) in the
Corridor Overlay District as shown on the Zoning
District Map.
[c] Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF
must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage exists with respect to all wireless operators
in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill
that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or
nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in the Township's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCFs in the right-of-way.
[d] Notice. Upon submission of an application for a towerbased
WCF, the applicant shall mail notice thereof to
the owner or owners of every property zoned
residential on the same street within 1,000 linear feet
of the site of the proposed facility and of every
property zoned residential not on the same street
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant
shall provide proof of the notification to the Township.
[e] Co-location. An application for a new tower-based
WCF in the right-of-way shall not be approved unless
the Township finds that the proposed wireless
communications equipment cannot be accommodated
on an existing structure, such as a utility pole or traffic
light pole. Any application for approval of a towerbased
WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:727
all existing towers and other suitable structures
within a one-mile radius from the point of the
proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to the
satisfaction of the Township that a different distance
is more reasonable and shall demonstrate conclusively
why an existing tower or other suitable structure
cannot be utilized.
[f] Time, place and manner. The Township shall
determine the time, place and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all tower-based
WCFs in the right-of-way based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the right-of-way, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time,
place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the Township and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[g] Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as
determined by the Township. In addition:
[i] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches
of the face of the curb.
[ii] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
undergrounded shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the Township.
[iv] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner within 10 business days of notice of the
existence of the graffiti.
[v] Any underground vaults related to tower-based
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township.
[h] Design regulations.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:728
[i] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth
technology available in an effort to appropriately
blend into the surrounding environment and
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant
shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
[ii] The maximum height of any tower-based WCF
shall not exceed 50 feet. Extensions to an existing
tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of
the Township, and shall not increase the overall
height of the tower-based WCF to more than 50
feet. The Township reserves the right to deny such
requests based upon aesthetic and land use
impact, or any other lawful considerations related
to the character of the Township.
[iii] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas
and comparable antennas for future users.
[i] Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the
right to deny the construction or placement of any
tower-based WCF in the right-of-way based upon
visual and/or land use impact.
[j] Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs in the right-of-way, the WCF
applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers
to co-locate antennas on tower-based WCFs where
technically and economically feasible. The owner of a
tower-based WCF shall not install any additional
antennas without obtaining the prior written approval
of the Township.
[k] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Township, or such
longer period as the Township determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a tower-based WCF
in the right-of-way shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any WCF when the Township,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:729
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the Township or other
governmental entity in the right-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Township.
[l] Compensation for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees as described in Subsection E(1)(b)[1][g][q]
above, every tower-based WCF in the right-of-way is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair
and reasonable compensation to be paid for use and
occupancy of the right-of-way. Such compensation for
right-of-way use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual right-of-way management costs,
including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other right-ofway
management activities by the Township. The
owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual
fee to the Township to compensate the Township for
the Township's costs incurred in connection with the
activities described above. The annual right-of-way
management fee for tower-based WCFs shall be
determined by the Township and authorized by
resolution of Township Board and shall be based on
the Township's actual right-of-way management costs
as applied to such tower-based WCF.
[m] Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a
tower-based WCF in the right-of-way shall, at its own
cost and expense, obtain from a surety licensed to do
business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond, or
other form of security acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, in an amount of $100,000 to assure the
faithful performance of the terms and conditions of
this section. The bond shall provide that the Township
may recover from the principal and surety any and all
compensatory damages incurred by the Township for
violations of this section, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure. The owner shall file a copy of the
bond with the Township.
[4] The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower
wireless communications facilities that do not
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:730
substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure to which they are attached:
[a] Permitted in all zones, subject to regulations.
Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zones, subject to
the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and
subject to the prior written approval of the Township.
[b] Limitation of location in the York Road Corridor
Overlay District. Nontower WCFs are prohibited
within 150 feet of York Road (Pennsylvania Route 263)
in the York Road Corridor Overlay District as shown
on the Zoning Map.
[c] Zoning permit required. Applicants proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall
obtain an administrative permit from the Township
zoning office. In order to be considered for such
permit, the applicant must submit a permit application
to the Township zoning office.
[d] Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance
and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
[e] Wind. Any nontower WCF structure shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind according to the
standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
EIA-222-E Code, as amended).
[f] Public safety communications. No nontower WCF
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[g] Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:731
[h] Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate
radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards
and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[i] Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or
abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be
removed as follows:
[i] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within three months of
the cessation of operations at the site unless a
time extension is approved by the Township.
[ii] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed
within three months of the cessation of operations
at a site, or within any longer period approved by
the Township, the WCF and/or associated
facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
[j] Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a nontower WCF is filed
with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
Township shall make its final decision on whether to
approve the application and shall advise the applicant,
in writing, of such decision. If additional information
was requested by the Township to complete an
application, the time required by the applicant to
provide the information shall not be counted toward
the Township's ninety-day review period.
[k] Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a nontower WCF, or
$1,000, whichever is less.
[l] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall provide the Township with a
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:732
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering the nontower WCF.
[m] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents,
at all times against any and all claims for personal
injury, including death, and property damage arising
in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with
any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the nontower WCF. Each
person that owns or operates a nontower WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the
Township in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by
the construction, installation, operation, maintenance
or removal of a nontower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but
not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other
costs of indemnification.
[5] The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower
wireless communications facilities that substantially
change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
[a] Permitted in all zones subject to regulations.
Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zones subject to
the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and
subject to the prior written approval of the Township.
[b] Permit required. Any applicant proposing the
construction of a new nontower WCF, or the
modification of an existing nontower WCF, shall first
obtain a permit from the Township zoning office. New
construction and modifications shall be prohibited
without a zoning permit.
[i] Applicants proposing the modification of an
existing nontower-based WCF shall obtain an
administrative permit from the Township zoning
office. In order to be considered for such permit,
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:733
the applicant must submit the following
documentation:
[A] A permit application;
[B] Plans, drawings, or detailed renderings of the
proposed redesign of the facility, containing
the signature and seal of an engineer licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
[C] A statement signed and notarized by the
applicant verifying that the proposed
modifications will not render the design and
specifications of the facility still in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
[ii] Special exception. Applicants proposing the
construction of a new nontower WCF must meet
the following criteria before the Township zoning
hearing board considers granting a special
exception to permit such construction:
[A] The applicant shall submit a permit to the
Township zoning office.
[B] The applicant shall demonstrate that the
nontower WCF is the minimum height
necessary for the service area.
[C] The applicant shall present documentation
that the nontower WCF is designed in
accordance with all applicable provisions set
forth in this chapter.
[D] Where the proposed nontower WCF will be
located on a property with another principal
use, the applicant shall present
documentation evidencing that the owner of
the property has granted an easement for the
proposed facility, and that vehicular access is
provided to that facility.
[c] Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:734
and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
[d] Wind. Any nontower WCF structures shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind according to the
standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSFEINTIA-222-E Code, as amended). Such
structures shall be able to withstand wind gusts of up
to 100 miles per hour with no ice and 78 miles per
hour basic wind speed with radial ice of 0.5 inch.
[e] Public safety communications. No nontower WCF
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[f] Historic buildings. No nontower-based WCF may be
located on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places or the official historic structures and/
or historic districts list maintained by the Township, or
has been designated by the Township as being of
historic significance.
[g] Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
[h] Maintenance. The following maintenance
requirements shall apply:
[i] The nontower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited
only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the Township's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[i] Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate
radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards
and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:735
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[j] Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or
abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be
removed as follows:
[i] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within three months of
the cessation of operations at the site unless a
time extension is approved by the Township.
[ii] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed
within three months of the cessation of operations
at a site, or within any longer period approved by
the Township, the WCF and/or associated
facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
[k] Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a nontower WCF is filed
with the Township, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
Township shall make its final decision on whether to
approve the application and shall advise the applicant,
in writing, of such decision. If additional information
was requested by the Township to complete an
application, the time required by the applicant to
provide the information shall not be counted toward
the Township's ninety-day review period.
[l] Retention of experts. The Township may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Township in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the WCF and, once approved, in
reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of this section. The applicant
and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the
Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s)
in providing expert evaluation and consultation in
connection with these activities.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:736
[m] Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a
nontower WCF shall, at its own cost and expense,
obtain from a surety licensed to do business in
Pennsylvania and maintain a bond, or other form of
security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an
amount of $25,000 to assure the faithful performance
of the terms and conditions of this section. The bond
shall provide that the Township may recover from the
principal and surety any and all compensatory
damages incurred by the Township for violations of
this section, after reasonable notice and opportunity
to cure. The owner shall file a copy of the bond with
the Township.
[n] Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a nontower WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
[6] The following additional regulations shall apply to nontower
wireless communications facilities located outside
the rights-of-way that substantially change the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
[a] Development regulations. Nontower WCFs shall be colocated
on existing structures, such as existing
buildings or tower-based WCFs, subject to the
following conditions:
[i] Such WCF shall not extend more than 10 feet
above the nontower structure on which it is
mounted.
[ii] No nontower WCF shall be located on a lot the
size of less than two acres. If the WCF applicant
proposes to locate the communications equipment
in a separate building, the minimum lot size of the
lot on which the building is located shall not be
less than two acres and shall comply with the
minimum requirements for the applicable zoning
district.
[iii] An eight-foot-high security fence shall surround
any separate communications equipment
building. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulations on the site for
the principal use.
[b] Design regulations.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:737
[i] Nontower WCFs shall employ stealth technology
and be treated to match the supporting structure
in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by
the WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval
of the Township.
[ii] Nontower WCFs, which are mounted to a building
or similar structure, may not exceed a height of
10 feet above the roof or parapet, whichever is
higher, unless the WCF applicant obtains a
conditional use permit.
[iii] All nontower WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the total
height of the nontower structure. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of
such justification on an individual basis.
[iv] Antennae, and their respective accompanying
support structures, shall be no greater in
diameter than any cross-sectional dimension than
is reasonably necessary for their proper
functioning.
[v] Noncommercial usage exemption. Township
citizens utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for
the purpose of maintaining television, phone, and/
or internet connections at their respective
residences shall be exempt from the design
regulations enumerated in Subsection
E(1)(b)[6][b].
[c] Removal, replacement, modification.
[i] The removal and replacement of nontower WCFs
and/or accessory equipment for the purpose of
upgrading or repairing the WCF is permitted, so
long as such repair or upgrade does not increase
the overall size of the WCF or the numbers of
antennas.
[ii] Any material modification to a wireless
telecommunication facility shall require a prior
amendment to the original permit or
authorization.
[d] Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the
right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of any nontower WCF based upon visual
and/or land use impact.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:738
[e] Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect
any WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this section and any other provisions found within the
Township Code or state or federal law. The Township
and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
[7] The following additional regulations shall apply to all
nontower wireless communications facilities located in the
rights-of-way:
[a] Co-location. Nontower WCFs in the right-of-way shall
be co-located on existing poles, such as existing utility
poles or light poles.
[b] Design requirements:
[i] WCF installations located above the surface grade
in the public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to, those on streetlights and joint utility
poles, shall consist of equipment components that
are no more than six feet in height and that are
compatible in scale and proportion to the
structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
[ii] Antennae and all support equipment shall be
treated to match the supporting structure. WCFs
and accompanying equipment shall be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with
the support structure upon which they are
mounted.
[c] Compensation for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees as described above, every nontower WCF
in the right-of-way is subject to the Township's right to
fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be
paid for use and occupancy of the right-of-way. Such
compensation for right-of-way use shall be directly
related to the Township's actual right-of-way
management costs, including, but not limited to, the
costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and
other right-of-way management activities by the
Township. The owner of each nontower WCF shall pay
an annual fee to the Township to compensate the
Township for its costs incurred in connection with the
activities described above. The annual right-of-way
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:739
management fee for nontower WCFs shall be
determined by the Township and authorized by
resolution of Township Board and shall be based on
the Township's actual right-of-way management costs
as applied to such nontower WCF.
[d] Time, place and manner. The Township shall
determine the time, place and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all nontower
WCFs in the right-of-way based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the right-of-way, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time,
place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the Township and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[e] Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as
determined by the Township. In addition:
[i] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches
of the face of the curb.
[ii] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
undergrounded shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the Township.
[iv] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner within 10 business days of notice of the
existence of the graffiti.
[v] Any underground vaults related to nontower
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township.
[f] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Township, or such
longer period as the Township determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the right-
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:740
of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any WCF when the Township, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the Township or other
governmental entity in the right-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Township.
[g] Visual or land use impact. The Township retains the
right to deny an application for the construction or
placement of a nontower WCF based upon visual and/
or land use impact.
(c) Facilities owned and operated by Warwick Township or the
Warwick Township Water and Sewer Authority shall not be
subject to the requirements of this subsection.
(d) Parking: two off-street parking spaces, or one space per
employee, whichever requires the greatest number of spaces.
(2) E2 Emergency Services. Fire, ambulance, rescue, and other
emergency services. All emergency services shall be operated,
recognized or authorized by the Township.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) At least 5% of the gross site area shall be devoted to civic or
recreational use in the form of a park, plaza, memorial garden,
sculpture garden, or like amenity.
(c) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(d) Parking: three off-street parking spaces for every four
employees on the two major shifts at maximum employment, or
four off-street parking spaces for each fire truck where no
community room is a part of the building, whichever requires
the greater number of parking spaces. Where a community
room is provided, two off-street parking spaces for each fire
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:741
truck plus one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area.
(3) E3 Terminal. Bus or taxi station or terminal or public parking lot.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: off-street parking spaces as the Board of Supervisors
shall determine adequate to serve customers, patrons, visitors,
employees, and vehicles normally parked on the premises.
(4) E4 Airport or Heliport. A facility designed for aircraft, including
airplanes and helicopters, to take off and land. An airport includes
hangers for the storage of aircraft, facilities for refueling and
repairing aircraft and various accommodations for passengers.
(a) In addition to the airport accessory office, service, industrial,
or commercial uses shall be approved by the Township Board
of Supervisors as conditional uses. The area, dimensional,
coverage, buffering, impervious surface limitations, and
parking requirements for the specific use and the Industrial
District shall be met.
(b) Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation and the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(c) A "stopway" of at least 300 feet in length and having a width
equal to that of the paved runway shall be provided between
each end of the runway and the property line of the airport
tract.
(d) As a minimum, all buildings, runways, taxiways, parking areas
for aircraft, warm-up pads, aprons, lights, communication
facilities, tie-down areas, repair facilities, refueling facilities,
etc., shall be 75 feet from property lines and street lines, as
well as conforming to all other state and federal aviation
setback requirements.
(e) A steel post and mesh Class "E" wire fence having a height of
four feet shall enclose that part of the airport tract which is
used by aircraft so that animals and unauthorized persons and
vehicles are restrained from entering the aircraft operating
area.
(f) The owners, lessees and operators of the airport shall take all
possible actions to protect the peace, safety and air quality of
the environment of the area surrounding the airport. This shall
include:
[1] The establishment of flight patterns and ground traffic
patterns;
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:742
[2] The location of warm-up ramps, parking areas, tie-down
areas, or hangars;
[3] Flight training shall not be scheduled before 7:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
(g) At least 5% of the gross site area shall be devoted to civic or
recreational use in the form of a park, plaza, memorial garden,
sculpture garden, or like amenity.
(h) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met. In addition, warm-up ramps, parking areas, tie-down
areas and hangars shall meet the buffer requirements of this
chapter.
(i) No airport shall be established if its flight pattern will conflict
with the flight patterns of any existing airport or heliport.
(j) The minimum lot size for a heliport shall be 10 acres.
(k) The flight patterns for a heliport shall be established to prevent
patterns which will take flights over residential areas.
(l) Parking: off-street parking spaces for the principal airport or
heliport facility as the Board of Supervisors shall determine
adequate to serve customers, patrons, visitors, employees, and
vehicles normally parked on the premises.
(5) E5 Large-Scale Solar Energy Park. A ground-mounted (as opposed
to roof-mounted) solar energy system with a capacity of generating
150 kilowatts or more including, but not limited to, photovoltaic
and concentrated solar energy systems. For purposes of this
chapter, the term “large-scale solar energy system” (also referred
to as “system”) shall include the system, accessory structures and
buildings, including substations, electrical infrastructure,
transmission lines and other appurtenant structures, equipment
and facilities.
(a) The system shall be constructed in conformance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted by
Warwick Township.199 [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-1]
(b) Land development approval shall be required. In addition to
the requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,200 the land development plan shall include an
electrical diagram detailing the system, associated
components, the approximate generating capacity of the
system, and electrical interconnection methods, with all
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Uniform.
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:743
National-Electrical-Code-compliant disconnects and
overcurrent devices.
(c) The applicants shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the system, which shall include measures for
maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater control,
and general procedures for operations maintenance of the
installation.
(d) No system shall be constructed until proof is submitted that
the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the
installation is to be located has been informed of the
applicant's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator.
(e) The applicants shall demonstrate that the system conforms to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute. The applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturer from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), IEEE,
Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), ETL, and
other similar certifying organizations.
(f) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
[2] Front yard setback: the system and all appurtenant
equipment and structures shall be located at least 75 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way, provided that where the lot
abuts a residential use or district, the front yard setback
shall not be less than 100 feet.
[3] Side yard setbacks: the system and all appurtenant
equipment and structures shall be located at least 50 feet
from any side property line, provided that where the lot
abuts a residential use or district, the side yard setbacks
shall not be less than 75 feet.
[4] Rear yard setback: the system and all appurtenant
equipment and structures shall be located at least 50 feet
from the rear property line, provided that where the lot
abuts a residential use or district, the rear yard setback
shall not be less than 100 feet.
[5] The system and all appurtenant equipment and structures,
including but not limited to equipment shelters, storage
facilities, transformers and substations, shall be shielded,
by vegetative cover, from view of adjacent properties and
streets. Vegetative cover shall not be of such a height as to
block direct sunlight from the solar panels.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:744
[6] All components of the system shall be considered
impervious, and the impervious surface requirements of
the underlying zoning districts shall be met.
(g) There shall be no signage on the system other than a sign, no
larger than 16 square feet, identifying the manufacturer,
owner and providing a twenty-four-hour emergency contact
phone number. The system shall not display advertising.
(h) A system shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent
required by safety or any applicable federal, state or Township
law or regulations.
(i) All electrical transmission lines, wiring, and cables shall be
installed underground.
(j) A system shall be enclosed by a fence, barrier or other
appropriate means to prevent or restrict unauthorized persons
or vehicles from entering the property on which the system is
located. Warning signs shall be placed on the fence, barrier or
system to inform individuals of potential voltage hazards.
(k) The owner of the system shall provide a copy of the approved
land development plan to the local fire company. Upon request,
the owner shall cooperate with the Township and local
emergency providers to develop an emergency response plan.
All methods of shutting down the system shall be clearly
marked.
(l) Any system which has reached the end of its useful life or has
been abandoned shall be removed. The owner shall physically
remove the installation no more than 180 days after
discontinuation of operations or abandonment.
Decommissioning and removal shall include:
[1] Physical removal from the site of all panels, equipment,
structures, security barriers and transmission lines.
[2] Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance
with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
[3] Stabilization and revegetation of the site as is necessary in
the determination of the Township to minimize erosion.
[4] Prior to issuance of a permit for the construction of the
system, the applicant shall post financial security in
amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of removal
and compliance with additional requirements set forth in
this subsection. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by
a qualified engineer. The estimate shall include a
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:745
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to
inflation.
F. Office uses.
(1) F1 Medical Office. Office or clinic for medical or dental examination
or treatment of persons as outpatients, including laboratories
incidental thereto.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: four off-street parking spaces per doctor or medical
practitioner, plus one additional space for each additional
employee. When the building in which the practice is located is
not fully occupied, the applicant shall provide one parking
space per 150 square feet of total floor area to allow for
expansion of the use as the practice grows. Parking areas must
be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of land
zoned for or in residential use.
(2) F2 Veterinary Office. Office of a veterinarian with accessory animal
kennel. In no event shall kennels be allowed as a primary use.
(a) No animal shelter, kennels, or runs shall be located closer than
200 feet from any lot line and shall be enclosed if necessary to
prevent sound from being audible on adjacent properties.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: four off-street parking spaces for each doctor, plus
one space for each employee. Parking areas must be
adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of land
zoned for or in residential use.
(3) F3 Office. Business, professional or governmental office other than
Uses F1 and F2.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area. Parking areas must be adequately screened
when situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential
use.
(4) F4 Business Park. A business park is a planned development of
office and related uses which includes improvements for internal
streets, coordinated utilities, landscaping, and buffering.
(a) Individual uses may be located in detached and attached
structures.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:746
(b) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum site area: 10 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width at street line (site): 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot width at street line (internal): 150 feet.
[4] Minimum building spacing: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum building setbacks (external) from site boundary:
[a] Property lines: 75 feet.
[b] Street lines: 75 feet.
[6] Minimum building setbacks (internal):
[a] Front: 50 feet. [NOTE: The setback shall be measured
from the street right-of-way line for roads offered for
dedication and from the curbline or edge of cartway
for nondedicated streets.]
[b] Side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear: 50 feet.
[7] Minimum parking area setbacks:
[a] From building: 20 feet.
[b] From street: 15 feet. [NOTE: The setback shall be
measured from the street right-of-way line for roads
offered for dedication and from the curbline or edge of
cartway for nondedicated streets.]
[8] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[9] Maximum impervious surface coverage:
[a] Site: 55%.
[b] Lot: 70%.
(c) Permitted uses: F1, F2, F3, G2, G3, G6, G7, G9, G15, G20, G30,
H2, and I1, I8. H7 uses such as a blacksmith, upholstery or
similar small crafts which do not generate noise or odor shall
be permitted in a business park.
(d) Accessory outside storage or display of materials, goods, or
refuse is not permitted within an office park.
(e) Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner
which will protect the highway and neighboring properties
from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:747
(f) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met utilizing the planting materials specified in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.201
(g) All uses within the business park shall take access from an
interior lot.
(h) All loading facilities shall be located to the rear or side of
buildings.
(i) Interior streets and driveways shall have street trees as listed
in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance202 set on
forty-foot centers.
(j) A transportation impact study and water impact study shall be
prepared in accordance with specifications provided by the
Township's consulting engineers.
(k) In areas not served by public water, a water impact study shall
be prepared in accordance with the specifications of the
Township's consulting engineers.
(l) All commonly owned elements shall be owned and maintained
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium
Act203 or other ownership arrangement approved by the Board
of Supervisors.
(m) The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and
improvements for the business park including water and sewer
facilities in accordance with the Township's Act 537 Plan.
(n) The plan for overall design and improvements for the business
park shall include a landscaped area along the frontage of the
property which includes a monument sign with a brick base
and a brick kneewall between two feet six inches and three feet
six inches.
(o) Open space: 20% of the base site area shall be reserved as
common open space. In addition, at least 5% of the gross site
area shall be devoted to civic or recreational use in the form of
a park, plaza, memorial garden, sculpture garden, or like
amenity, which shall be centered in the business park, and,
where possible, accessible by trail systems on adjacent
properties.
(p) The buildings shall be interconnected by a system of walkways
to form a cohesive development consistent with the design
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.204
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
203. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:748
(q) There shall be a fifty-foot-wide buffer along all arterial streets
and against residential properties, and a forty-foot-wide buffer
along all other streets and other properties. This buffer shall
consist of one canopy tree every 30 feet plus one evergreen
tree per every 60 feet. In addition to the canopy and evergreen
trees, a combination of brick wall approximately two feet six
inches and three feet six inches in height, and evergreen
hedge, shall surround the site, and shall be planted in, or
immediate to the rear of, the buffer area.
(r) All architectural drawings shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors for approval prior to land development approval.
In no event shall the architectural design include flat roofs.
(s) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area. Parking areas must be adequately screened
when situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential
use.
(t) Conditional reduction of parking improvements: refer to
§ 195-80 of this chapter.
G. Commercial and consumer service uses.
(1) G1 Commercial School. Trade or professional school; art, music, or
dancing school. Other schools not included under Use C3.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres, unless developed as part of a
shopping center (G27).
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: one off-street parking space per faculty member and
employee, plus one space per three students. Parking areas
shall be adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of
land zoned for or in residential use.
(2) G2 Day-Care Center. Day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten or
other agency giving day-care to more than six children. [Amended
4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 60,000 square feet.
(b) All day-care uses shall comply with the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare registration, certification and
licensing requirements, including all Township building codes.
(c) For all day-care uses, an outdoor recreation area shall be
provided at a minimum of 100 square feet of nonimpervious
surfaces for each child. All day-care recreation areas shall be
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:749
fully enclosed by a four-foot-high fence and shall be located
to the side or rear of the lot. Outside play or recreation areas
shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(d) The minimum yard, setback and lot width requirements for
other permitted uses in the applicable zoning district shall be
met.
(e) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(f) When used in combination with another nonresidential use, a
permit is required for each use.
(g) An existing residential building may be used and occupied as a
single-family residence for the owner or an employee of the
owner of the day-care center.
(h) Parking: at least one off-street parking space for each teacher,
administrator and maintenance employee, plus two additional
spaces per classroom and three safe passenger unloading
spaces, measuring 10 feet by 20 feet. Parking shall be
adequately screened when situated within 50 feet of land
zoned for or in residential use.
(3) G3 Retail Store. A shop or store selling commodities and goods to
the ultimate consumer. Not included under this use is the over-thecounter
sale of alcoholic beverages in a tavern or bar or a store
with greater than 15 square feet of floor area devoted to the display
of pornographic materials.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for every two
employees.
(4) G4 Adult Commercial. Adult Commercial Uses. An adult
commercial store, adult entertainment cabaret, adult movie house,
and other adult uses as defined below.
(a) Adult commercial bookstore: An adult bookstore is an
establishment with more than 15 square feet of floor area
devoted to the display, selling and/or rental of pornographic
materials which are pictures, drawings, photographs, video
tapes, or other depictions or printed matter and paraphernalia,
which if sold knowingly to a minor under 18 years of age,
would violate the criminal laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in effect at the same time.
(b) Adult entertainment cabaret: a public or private establishment,
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages,
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:750
which features live sex, topless dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or similar
establishment to which access is limited to persons 18 years of
age or older.
(c) Adult video/movie houses: an enclosed building used regularly
and routinely for presenting, displaying or exhibiting obscene
matter for observation by patrons therein, or similar
establishment to which access is limited to persons 18 years of
age or older.
(d) Other adult uses: any business, activity or use similar to or of
the same general nature as the uses listed above.
(e) The building or structure of such use shall be located no less
than 500 feet from any residential use or district, and no less
than 1,000 feet from any public or private school, church,
recreation facility or any other religious, institutional or
educational use.
(f) No such use shall be located within 2,000 feet of a similar use.
(g) No materials sold within shall be visible from any window, door
or exterior of the building.
(h) No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be permitted
within an adult commercial store or sold any pornographic
material.
(i) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(j) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for every two
employees.
(5) G5 Village-Oriented Shop or Service Business. A shop or store
including corner grocery (as distinct from a supermarket),
drugstore, stationery store, soda fountain, luncheonette,
barbershop, beauty parlor, antique shop, craft store, office, studio,
photographer, travel agency, shoe repair, tailor, optician, and
clothes dry-cleaning establishment. This use shall not include a
store, shop or office in excess of 2,000 square feet of floor area.
(a) Lighting on pole fixtures shall not exceed 10 feet in height. The
source of illumination shall be recessed and shielded within the
fixture itself and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle at the
property line.
(b) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and
trash removal. These stations shall be located to the rear of the
structure and shall be screened from view and landscaped.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:751
(c) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for every full-time
employee. Parking shall not be located between a building and
a street.
(6) G6 Adult Day-Care Center. Day-care services or other agency
giving day care to two or more adults, not including up to one
relative of the property or business owner. [Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-3]
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
(b) All day-care uses shall comply with the Pennsylvania
Department of Aging registration, certification and licensing
requirements, including all Township building codes.
(c) No overnight customers and/or guests are permitted.
Permitted hours of operation are limited to 5:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
(d) Any outdoor recreation areas shall be fully enclosed by a fourfoot
or higher fence.
(e) The minimum yard, setback and lot width requirements for
other permitted uses in the applicable zoning district shall be
met.
(f) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(g) The center shall maintain a staff to client ratio of one to seven
at all times.
(h) An existing residential building may be used and occupied as a
single-family residence for the owner or an employee of the
owner of the day-care center.
(i) Parking: at least one off-street parking space for each
employee, plus two additional spaces for each 1,000 square
feet of floor area and three accessible safe passenger
unloading spaces. Parking shall be adequately screened when
situated within 50 feet of land zoned for or in residential use.
(j) Any buildings used in conjunction with this use shall be fully
accessible.
(k) Medications and injections of substances that are not selfadministered
by clients shall be administered by a qualified
medical professional. Nonmedical staff persons who have
completed the Department of Public Welfare's (DPW)
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:752
medication administration course may administer oral, topical,
eye and eardrop prescription medications. To administer
insulin, a staff person must also complete an approved diabetes
patient education program.
(l) The center is required to obtain the services of either a
registered nurse (RN), licensed in Pennsylvania, or a practical
nurse (LPN), licensed in Pennsylvania who is under the
direction of a licensed registered nurse or a licensed physician.
The nurse may be a full-time or part-time staff member, a
consultant, or may serve through some other arrangement that
meets the needs of the clients.
(m) The maximum licensed capacity shall be no greater than one
consumer and/or guest per 50 square feet of indoor space.
Indoor floor space shall be measured wall to wall, including
space occupied by equipment, temporary storage and
furnishings. Space occupied by lavatories, dining areas,
loading docks, kitchens, hallways, offices and first aid rooms
cannot be included unless it is documented that the space is
used for programming for at least 50% of each program day.
Permanent storage space may not be included in the indoor
floor space.
(7) G7 Financial Establishment. Bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, and other financial establishment.
(a) Each drive-up service window, including remote cash
machines, shall have a waiting area for at least four vehicles;
however, when only a single drive-up service window or remote
cash machine is provided, a waiting area for at least six
vehicles shall be provided. The waiting line area shall be
separated from other circulation lanes.
(b) A ten-foot minimum clearance width shall be provided between
drive-up service windows or remote cash machines.
(c) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area.
(8) G8 Funeral Home or Mortuary. An establishment for the
preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the
deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation. Crematories may only be permitted in the LI District
and shall be a conditional use meeting all the requirements of this
chapter.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:753
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each four seats
provided for patron use, or at least one off-street parking space
for each 50 square feet of total floor area, whichever requires
the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one
additional space for each full-time employee.
(9) G9 Eating Place. Eating place for the sale and consumption of food
and beverages without drive-in service. The sale of alcoholic
beverages must be incidental to the sale and consumption of food
and shall be subject to all licensing requirements of the state.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of
total floor area, or one off-street parking space for every two
seats, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus
one additional space for each full-time employee on the largest
shift.
(10) G10 Drive-Ins and Other Eating Places. Eating place for the sale
and consumption of food and nonalcoholic beverages other than
Use G9 Eating Place.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) There shall be a vehicle waiting lane area for at least six
vehicles. The waiting lane shall be separated from other
circulation lanes.
(c) A ten-foot minimum clearance width shall be provided between
drive-up service windows.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for every two seats, or
one off-street parking space for every 25 square feet of total
floor area, whichever requires the greater number of off-street
parking spaces, plus one additional space for each employee
on the largest shift.
(11) G11 Tavern. An establishment which serves alcoholic beverages for
on-premises consumption and which is licensed. This use does not
include adult commercial uses.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of
total floor area, plus one additional off-street parking space for
each full-time employee.
(12) G12 Repair Shop. Repair shop for items, including but not limited
to appliances, lawn mowers, watches, guns, bicycles, locks, small
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:754
business machines, but not including automobiles, motorcycles,
trucks, trailers, and other heavy equipment.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) The minimum lot area for lawn mower repair shall be 1.5 acres.
(c) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for each employee.
(13) G13 (Reserved)
(14) G14 Theater. A building in which films are shown or stage shows
are performed regardless of the type of film or program presented.
This use does not include open air, outdoor or drive-in theaters.
This use does not include adult commercial uses.
(a) The display of any pornographic material which would violate
the criminal laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
effect shall be prohibited.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: one off-street parking space for each three seats
provided for patron use, or at least one off-street parking space
for each 40 square feet of total floor area used or intended to
be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or
members, whichever requires the greater number of off-street
parking spaces, plus one additional space for each employee.
(15) G15 Indoor Athletic Club. An indoor athletic club shall include
buildings for indoor court games played with a ball such as
racquetball, handball, squash, tennis, basketball, and volleyball;
aquatic facilities, facilities for exercise equipment and health clubs
and facilities related thereto; skateboarding or cycling facilities; ice
skating and/or ice hockey rinks.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each five persons of
total capacity, or at least one off-street parking space for each
50 square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used
for services to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members,
whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking
spaces, plus one additional space for each employee.
(16) G16 Amusement halls and arcade. An entertainment facility
operated as a gainful business within a building or structure
providing automatic amusement devices or games, pool or billiard
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:755
rooms, bowling alley, indoor miniature golf or similar facilities. This
use does not include adult commercial uses.
(a) An automatic amusement device or game is defined to be each
coin-operated machine, mechanical or electronic machine
which operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill
or amusement of any kind or description. Such devices shall be
governed by this use in any location where more than four such
devices are located.
(b) This use shall be located no closer than 1,500 feet, measured in
all directions, to a school or church.
(c) Such use shall only be operated between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(d) No audio speakers or equipment shall be installed inside or
outside the location of such use which would cause sounds to
emanate to the exterior of the premises.
(e) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(f) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of
total floor area, plus one additional off-street parking space for
each employee.
(17) G17 Outdoor Entertainment. Outdoor entertainment other than
Use D1. This use shall not include any activity which involves the
outdoor discharge of firearms.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for every three persons
present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity.
(18) (Reserved)
(19) G19 Motel-Hotel. Motel, hotel; a building or group of buildings for
the accommodation of transient guests, chiefly motorists,
containing guest rooms for rent.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Motels and hotels may include accessory restaurant facilities,
conference facilities, meeting rooms and tavern facilities. In
addition to the parking requirements of Subsection G(19)(d)
below, parking shall be provided for the accessory facilities
based on one off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of
total floor area or one off-street parking space for every four
seats, whichever requires the greater number of spaces.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:756
(c) There shall be a fifty-foot-wide buffer through all arterial
streets and against residential properties and a forty-foot-wide
buffer along all other streets and other properties. This buffer
shall consist of one canopy tree every 30 feet plus one
evergreen tree per every 60 feet. In addition to the canopy and
evergreen trees, a combination of brick wall between two feet
six inches and three feet six inches in height, and evergreen
hedge shall surround the site and shall be planted in, or
immediate to the rear of, the buffer area.
(d) Parking: 1 1/4 off-street parking spaces for each rental room or
suite, plus one additional off-street parking space for each fulltime
employee. If accessory/associated uses such as a
restaurant are located on the motel/hotel grounds, parking for
those facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(20) G20 Billboard. A sign which directs attention to an activity not
conducted on the same lot. Billboards may also be referred to as
off-premises advertising signs. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-1]
(a) Location. Billboards shall be located only along York Road
(State Route 263) between School Road and Sugar Bottom
Road.
(b) Right-of-way. No off-premises advertising sign or any part
thereof shall be erected or maintained closer than 50 feet from
the future right-of-way of a public street. No off-premises
advertising sign or any part thereof shall be erected or
maintained farther away than 150 feet from the future right-ofway
of State Route 263.
(c) Billboards shall not be located upon or within any protected
natural resource.
(d) Billboards shall be constructed on a monument base of stone or
brick and landscape plantings shall be installed in and around
the monument base. No billboard shall be erected on a
monopole.
(e) The following buffer plants shall be planted adjacent to all
billboards. The size and species of these plants shall comply
with the requirements listed in § 195-63 of this chapter.
[1] Five evergreens within a forty-foot radius along the sides
and rear of the sign;
[2] Four flowering trees within a fifty-foot radius along the
sides of the sign; and
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:757
[3] One shrub in front of the sign for every three lineal feet of
sign frontage.
(f) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building setback line: 90 feet.
(h) Front and rear yard setback: 75 feet.
(i) Side yard setbacks: 50 feet.
(j) No billboard shall be located within 50 feet of any driveway or
private lane.
(k) Height. The lesser of 20 feet from the nearest shoulder of the
road to the highest point on the sign, or 25 feet from the
undisturbed surface of the ground underneath the sign to the
highest point on the sign.
(l) Separation requirement. No billboard may be erected or
maintained within 500 feet of any other such sign or
freestanding sign or residential dwelling.
(m) Area of billboard. No billboard shall exceed a maximum area of
150 square feet including border, but excluding supports and
decorative trim which is not part of the copy content of the
display.
(n) Billboards shall be nonilluminated, freestanding signs. Only
one billboard may be erected on a property. No electronic,
video graphic, or signs with changing or scrolling text,
pictures, or graphics shall be permitted.
(o) All billboards shall be maintained in good condition. The
structural components of the sign shall be maintained to
ensure their integrity and to prevent the possible collapse of
the sign. Any damage to the structural components shall be
repaired within 24 hours. The face of the sign shall be blank or
shall show the full advertisement. Signs having ripped,
defaced, or partial advertisements shall be immediately
repaired by having the advertisement restored to its original
condition, removed, or covered.
(21) G21 Convenience Store. The retail sale of grocery items and takeout
food. Not included under this use is the over-the-counter sale of
alcoholic beverages in a tavern or bar or a store with greater than
15 square feet of floor area devoted to the display of pornographic
materials. The convenience store use shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) There shall be no table service or drive-through service.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:758
(b) An accessory fueling station of no more than six double-sided
pumps may be added to buildings over 5,000 square feet. An
accessory fueling station shall be permitted only in the VC 2
District.
(c) The canopy over the stations which dispense fuel shall be
limited as follows:
[1] The height of the canopy shall not exceed 22 feet from
grade to the highest point of the roof.
[2] The roof of the canopy shall be pitched and shall not be
flat.
[3] The canopy shall extend beyond the fuel pumps only as far
as the Township deems necessary to protect from the
elements customers fueling their vehicles.
[4] The color, construction materials, and architectural design
of the canopy and its support poles shall be consistent with
the color, construction materials and architectural design
of the convenience store building.
[5] The lighting in and on the canopy shall be recessed and
shall be pointed downward to avoid glare leaving the
canopy area.
[6] Any writing, coloring or design of or on the canopy which
constitutes a sign as defined by Article XXII of this chapter
shall be included in the calculations of the maximum
signage allowed by this chapter.
(d) There shall be no automotive service or sales of automotive
parts.
(e) The maximum building size shall be 6,500 square feet.
(f) There shall be fifty-foot-wide buffers through arterial streets
and against residential properties, and a forty-foot-wide buffer
along all other streets and other properties. The buffer shall
consist of a minimum of one canopy tree every 30 feet, one
evergreen shrub every 15 feet, and one shrub or hedge
planting every eight feet.
(g) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for every two
employees. Areas for fueling will not count as parking spaces.
(h) Rows of parking spaces shall not be contiguous, but rather
separated by a curbed, landscaped island no less than four feet
in width. Ends of the parking rows shall be treated with
landscaped islands with a minimum width of 10 feet. Pavement
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:759
may be included in the landscape islands only if the pavement
forms part of a walkway system serving the entire site.
(i) Off-street loading zone shall be required as determined
necessary by the Township.
(22) G22 Service Station and/or Car-Washing Facility. The retail sale of
vehicular fuels and/or a car-washing facility; and including as
accessory uses the sale and installation of lubricants, tires,
batteries and similar accessories and/or the sale of groceries and
similar convenience-type products.
(a) A minimum lot width of not less than 250 feet shall be provided
along each street on which the lot abuts.
(b) The sale of convenience-type products shall be limited to a
maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet.
(c) Access to roads shall be at least 200 feet from the intersection
of any streets.
(d) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
(e) Fuel pumps and canopies shall be at least 25 feet from any
ultimate street right-of-way.
(f) All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within
a building.
(g) All refuse shall be stored within a building or exterior enclosed
area.
(h) Paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be permitted.
(i) Lubrication, oil changes, tire changes, and minor repairs
permitted if entirely within a building.
(j) Vehicles shall not be stored outdoors while awaiting repairs for
more than five days, and no more than five vehicles may be
stored on the property at any one time.
(k) Junk vehicles may not be stored in the open at any time.
(l) Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania State Police
Fire Marshal and the Warwick Township Fire Marshal for the
underground storage of fuel. The state and Township fire
marshals shall be contacted if fuel tanks are temporarily or
permanently abandoned. All uses shall comply with the
Pennsylvania State Police Flammable Liquid Regulations.
(m) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:760
(n) A stacking lane shall be provided for 15 waiting vehicles for
each drive-through automatic car-wash facility. The stacking
lane shall not encroach on the required parking facilities,
future road right-of-way, or the points of ingress and egress to
the site.
(o) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 200 square feet
of total floor area or two off-street parking spaces for each
service bay, whichever is larger, plus one space for each
employee. Off-street parking spaces shall not be part of, nor
interfere with, the accessways to the pumps.
(23) G23 Vehicular Sales. Sale and rental of motor vehicles including
automobiles by a duly franchised new car dealership, used car
sales, trucks, trailers, cycles, boats and recreation vehicles
including repair work conducted as an accessory use.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) In addition to compliance with the buffer requirements of
§ 195-63 of this chapter, the applicant shall installed a six-foot
berm, with trees and shrubs as directed by the Township,
around the perimeter of the property in any location that is
adjacent to a residential use or zoning district.
(c) All motor vehicle parts, refuse, and similar articles shall be
stored within a building or enclosed area.
(d) All lighting shall comply with the lighting regulations of this
chapter, including the requirement that all light sources must
be shielded and directed downward. No individual light fixture
shall be more than 20 feet high.
(e) Deliveries shall be made during hours when the business is
open. Vehicles must be off-loaded outside the right-of-way of
public roads and streets.
(f) Vehicles awaiting repair may not be stored outdoors more than
10 days.
(g) Painting and/or body work shall not be permitted in
conjunction with this use.
(h) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area and one off-street parking space for each
5,000 square feet of total outside vehicle display area, plus one
additional space for each employee. This required parking
shall not be used for the display of automobiles offered for sale
or lease.
(24) G24 Vehicular Repair. Motor vehicle repair garage, including paint
spraying and body and fender work, provided that all repair and
paint work is performed within an enclosed building.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:761
(a) All motor vehicle parts, refuse and similar articles shall be
stored within a building or enclosed area.
(b) Vehicles awaiting repair and junk vehicles may not be stored
outdoors more than 10 days and no more than 10 vehicles shall
be stored on the property at any one time.
(c) Vehicles stored on the property waiting for repair shall be
located in an area which is not visible from the street or
adjacent properties.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for each employee.
(25) G25 Vehicular Accessories. Sale of automotive accessories, parts,
tires, batteries, and other supplies. Installation and storage of parts
shall be in an enclosed structure.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for each employee.
(26) G26 Heavy Equipment and Farm Equipment Sales and Repair.
Heavy equipment and farm equipment repair and sales.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) All motor vehicle parts, refuse and similar articles shall be
stored within a building or enclosed area.
(c) Vehicles awaiting repair and junk vehicles may not be stored
outdoors more than 10 days and no more than 10 vehicles shall
be stored on the property at any one time.
(d) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for 5,000 square
feet of outdoor display area, plus one additional space for each
employee.
(27) G27 Shopping Center. A shopping center which is planned and
designed as a complex of related structures and circulation
patterns.
(a) Minimum site area: 12 1/2 acres.
(b) In a shopping center, the following uses shall be permitted:
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:762
[1] Retail shops and stores selling apparel, books, confection,
drugs, dry goods, flowers, food stuffs, furniture, gifts,
hardware, toys, household appliances, jewelry, notions,
periodicals, shoes, stationary, tobacco, paint, records,
cards, novelties, hobby and art supplies, music, luggage,
sporting goods, pets, floor covering, garden supplies,
greenhouses, and fabrics, provided all products produced
on the premises are sold on the premises at retail. Also
included within this use shall be the sale of soft drinks and
beer. However, not included within this use is a bar, tavern
or taproom, the principal business of which is the sale of
alcoholic beverages. Also excluded are all slot machines,
gaming devices and coin-operated amusement devices.
[2] Service business including barber, beautician, laundry and
dry cleaning, shoe repair, tailor, photographer, travel
agency.
[3] Financial establishment: bank, savings and loan
association, credit union and other financial
establishment. Drive-in facilities shall be permitted
provided there is a vehicle waiting lane area for at least six
vehicles. The waiting lane shall be separated from other
circulation lanes.
[4] Restaurant or eating place for the sale and consumption of
food and beverages. The sale of alcoholic beverages must
be incidental to the sale and consumption of food (Use G9
or G10).
[5] Automotive accessories: sale of automotive accessories,
parts, tires, batteries, and other supplies. Installation of
parts shall be in an enclosed structure in conjunction with
a major department store and may be a separate structure.
[6] Entertainment: indoor movie theater (G14).
[7] Medical office: office or clinic for medical or dental
examination or treatment of persons as outpatients,
including laboratories incidental thereto.
[8] Office: business, professional, governmental or municipal
services.
[9] Any use of the same general character as any of the abovepermitted
uses, when authorized as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that such use shall be
permitted subject to such reasonable restrictions as the
Board may determine.
(c) Buffer yard areas shall be provided and planted along all street
frontages and around the perimeter of the shopping center
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:763
development that adjoins adjacent properties. Along street
frontages and adjoining properties in nonresidential zoning
districts, a minimum buffer of 30 feet shall be required, and
along property lines of adjoining properties in residential
zoning districts, a fifty-foot buffer is required. A planting area
at least 15 feet wide shall be provided on either side of all
entrances to the mall separating the entrance drives from the
parking area.
(d) Open space. A minimum of 20% of the base site area shall be
reserved as common open space. In addition, at least 5% of the
gross site area shall be devoted to civic or recreational use in
the form of a park, plaza, memorial garden, sculpture garden,
or like amenity which shall be located in a center area of the
shopping center.
(e) There shall be a fifty-foot-wide buffer along all arterial streets
and against residential properties, and a forty-foot-wide buffer
along all other streets and other properties. This buffer shall
consist of one canopy tree every 30 feet plus one evergreen
tree per every 60 feet. In addition to the canopy and evergreen
trees, a combination of brick wall between two feet six inches
and three feet six inches in height, and evergreen hedge shall
surround the site, and shall be planted in, or immediately to
the rear of, the buffer area.
(f) Outdoor storage and displays shall conform to the provisions of
§ 195-63 and Use I2.
(g) The distance at the closest point, between any two buildings or
groups of units of attached buildings, shall not be less than 20
feet.
(h) Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner
which will protect the highway and neighboring properties
from any direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
(i) Parking: 4 1/2 off-street parking spaces shall be provided and
maintained for each 1,000 square feet, or a portion thereof, of
gross leasable area. An additional 10% of the total number of
required spaces shall be held in reserve. An area depicting
these spaces shall be identified on the record plan and held as
open space until such time as needed. The design of site
improvements shall include this area, including, but not limited
to stormwater management, impervious surface coverage, etc.
"Gross leasable area" is the total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and use, including basements, mezzanines, storage
areas and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and
measured from the center line of common partitions and from
outside wall faces.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:764
(j) Conditional reduction of parking improvements: refer to
§ 195-80 of this chapter.
(k) Water and sewer service shall be provided pursuant to the
Township's Act 537 Plan.
(28) G28 Miniwarehouse. Warehouse/storage units provided for lease to
the general public for the purpose of storage of articles commonly
associated with residential properties.
(a) Minimum aisle width between buildings shall be 26 feet.
(b) The storage facilities complex shall be surrounded by a fence
at least eight feet in height of a type approved by the Township.
(c) Outdoor storage of automobiles, boats, and recreation vehicles
is permitted if they are within the fenced area. A maximum of
two square feet of outdoor storage area shall be permitted for
every one square foot of indoor storage area. The parked
vehicles shall not interfere with traffic movement through the
complex and shall meet the minimum setbacks.
(d) Buffers shall be provided in accordance with § 195-63 of this
chapter. In addition, any parked vehicles which are stored
outdoors shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from
any adjacent streets or property.
(e) One office and dwelling unit is permitted as an accessory use to
provide for a full-time caretaker.
(f) Approval shall be obtained from the Township Police Chief and
Fire Marshal regarding security and fire protection.
(g) Each structure shall not exceed 6,000 square feet in size.
(h) The maximum height of the storage units shall be 15 feet.
(i) Minimum requirements for lease restrictions:
[1] No business activities other than leasing of storage units
shall be permitted; and
[2] No explosive, toxic, radioactive, or highly flammable
materials shall be stored on the property.
(j) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(k) Parking: one space for each five storage units or, if the size and
number of units is flexible, one space for each 2,000 square
feet of total floor area and outside storage area. These parking
spaces shall be distributed equally throughout the storage
area. If a manager's living quarters are included, two
additional spaces are required. One additional space for each
25 storage compartments or, if the size and number of units is
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:765
flexible, one space for each 10,000 square feet of total floor
area to be located at the project office for use by prospective
clients.
(29) G29 Dwelling in Combination. An accessory dwelling unit that is
clearly subordinate to an institutional, commercial, consumer
service or office use.
(a) Where permitted, a dwelling in combination may be used as an
accessory use with an institutional, commercial, consumer,
service or office use that is permitted within the applicable
district. Where permitted, a dwelling in combination may be
used as an accessory use with a nonconforming institutional,
commercial, consumer service or office use under the
requirements of Article XXI.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 shall be met.
(c) In addition to the requirements for the principal use, the
minimum floor area, minimum lot area and minimum off-street
parking requirements for the B8 use shall be met for any
accessory dwelling unit.
(d) The maximum density in all districts shall be 2.0 dwelling units
per acre.
G30 Nonresidential Conversion. The conversion of an existing
structure to a permitted nonresidential use shall be permitted
where the character of the existing structure is maintained and
where all parking and other requirements for the particular use are
met.
(a) A new zoning permit is required each time a structure is
converted to a different nonresidential use.
(31) G31 Drug Store with Drive-Through Service. A retail drug store,
with drive-through service, selling prescription drugs, over-thecounter
drugs, cosmetics and accessory miscellaneous consumer
goods, but selling no prepared food. This use shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) There shall be no more than one drive-up lane at each store.
(b) The drive-through lane shall have a vehicle waiting/stacking
lane for at least six vehicles. The waiting lane shall be
separated from other circulation lanes.
(c) The requirements of § 195-16G(3), including parking, shall
apply to this use.
(d) There shall be a fifty-foot-wide buffer through arterial streets
and against residential properties and a forty-foot-wide buffer
along all other streets and other properties. The buffer shall
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:766
consist of a minimum of one canopy tree every 30 feet, one
evergreen shrub every 15 feet and one shrub or hedge planting
every eight feet. The buffering requirements of this subsection
may be waived in whole or in part when, in the sole discretion
of the Board of Supervisors, the nonresidential use of adjacent
property or properties does not warrant the imposition of the
buffer requirements as stated above.
(32) G32 Garden Center. A retail establishment which sells plants, trees
and shrubs, or a combination thereof, together with gardening
accessories and supplies.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met using the planting materials specified in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.205
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area, plus one additional space for 5,000 square
feet of outdoor display area, plus one additional space for each
employee.
H. Industrial uses.
(1) H1 Manufacturing. Manufacturing, including the production,
processing, cleaning, testing, and distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs, and products.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for 300 square feet of
floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle normally
stored on the premises.
(2) H2 Research. Research, testing or experimental laboratory.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 250 square feet
of total floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(3) H3 Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage, Warehousing.
Wholesale business, wholesale storage, or warehousing with no
sales to the public.
(a) No explosive, toxic, radioactive, or highly flammable materials
shall be stored on the premises.
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:767
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 500 square feet
of total floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(4) H4 Printing. Printing, publishing, binding.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 500 square feet
of total floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(5) H5 Contracting. Contractor offices and shops such as building,
cement, electrical, heating, masonry, painting, plumbing,
carpentry, and roofing.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) All materials and vehicles shall be stored within a building or
an enclosed area visually screened from adjacent properties
and streets by a solid vegetation barrier or solid fence.
(c) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee on the
largest shift, or one off-street parking space for every 500
square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater, plus one
space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(6) H6 Truck Terminal. A use of land or structures for the temporary
storage of trucks and/or the transfer of freight from one truck to
another.
(a) Short-term warehousing may be permitted under this use.
(b) The truck terminal shall be licensed by the Public Utilities
Commission.
(c) Trucks with compressors or other trucks which run more than
six hours a day shall be located within a quadrangle of
buildings or walls.
(d) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(e) Each truck terminal shall have an office and comfort facilities
on the property.
(f) Parking: In addition to areas devoted to the parking of trucks
as part of the intrinsic use, there shall one off-street parking
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:768
space for each employee or one space for every 500 square
feet of total floor area, whichever requires the greater number
of spaces, plus one space for each company vehicle normally
stored on the premises.
(7) H7 Crafts. Upholstery, cabinetmaking, furniture making, locksmith,
gunsmith, and similar crafts.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for every 300 square feet
of total floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(8) H8 Lumber Yard. Lumber yard where lumber products are sold
and/or processed. This principal use may be combined with a
planing mill.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee on the
largest shift at maximum employment, but in no case less than
one off-street parking space for every 250 square feet of total
office and customer service area.
(9) H9 Mill. Mill where grain and similar products are processed.
(a) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(b) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee on the
largest shift, plus one space for every 250 square feet of total
floor area used for servicing customers.
(10) H10 Fuel Storage and Distribution. Storage and distribution of fuel
oil or coal.
(a) Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania State Police
Fire Marshal and the Warwick Township Fire Marshal for the
underground storage of fuel.
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 of this chapter shall be
met.
(c) Parking: off-street spaces as the Zoning Hearing Board shall
determine adequate to serve customers, employees, visitors,
and vehicles normally parked on the premises, but in no case
less than one off-street parking space for each employee.
(11) H11 Auto Salvage Recycling Center. An area of land, with or
without buildings, used for the storage of two or more motor
vehicles not having valid inspection stickers issued by the
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:769
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, excluding farm
vehicles, or of two or more wrecked or broken vehicles, or the
major parts of two or more such vehicles.
(a) No material shall be placed in any junkyard in such a manner
that it is capable of being transferred out of the auto salvage
recycling center by wind, water, or other natural causes.
(b) The boundaries of any auto salvage recycling center shall at all
times be clearly delineated.
(c) The land area used for auto salvage recycling center purposes
shall not be exposed to public view from any public street or
road by virtue of its location on a hillside or location on a
plateau below street level.
(d) Such auto salvage recycling center shall be entirely enclosed
by a solid fence or wall, at least eight feet, but no more than 10
feet, high, constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder, block, or
concrete, with access only through solid gates. The fence or
wall shall be situated no closer to any street or property line
than 50 feet. Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair
and neatly painted in a uniform color.
(e) The contents of such an auto salvage recycling center shall not
be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of
the fence or wall herein prescribed.
(f) Between the fence or wall and the street or property line,
buffer plantings shall be placed that are either:
[1] One deciduous tree (two-and-one-half-inch caliper
minimum) at an average of one tree per 40 lineal feet of
buffer plus one evergreen tree (six-foot minimum height)
at an average of one tree per 20 lineal feet of buffer; or
[2] One deciduous tree (two-and-one-half-inch caliper
minimum) at an average of one tree per 40 lineal feet of
buffer plus one deciduous shrub (three-foot minimum
height) per four lineal feet of buffer. Shrubs shall be privet,
forsythia, or viburnum species.
(g) All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the
breeding or harboring of rats, insects, or other vermin. When
necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosing in
containers, raising of materials above the ground, separating
of types of material, preventing the collection of stagnant
water, extermination procedures, or other means.
(h) No explosive, toxic, radioactive, or highly flammable materials
shall be kept on the property.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:770
(i) No burning shall be carried on in any auto salvage recycling
center. Fire shall be prevented and hazards avoided by
organization and segregating of stored materials, with
particular attention to the separation of combustibles from
other materials and enclosure of combustibles where
necessary (gas tanks shall be drained), by the provision of
adequate aisles (at least 15 feet) for escape and fire fighting
and by other necessary measures.
(j) All vehicles must be drained of all liquids before they are
placed in the auto salvage recycling center. An impervious
base, free of cracks and sufficiently large for draining liquids
from all vehicles, shall be provided. The base should be sloped
to drain to a sump or holding tank and liquid shall be removed
from the site as often as is necessary to prevent overflow of the
system. Curbing round the pad must be able to retain runoff
from a one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm. All
hazardous liquids shall be properly disposed of according to
the Department of Environmental Protection's rules and
regulations.
(k) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(l) Parking: one off-street parking space for each employee on the
largest shift, plus three spaces for customer parking.
(12) H12 Extractive Operations.
(a) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
ASPHALT PLANT — An operation or plant which has as its
primary function the mixing of rock materials with asphalt oils
or other binders for road-building and construction purposes.
OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A QUARRY/EXTRACTION USE,
READY-MIX CONCRETE PLANT OR ASPHALT PLANT — The
applicant therefor and its agents when acting under this
subsection, notwithstanding any definition to the contrary in
any other law or regulation.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION (DEP) — Also the successor thereto.
QUARRY/EXTRACTION OPERATION — An excavation or other
place from which an aggregate or mass of mineral matter,
whether or not coherent, is extracted by surface mining,
including but not limited to the extraction of stone, including
limestone and dolomite, gravel and sand, rock and stone,
earth, clay and topsoil, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite,
shale, slate, or other minerals or natural resources, by cutting,
digging, blasting or other means, including but not limited
to those related operations of crushing, sorting, sizing,
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:771
stockpiling, or spoilpiling of such extracted materials, and
including overburden, settlement basins, borrow pits,
equipment maintenance, and parking areas. Minor excavation,
such as removal of topsoil for construction of buildings or other
structures or construction operations and blasting for removal
of rock in construction operations not qualifying as a quarry/
extraction operation, is hereby excluded.
READY-MIX CONCRETE PLANT — An operation or plant which
has as its primary function the mixing of materials to make
concrete. Excluded from the regulations of this subsection is
the mixing of concrete on a construction site on a temporary
basis or until construction on the site is completed.
(b) All other definitions in this chapter, and any other Township
ordinances, the provisions of this subsection shall control.
(c) The Township shall have the authority, by adoption of a
resolution, to establish a schedule of fees to be applied to all of
the applications, inspections and permits for the uses governed
by this subsection, including applications for conditional use,
land development, and subdivision approval for the uses
governed by this subsection and for the insurance
requirements required by the owner or operator of such uses.
(d) An applicant for conditional use and subdivision/land
development approval of any of the uses governed by this
subsection shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township that all of the provisions of this subsection have been
or will be satisfied, and all the provisions of this subsection are
hereby established as specific requirements for conditional use
approval and for land development and subdivision approval.
(e) The following regulations shall govern the quarry/extraction,
ready-mix concrete plant and asphalt plant uses in Warwick
Township, and they shall apply to all three uses, except where
the context of a regulation would apply only to a particular use
or it is otherwise specified that the regulation applies to a
particular use:
[1] Soil berm.
[a] For a quarry/extraction operation, there shall be a soil
berm of a minimum height of 35 feet and a maximum
height of 40 feet, measured from the natural ground
elevation of the land prior to any development,
surrounding the entire property site, except for those
areas required for ingress and egress to the quarry/
extraction property designated on the final land
development plan approved by the Township. The
slope of the sides of the berm shall not exceed in
steepness a three-to-one ratio (horizontal to vertical);
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:772
however, a lesser ratio and steeper slope of the berm
may be utilized, with proper stabilization, if, in the
opinion of the Township, such lesser ratio and steeper
slope of the berm are justified by geologic conditions
on the site or surrounding property, good engineering
or design practice or taking into consideration the
beneficial resultant qualities of visibility barrier to be
achieved. Berms shall be spread with topsoil and
planted with grass and other suitable vegetation.
Erosion control measures shall be provided in
accordance with the standards approved by the
United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service. As a condition for subdivision and land
development approval, the foregoing requirements for
a soil berm may be modified or waived by the
Township for that portion of the site which has natural
geologic conditions and resources which would serve
the same objectives as the soil berm and which, in
good ecological judgment, should not be disturbed
by the berm construction. By way of example and
not limitation, a steep, wooded bank might serve the
purposes of this subsection in lieu of the soil berm.
[b] The soil berm location on the site shall provide the
maximum visibility barrier to the use from locations
outside the property, and it is to be located between
the buffer yard and the use. However, the Township
may require the soil berm to be located within the
buffer yard if the geologic or natural conditions and
features of and on the site would support that
relocation or the same might enhance the required
visibility barrier.
[c] No soil berm is required specifically for ready-mix
concrete plant or asphalt plant uses, since these uses
are permitted only within the boundary of a quarry
which requires a soil berm.
[d] No quarry/extraction operations may be performed
within or under the surface of the soil berm.
[2] Buffer yard.
[a] A minimum two-hundred-foot-wide buffer yard shall
be provided and maintained along the entire outside
boundary line of a quarry/extraction property, and the
buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. All plant material shall
consist of a dense screen of trees, shrubs or other
vegetation along the entire length of the lot line to
serve as a barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:773
and noise and shall be in accordance with the
standards of the this chapter. Areas of ingress and
egress shall be located and sufficiently screened by
planted vegetation to form a suitable visibility barrier
between the extraction operation and the adjoining
roads and properties. The buffer yard shall be kept
free of debris and refuse at all times and shall be
maintained in a neat, tidy, and safe condition. Grass
and weeds shall be cut or trimmed regularly and as
needed to maintain a neat and clean appearance. No
quarry/extraction operations may be performed within
or under the surface of the buffer yard.
[b] A buffer yard is not required for a ready-mix concrete
or asphalt plant since the same are permitted only
inside a quarry.
[3] Minimum lot size and lot width.
[a] Minimum lot size and lot width shall be as follows:
[i] Quarry/extraction operation: 60 contiguous acres.
[ii] Ready-mix concrete plant: five contiguous acres.
[iii] Asphalt plant: five contiguous acres.
[b] Each of the uses governed by this subsection shall
have and maintain a minimum lot width of 200 feet on
a public street.
[4] Landscaping.
[a] Landscaping of the berm and buffer yard areas shall
be required in accordance with the standards of this
chapter, and the same shall be sufficient to produce,
three years after planting, a complete, all-season
visual screen of at least 10 feet in height.
[b] Any plantings in the buffer yard or berm which die or
are destroyed shall be replaced immediately or as
soon as seasonably possible.
[c] Both landscaping of the buffer yard and construction
of the berm shall be in compliance with plans
submitted to and approved by the Township.
[d] The buffer yard landscaping and plantings and the
berm construction shall be completed in accordance
with the approved plans and the provisions of this
subsection within six months after the issuance of the
initial zoning permit.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:774
[e] A landscape architect, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, shall prepare, sign and seal the
landscaping plan for the buffer yard and any other
location on a property where any of the uses permitted
by this subsection are located and shall supervise the
installation of all landscaping and plantings.
[5] Fence. A chain-link-type fence with openings no larger
than two inches and at least 10 feet in height, surmounted
by six strands of barbed wire mounted on V-shaped arms
angled inward and outward, shall be erected within the
buffer yard and around the entire outside perimeter of the
property, except at the points of ingress and egress to the
site. The position of the fence shall be approved by the
Township and located at a point no closer than 50 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way line along a street boundary
of the property or not less than 50 feet inside the property
line not bordered by a street. The chain-link fence and
barbed wire shall be maintained in good order and repair
at all times. Points of ingress and egress shall have a gate
or gates which can and shall be locked to secure the
property after the permitted hours of operation.
[6] Warning signs.
[a] Appropriate warning signs shall be mounted or posted
along the fence required as aforesaid, at intervals of
not more than 100 feet, advising of the use, and the
same shall be maintained in good order and repair at
all times.
[b] Warning signs shall be erected, in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations, on all public highways intersected by
internal driveways, at a point 150 feet from the
intersection of a public highway and an internal
driveway (or such lesser distance, if necessary and
required by the Township or if such distance between
the internal driveway and the public highway is less
than 150 feet) and on both sides of the intersection of
any internal driveway with a public highway. The
warning signs shall be readily visible to approaching
traffic and shall indicate that caution should be
observed and that trucks will be entering the highway.
[7] Internal driveways. For a quarry use, an adequate internal
circulation pattern of driveways shall be provided and
maintained between the excavation sites and processing
areas, and the same shall provide adequately for traffic
safety inside the boundary of the property.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:775
[8] Use of public streets, bridges, and culverts.
[a] Use of public streets, bridges, and/or culverts shall not
be permitted for any vehicles hauling between quarry/
extraction and processing areas for weigh-in or for
any other internal operations of the uses permitted by
this subsection.
[b] Before exiting a property upon which any use
governed in this subsection is conducted, all vehicles
shall be cleaned and washed so that no dust, dirt, or
other materials from the operation of such uses or
from the property on which the uses are conducted
are carried or transported beyond the property
boundary by the vehicles. Adequate washing and
cleaning facilities shall be provided and maintained in
good order and repair at all times at exit points on the
property, and the same shall be used by all vehicles to
accomplish the purposes of this subsection. All loaded
trucks leaving the facility must be covered to prevent
materials from spilling into the highways.
[c] If vehicular traffic for any use governed in this
subsection exits the use onto a Township road, it must
be established, as a condition for approval of the use,
by competent, reliable engineering and scientific
proof, that the Township street, bridge and/or culvert
has been constructed to the specifications and
standards that accommodate the expected vehicular
traffic of the use without causing damage to the
Township road to an extent greater than that which
would be expected without the operation of such use.
If such a greater extent of damage to the Township
road is established as aforesaid, then, as a
prerequisite for conditional use approval, the
Township may deny the use application or require the
owner or operator of the use to make improvements to
the Township road in order that the vehicular traffic
from the use can be accommodated in safety and
without causing damage to the Township road. The
nature and extent of such road improvements shall be
determined by the Township based on sound
engineering practice and judgment, and the costs of
such road improvements shall be paid by the owner or
operator of the use prior to and as a condition for use
approval.
[d] The owner and operator of any use governed by this
subsection shall be responsible for cleaning any
material, mud, dirt, or other debris which may be left
on the public roads and streets as a result of truck
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:776
traffic entering or leaving the facility. This obligation
shall exist even if the trucks depositing or tracking
the materials, dirt, mud, or debris are not owned or
operated by the owner or operator of the quarry.
[9] Stop signs. Stop signs shall be erected in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations at
the intersection of all internal driveways with public
highways, halting all internal traffic in any direction before
entering upon a public highway.
[10] Caution lights. For all uses governed by this subsection,
caution lights that are approved by Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation regulations shall be
provided, having at least two blinking yellow lights on
each sign which are sufficient to attract the attention of a
passing motorist. The lights shall be attached to signs
which advise that caution should be observed due to
trucks entering ahead. The signs shall be erected on the
public highway at a distance of 300 feet from the
intersection of the public highway and internal driveway,
or less if necessary and required by the Township. At least
one sign shall face and be readily visible in each direction
of travel on the public highway. The owner/operator of the
use for which the caution lights are required herein shall
pay the cost of providing electricity for the signs, which at
all times shall be fully operational and maintained in good
order and repair.
[11] Slopes. In a quarry/extraction operation, no slope shall be
maintained for piles of extracted or excavated materials
exceeding the normal limiting angle of slippage of the
material of which the excavation or extraction is being
made, except for temporary occasions when the
excavation of sand and gravel requires exceeding that
normal limiting angle of slippage. These instances should
be minimized. No undercutting shall be permitted within
the buffer yard or beneath the berm.
[12] Lateral support. All quarry/extraction operations shall be
conducted with sufficient lateral support to be safe with
respect to hazard to persons, physical damage to adjacent
lands, and improvements and damage to any street,
sidewalk, parking area or utility by reason of slide, sinking
or collapse.
[13] Stockpiles and spoilpiles. No stockpiles and spoilpiles shall
exceed 35 feet in height above the original ground surface
level prior to the development and shall be located inside
the soil berm and buffer yard, toward the quarry
extraction use. No materials or waste deposited upon any
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:777
stockpile or spoilpile shall be washed, blown, or otherwise
carried or transferred off the site by normal causes or
forces.
[14] Drainage. All drainage from the site shall be controlled by
dikes, barriers, or drainage structures sufficient to prevent
any silt, debris, or other loose materials from filling any
existing drainagecourse or encroaching on any streets or
adjacent property or entering into any stream, pond, well,
subterranean stream, or other body of water. All
operations shall comply with the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Act206 and such other laws and regulations which
are applicable.
[15] Ground vibration. No ground vibration caused by blasting
or machinery shall exceed the limits established by all the
applicable laws and the rules and regulations which are
adopted thereunder and which are effective during the
operation of the use, with the exception that no blasting
shall cause a peak particle velocity greater than 0.5 inch
per second, measured at any location beyond the boundary
line of the property. Ground vibration for all blasting
activities shall be monitored by the quarry owner/operator
with seismic instrumentation approved by the Township as
to its proper frequency response and calibration
referenced to accepted national standards, technological
effectiveness and efficiency; and reports thereon
concerning all blasting activities, certified as to their
accuracy by the quarry owner/operator, shall be furnished
to the Township, on a monthly basis; and these reports
shall indicate the time, location and measurement of all
blasting which had taken place on the quarry property
since the previous report had been delivered to the
Township. Reports required to be furnished to DEP
concerning blasting activities also shall be sent to the
Township when the same are filed with DEP.
[16] Noise levels.
[a] The maximum permissible level of noise for the uses
permitted by this subsection shall not exceed the peak
levels allowable under 25 Pa. Code § 77.564(f)(1) and,
further, shall be limited to an hourly average
continuous A-weighted sound level which shall not
exceed 57 dbA on the A-scale when measured at the
property boundary during hours of permissible
operation, using a noise meter in compliance with the
American National Standards Institute Standard
ANSI.SI 4-1971 (R1976) Type S2A or equivalent.
206. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:778
[b] The maximum permissible noise level as set forth in
this subsection shall be further adjusted as follows:
[i] If the continuous noise occurs for less than 5% of
the time, but more than 1% of the time during any
one-hour period, then five dbA may be added to
the maximum permissible noise level set forth
herein; or
[ii] If the continuous noise occurs for less than 1% of
the time during any one-hour period, then 10 dbA
may be added to the maximum permissible noise
level set forth herein.
[c] The following activities are exempt from the maximum
permissible noise levels contained herein, except in no
case shall the maximum allowable peak noise level at
the property boundary given in 25 Pa. Code §
77.564(f)(1) be exceeded nor the hourly average noise
level exceed 75 dbA with an allowed increase of five
dbA for 1% to 5% during any one hour and an increase
of 10 dbA allowed for up to 1% of any one hour:
[i] Temporary construction work and site
preparation; and
[ii] Emergency warning signals and devices.
[d] Noise levels shall be monitored by the use owner or
operator on a daily basis with the instrumentation
identified above, and reports thereon, certified as to
their accuracy by the use owner or operator, shall be
furnished to the Township on a monthly basis, and
these reports shall indicate the results of the noise
testing which had taken place on the quarry property
since the previous report had been delivered to the
Township. Reports required to be furnished to DEP
concerning noise levels for the uses permitted by this
subsection also shall be sent to the Township when the
same are filed with DEP.
[17] Air quality. Emissions from the use shall be no more than
0.02 grain of particulate per dry standard cubic foot, with
the further conditions that visible air contaminants shall
not be emitted in such a manner that the opacity of the
emissions is equal to or greater than 15% for a period or
periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one
hour or equal to or greater than 20% at any time; and
fugitive emissions shall not extend beyond the property
boundary line where any use permitted by this subsection
is conducted.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:779
[18] Odor. No malodorous air contaminants, as defined by DEP,
from any use permitted by this subsection shall be
detectable beyond the property boundary line where the
use is located.
[19]Water quality.
[a] The uses governed by this subsection shall not affect
surrounding ground and/or surface water quality with
regard to increasing the concentration in the water of
total suspended solids, total dissolved solids, total
hardness, chemical oxygen demand, biological oxygen
demand, total or fecal coliform bacteria, ammonia,
nitrate, nitrite, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, salt (as NaCl),
cyanide, iron, manganese, radioactive element or
compound, oil, grease, total petroleum hydrocarbons,
total organic halogens, total organic carbon, dioxins,
PCBs, pesticides/herbicides, phenols, phthalates, or
any chemical element or chemical compound listed by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency as
a "priority pollutant." Prior to initiating any
construction of a quarry/extraction operation, the
owner/operator of the use shall determine at its
expense, either through examination of well records
or on-site measurements as allowed by or at the
convenience of the well owner or user, the current
well water quality, including concentration of
parameters listed above.
[b] The uses governed by this subsection shall not affect
the quantity of groundwater available to private or
public water supply wells within the zone of influence
of any pumping of groundwater for any of the
foregoing uses or within one mile outside of the
property boundary of the use, whichever is greater.
The quantity of groundwater available to a well shall
be considered to be affected if, due to the use, the
static water level drops in the well one foot or more, or
the well is unable to provide 50% or less of its historic
flow rate of water. Prior to initiating any construction
of a quarry/extraction use, the owner/operator of the
use shall determine, at its expense, either through
examination of well records or through on-site
measurements as allowed by and at the convenience
of the well owner or user, the normal water level and
flow rate of each well within one mile of the boundary
line of the quarry/extraction use property. The owner/
operator of this use shall provide the record of these
initial water levels and flow rates to the Township and
to the well owner or user.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:780
[c] The uses governed by this subsection shall not affect
the quantity of surface water available in any surface
water body within one mile from the property
boundary line of the use. The quantity of water
available shall be considered to be affected if, due to
the use, the water level in a pond, lake, brook, stream
or river decreases one foot or more or if the water flow
decreases 0.1 of a cubic foot per second (cfs) or more.
Prior to initiating any construction of a quarry/
extraction use, the owner/operator of the use shall
determine, at its expense, either through examination
of existing records or through on-site measurements,
the normal water quantity, water level and water flow
rate of each surface water body within one mile of the
property boundary of the use. The owner/operator of
the quarry/extraction use shall provide the record of
these initial water level and flow rates to the
Township.
[d] In order to establish a baseline of groundwater
conditions and to serve as an early warning of the
impact of a quarry/extraction use on groundwater
quality and quantity, a series of monitoring wells shall
be installed around the periphery of the property, at
locations determined and approved by the Township,
prior to initiating construction of a quarry/extraction
operation. At least one well shall be installed every
500 linear feet. The monitoring wells shall be installed
in accordance with the practices prescribed by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory. The
monitoring wells shall be installed so as to provide
data on groundwater quality and quantity from each
underground aquifer which is likely to be affected by
the construction and operation of the quarry/
extraction use. The initial measurements of
groundwater quality and quantity shall be provided to
the Township. The monitoring wells shall be tested
monthly as to water level and water quality
parameters, and the results thereof shall be provided
to the Township. The report shall indicate whether
there has been any significant change in water level,
which shall be defined as greater than a one-foot drop,
or water quality, which shall be defined as an increase
in any parameter of 25% or greater, since the previous
report or cumulatively during the previous reports.
The Township may, at its discretion, decrease the
frequency of monitoring to quarterly or less often for
some or all of the wells and testing parameters. The
Township may, as the results of a significant change in
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:781
water quality or quantity, as noted in the reports or
by an expert consultant in hydrogeology hired by the
Township, require increased monitoring at the
existing or additional wells to be constructed, a
change in quarry/extraction practices to avoid impact
on water quality or quantity in off-site wells or a
cessation in quarry/extraction operations until the
quarry owner/operator can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township's hydrogeological expert
consultant that continued operations, modified as
appropriate, will not significantly impact on water
quality or quantity available to off-site wells.
[20] Native raw materials. If quarry/extraction operation use is
lawfully combined with either or both ready-mix concrete
plant and asphalt plant uses, the primary or principal
source of all raw materials used for asphalt and ready-mix
concrete plant operation shall be mined from the property
where such uses are located. "Primary" or "principal"
source shall be defined as 85% of the sand, gravel, rock, or
other solid raw materials used in the manufacturing of
asphalt or concrete. If the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation should be modified to allow
greater than 15% recycled materials to be used in asphalt
or concrete, the above eighty-five-percent limit for native
materials may be reduced proportionally for the use of
imported materials in the manufacture of asphalt and
concrete, so long as such imported materials are recycled
materials approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for manufacture of asphalt or concrete. No
materials containing asbestos may be used for recycling.
[21]Off-street parking. All off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the standards set forth herein. Parking areas
shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
standards of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development. Parking areas shall be adequate to serve
customers, employees, visitors, and vehicles normally
parked on the premises. No parking shall be permitted
within the buffer yard. A use governed by this subsection
shall provide a parking area for at least one off-street
parking space for every employee on the largest shift, one
off-street parking space for each company vehicle
normally parked on the premises (exclusive of quarry/
extraction vehicles and earthmoving equipment, which
shall be parked inside the berm) and six off-street visitor
parking spaces.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:782
[22] Blasting schedule. A schedule of all blasting to be
performed within the property shall be sent by regular
mail, postage prepaid, to all property owners within 2,000
feet of the outside perimeter of the property boundary line
at least seven days prior to blasting operations. Within 24
hours prior to blasting, the owner/operator shall notify all
such property owners by telephone of the time the
proposed blasting will commence. The owner/operator
shall provide the Township with the names, mailing
addresses and local telephone numbers of such property
owners who are required to be notified by this subsection.
[23] Concrete pad. An asphalt plant and/or ready-mix concrete
plant shall be constructed upon a concrete pad of
sufficient design, strength, and consistency to ensure that
no asphalt, concrete, or the ingredients thereof or those
used therein are deposited on the ground, to provide for
the structural integrity of the asphalt plant or ready-mix
concrete plant and otherwise to comply with all other
governmental regulations pertaining to the construction
thereof.
[24] Environmental impact.
[a] At the time of application for conditional use approval,
subdivision, and land development approval, initial
and renewal of the zoning permit and at all other
times requested by the Township, the owner or
operator of any use governed by this subsection shall
provide to the Township sufficient data to demonstrate
that the impact of the use will not and does not have
an adverse effect upon the health, safety and welfare
of the community, including, without limitation,
sufficient evidence that the use will not impact
adversely upon groundwater quality and supply,
ground vibration, noise, dust dissemination, air or
ground contamination by toxic or hazardous
substances, and the traffic infrastructure of the
community. The minimum standards of the foregoing
shall be all state and federal laws and the rules and
regulations of all governmental bodies and regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction regarding the foregoing
conditions, except where the provisions of this
subsection provide stricter standards, in which case
the provisions of this subsection shall apply. The
Township shall perform testing, at the expense of the
owner/operator, of the use, as and when the Township
shall decide, in order to determine compliance with
the environmental performance standards set forth in
this subsection. Such testing shall be performed at
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:783
such times, in a manner and by methods directed and
approved by the Township on a semiannual basis or
more frequently if it is determined by the Township
that an adverse impact to any of the environmental
impact parameters set forth in this subsection has
occurred or appears to have occurred during the
operation of the uses governed by this subsection.
The owner or operator of the use shall undertake any
measures required by the Township, as a result of
such testing, to bring the use into full compliance
with the environmental performance standards of this
subsection as soon as possible and practical.
[b] An environmental impact assessment shall be
conducted by an applicant for any use governed by
this subsection, and a statement of the environmental
impact of such a proposed use based on that
assessment shall be submitted to the Township in
support of the application for conditional use approval
and land development or subdivision approval.
[c] Required information. The environmental impact
statement shall include but not be limited to the
following:
[i] A summary, including a brief description of the
proposed use or facility and any potential impacts
on public health or the environment.
[ii] The existing site conditions and the need for the
facility on that site.
[iii] The proposed facility and its associated land
development, including buildings and all other
structures, fencing, buffering, paving and other
site improvements.
[iv] The proposed ownership, the type or design of the
facility and its location, setting on the site,
construction methods, landscaping, maintenance,
and operation.
[v] The potential adverse environmental impacts of
the proposed facility during site preparation,
construction, and operation phases, including the
following parameters:
[A] Air pollution, including volatile organic
chemicals, toxic metals, acid gases, dioxins/
furans, dust, and fugitive emissions.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:784
[B] Surface groundwater pollution, including
bacteria (at least total and fecal coliform),
viruses, biological oxygen demand, total
suspended particulates, toxic metals, nitrate,
salt (as NaCl), and EPA priority pollutants.
[C] Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and
sedimentation.
[D] Soil contamination, both on site and off site,
from EPA priority pollutants, pesticides,
PCBs, dioxins, etc.
[E] Water supply for the site and impacts on wells
of surrounding neighbors.
[F] Residual waste storage and disposal, if any.
[G] Traffic and traffic safety.
[H] Noise.
[I] Odors.
[J] Potential for fire and explosion.
[K] Impacts on local ecology, including
terrestrial, avian and aquatic species, with
particular mention to any threatened or
endangered species or species of significant
economic importance, as defined by the
Pennsylvania Fish and Game Commissions.
[L] Impacts on public health.
[M] The extent to which state and federal
environmental regulations will be satisfied,
met or exceeded.
[vi] Alternatives to the proposed facility to lessen
adverse impacts, including but not limited to the
following:
[A] Changed location.
[B] Smaller (or larger) facilities.
[C] Redesign, layout, or siting of buildings or
structures, or revised traffic or access
patterns.
[D] Variations in process throughputs or
capacities.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:785
[E] Alternative methods for air pollution control,
water pollution control, water supply or solid
waste handling and disposal.
[F] No facility.
[vii] Discussion of the alternatives and the reasons for
selecting the proposed facility, its site location,
and specific design.
[viii] Measures to mitigate unavoidable adverse
environmental impacts.
[ix] Assessment of risks to the public health and the
environment from the proposed facility after
implementing the mitigating measures.
[x] Proposed monitoring of key or critical
environmental and public health parameters to
ensure that the actual environmental and public
health impacts are maintained at or below those
estimated in the environmental impact
assessment.
[xi] The role of the federal, state and local
government agencies in permitting the facility
and reviewing its ongoing operations for
compliance with the conditions of the permit.
[A] The Township may request additional
information regarding the proposed facility
and its impacts if such information is needed
to evaluate fully the public health and
environmental effects and consequences.
[B] The environmental impact statement shall be
prepared by qualified experts, including
engineers, toxicologists, ecologists and other
experienced professionals, such as those
pertaining to areas of traffic, air and water
quality, public health and other critical
parameters.
[d] In order to be granted conditional use approval and as
a condition for land development or subdivision
approval, an applicant for any use governed by this
subsection shall have the burden of providing, by the
preponderance of clear and convincing competent
proof and testimony from qualified expert consultants,
that any use governed by this subsection which is
proposed for operation in the Township will not have a
significant adverse impact on the environmental
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:786
conditions set forth previously and that the proposed
use will not have a harmful impact on the public
health, safety, and welfare of the community. A finding
by the Township that such an adverse or harmful
impact does or will exist shall be a basis for denial
of an application for any use governed by this
subsection.
[25] Reclamation/rehabilitation plan.
[a] An application for a zoning permit, conditional use
approval and subdivision and land development
approval for a quarry/extraction operation shall
contain a copy of the plan for reclamation as
submitted to and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
"Reclamation" and "rehabilitation" shall have the
same meaning herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a copy of the reclamation plan proposed for approval
by DEP shall be filed with the Township when it is
submitted to DEP so that the Township may review
and comment on it prior to consideration thereof by
DEP.
[b] Along with the reclamation plan, a timetable for the
reclamation proposed for the site in general, with an
actual timetable for reclamation of slopes, shall be
provided.
[c] Where contouring or terracing, as defined under the
Act, is not proposed, plans for the reclamation or
rehabilitation uses shall include uses permitted by the
Act (except solid waste disposal area, development or
use, which is hereby specifically prohibited) so long as
such use or uses otherwise are permitted under this
chapter.
[d] Reclamation or rehabilitation shall commence within
one year following the completion or the
discontinuance for a period of one year of the quarry/
extraction operation or the completion of the
excavation of a portion of an entire operation which
can feasibly be restored, reclaimed or rehabilitated
separately from other portions of the quarry/
extraction operation and which is not necessary to
such operation. Normal benching operations for
sloping purposes shall not be construed as requiring
the commencement of rehabilitation. Such
rehabilitation or reclamation shall be completed
within five years from the date the same is
commenced except where a longer period of time is
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:787
specifically authorized as part of the rehabilitation
program approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township.
[e] Rehabilitation shall include removal of all debris,
structures, equipment, stockpiles and spoilpiles.
[f] A layer of arable soil of sufficient depth to sustain
grass, shrubs and trees shall be provided over the
entire site. Grass, shrubs and trees native to the area
shall be planted thereon not later than six months
after the providing of arable soil.
[g] Where the quarry/extraction operations area is to be
filled as part of the rehabilitation process, no material
shall be used for fill purposes other than earth, stone,
sand, or concrete.
[h] Water accumulation upon the site may be retained
after the completion of such rehabilitation where the
excavation cannot reasonably be drained by gravity
flow, provided that adequate provision shall be made
to avoid stagnation, pollution, and the danger of
improperly controlled release of such waters from the
site and adequate safety measures are applied to the
water accumulation area to protect the general public.
[i] The rehabilitation plans must comply with the
provisions of this subsection and other applicable
regulations as a prerequisite for conditional use,
zoning permit, subdivision and land development
approval granted by the Township. Upon receipt of the
rehabilitation plan, the Township shall review the
same and determine its compliance with all provisions
of this subsection and other regulations, and the
applicant shall make any changes therein which the
Township may require to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this subsection and the rules and
regulations of and the plan approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Upon such compliances, the approved
reclamation plan shall be filed permanently in the
official records of the Township.
[j] Reclamation plans may be amended from time to time,
by approval of the Township upon proper application,
so long as such amendments also are approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
[k] Before any permit, conditional use approval, land
development, or subdivision approval is granted for a
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:788
quarry/extraction use, financial security shall be
provided in an amount determined by the Township
based on the total estimated cost to the Township of
completing the approved reclamation plan and in a
form governed by the regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection regarding the nature and
alternatives of financial security. The financial security
shall be sufficient to ensure the rehabilitation of the
affected quarry site in accordance with the standards
for the issuance of any original permit or annual
renewal permit and in accordance with the provisions
of the plan of rehabilitation as submitted or amended
pursuant to this subsection. The financial security
posted with any state agency shall not be withdrawn
or reclaimed without written approval by the
Township. The financial security required to be
provided to the Township by this subsection shall be
in addition to the bonding requirements under the
Act, and the financial security required under this
subsection shall continue for the duration of quarry/
extraction activities and its reclamation and for a
period of five years after the completion of such
activities. The owner or operator of a quarry shall
deposit such additional financial security as the
Township may direct if the Township determines that
the existing financial security does not meet the
requirements of this subsection for any reason,
including, without limitation, changes in quarry
operations, reclamation changes or changes in the
cost of reclamation, restoration or abatement work.
[l] Ultimate use and ownership of the site after the
completion of the quarry/extraction operation and
reclamation shall be disclosed when the reclamation
plan is submitted for approval by the Township, and
the ultimate use of the reclaimed quarry site shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
[26] Historical sites. Historical sites or districts within the
Township, including, without limitation, those identified by
the Bucks County Conservancy in its Significant Natural
Areas Preservation Program or those identified by the
Warwick Township Historical Commission, shall not be
disturbed by the uses herein regulated or by its owner or
operator, who shall demonstrate evidence of the same on
all applications and plans required to be submitted to the
Township and at all times during the use operation.
[27] Notices, permits, reports, and hearings. Whenever the
owner or operator of the use is required under the Act to
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:789
give public notice of any application for a permit or bond
or financial security release, or whenever any public
hearing relating to the use is scheduled or authorized or
permitted to be scheduled pursuant to the Act or any other
law or regulation, the owner or operator of the use shall
notify the Township, in care of the Board of Supervisors, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
of the exact nature of such application, the time, date and
location of the hearing and shall provide the Township
with a copy of the application and all applicable notices
or communications issued by any regulatory agency or
governmental body having jurisdiction thereover and/or
scheduling or conducting the hearing. All reports or other
documents required by state law or regulation to be filed
with any state agency, including the Department of
Environmental Protection, pertaining to a use governed
by this subsection shall be filed with the Township
simultaneously with the state filing.
[28] Insurance. The owner or operator of the uses governed by
this subsection shall provide and maintain public liability
and property damage insurance and such other coverage
as may be required by the Township during the conduct of
the uses governed by this subsection. The nature and
amounts of such insurance coverage shall be determined
by the Township at the time conditional use approval is
granted in accordance with the resolution governing the
same adopted by the Board of Supervisors. Insurance
policy limits shall be no less than, but may exceed, the
limits required by the Township for land developments.
Such insurance shall be issued by an insurance company
authorized to transact business in Pennsylvania and
having at least an A-rating by the current edition of Best's
Review. At all times requested by the Township, evidence
of such insurance coverage shall be presented to the
Township for review and approval by the Township, and
evidence that the insurance policy(ies) required by this
subsection have been properly issued shall be a condition
of any permit or approval granted for a use governed
hereunder.
[29] Technology. All uses governed hereunder shall employ the
best available technology, not only in their operations but
also for all required testing and environmental protection,
including, without limitation, prevention of air, water and
noise pollution.
[30] Annual renewal permit.
[a] An applicant for a use governed by this subsection
shall apply for and obtain an annual renewal permit
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:790
during each year of its operation in order to be in
compliance with this subsection.
[b] The properly completed application for a renewal
permit must be received by the Township along with
the appropriate fee and required supporting plans and
other materials and data required not less than 60
days prior to the expiration of the then-current
Township permit.
[c] The application shall include updated plans and other
materials and data showing any change from the
information required for the issuance of an original
permit, or if there is no change, the application shall
so indicate.
[d] The annual renewal permit shall be issued only if the
Township is satisfied that the applicant has complied
with all of the requirements for an originally issued
permit, and provided that the provisions of this
subsection have been and will be satisfied.
[e] The annual renewal permit application may be
referred by the Board of Supervisors for review by any
Township officials or agencies or professional
consultants or contractors to receive its
recommendations on compliance with the provisions
of this subsection.
[31] Application and permit fees. Applicants for a zoning
permit, annual renewal permit, conditional use,
subdivision, and land development approval for the uses
governed by this subsection shall pay a fee to the
Township, established by the Fee Schedule Resolution
which may be adopted and amended, from time to time, by
the Township.
[32] Inspections. To ensure that the provisions of this
subsection are strictly satisfied and enforced, the
Township and its duly authorized representatives shall
have the right to inspect the uses governed by this
subsection. Such inspection or inspections as the
Township shall deem necessary may be conducted on any
working day of the year, during regular business hours and
may be performed by the persons duly authorized by the
Township, without any prior notice to the owner or
operator of the use.
[33] Hours of operation. Except for clerical or office work, no
use governed by this subsection shall operate or be
conducted before the hour of 7:00 a.m. and after the hour
of 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and on Saturday
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:791
before the hour of 8:00 a.m. and after the hour of 12:00
noon or anytime on Sunday, Christmas Day, New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, July fourth, Labor Day or Thanksgiving
Day. However, no stone-crushing operation shall be
conducted any time on Saturday. All time designations
shall be in prevailing time for Warwick Township.
[34] Machinery and equipment. A schedule of the quantity and
types of machinery and equipment which will be employed
in the uses governed by this subsection shall be provided
with the application for conditional use, subdivision/land
development and zoning permit approvals, and the noise
levels of each shall be disclosed.
[35] Safety and complaints. All safety measures to be employed
and a plan to be utilized to monitor and to respond to
complaints shall be provided with the application for
conditional use, subdivision/land development and zoning
permit approvals, and the same shall be approved by the
Township as to their effectiveness, workability and
coordination with appropriate Township personnel, such
as emergency services, fire marshal, police, and code
enforcement personnel.
[36] Height limitations. No machinery, equipment, buildings, or
structures used in a quarry/extraction operation and no
extracted material from the quarry/extraction property
shall exceed 35 feet in height above the ground level
previously existing prior to the use, and none of the
foregoing shall be visible from any location outside of the
property boundary.
[37] All extraction uses shall comply with Title 25, Chapter 77,
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Code. No machinery, equipment, buildings or
structures used in a ready-mix concrete or asphalt plant
operation shall exceed 35 feet in height above the ground
level previously existing prior to the use.
(13) H13 Industrial Park.
(a) Purpose. The following regulations are intended to permit
greater flexibility in design, size of layout and construction in
industrial development so as to encourage retention and
preservation of woodlands, steep slopes and other open space
land for aesthetic and scenic beauty, passive recreation and
preservation of the ecological systems of the Township.
(b) Applicability.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:792
[1] The Board of Supervisors may request of a developer
cluster development for any tract of land located in an LI
Limited Industrial District.
[2] A landowner may, at his option, develop any tract of land
located in an LI Limited Industrial District as a cluster
development, in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
[3] The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an
area of not less than 25 contiguous acres and located in an
LI Limited Industrial District may submit to the Board of
Supervisors a plan for the use and development of the
entire tract in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter. The submission must include a tentative sketch
plan which complies with Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development, of Warwick Township. The Board of
Supervisors shall submit each such request to the
Township Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to
the Board of Supervisors' consideration of the submission
to provide the Township Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit its recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors, which recommendations shall be
accompanied by a report stating specific evidence and
facts indicating that the required development meets the
requirements of this chapter and that the properties
adjacent to the tract to be developed will not be adversely
affected.
(c) Development standards.
[1] Use regulations.
[a] Any use permitted in the Limited Industrial District as
specified in Article XVIII of the this chapter, as
amended, shall be permitted.
[b] Commercial recreation facilities, such as swimming
pools and tennis courts but not including amusement
parks with rides, shall be permitted.
[c] Public storage facilities shall be permitted.
[2] Area and dimensional requirements for individual lots in
an H13 Industrial Park.
[a] The development of lots in a clustered industrial
development shall meet the following conditions:
[i] No individual lot may have an area less than one
acre and a width not less than 145 feet at the
building line.
[ii] Building area.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:793
[A] The first-floor area of primary and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of each lot
area, and the total floor area of primary and
accessory buildings and/or structures,
excluding basement area, shall not exceed
60% of each lot area regardless of building
height.
[B] No more than 80% of the lot area shall be
covered by impervious surfaces.
[iii] Building placement. No building or structure shall
be located less than 500 feet from an existing
residential use or residential district nor less than
75 feet from an existing street right-of-way line.
Within the industrial park development, no
building or structure shall be located less than 40
feet from any internal road or less than 25 feet
from one side or rear property line. For Flex
Space use H16, the use of party walls and zero lot
lines is permitted only within a building that
complies with all other setbacks set forth in this
subsection H(13)(c)[2][a][iii]. No parking,
loading, or service areas shall be located in front
of any building but shall be permitted on side and
rear yard areas. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-1]
[iv] Buffer yards. Along any existing residential use or
residential district boundary line, a buffer yard
shall be provided which shall be not less than 200
feet in width, measured from the street line
(where such street constitutes the boundary line).
Thirty-five feet of this two-hundred-foot buffer
must be landscaped with suitable trees, shrubs,
and grass in the nature of a buffer zone as
required by § 195-63 of this chapter. Such buffer
yards may be conterminous with any required
yard, and, in case of conflict, the larger yard
requirements shall apply. No parking shall be
permitted within 100 feet of any existing
residential use or residential district boundary
line.
[v] Height regulations. No building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height, or three stories,
whichever is less.
[vi] Parking requirements for individual uses within
an industrial park shall be as required by the use
regulations of this chapter.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:794
[A] In the absence of specific parking regulations
for the individual industrial uses: one offstreet
parking space for every 300 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater,
but the property owner shall have the right to
reduce the number of parking spaces, subject
to provision being made for future expansion
to the above requirements if said parking
should become necessary due to occupancy.
[3] Open space. A minimum of 20% of the base site area shall
be reserved as common open space. In addition, at least
5% of the gross site area shall be devoted to civic or
recreational use in the form of a park, plaza, memorial
garden, sculpture garden, or like amenity which shall be
located in a center area of the H13 Industrial Park use.
(d) Special regulations.
[1] A tentative plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
Board of Supervisors showing the layout of the proposed
development and shall include the following:
[a] The scale shall be one inch equals 100 feet, with fivefoot
contour intervals and other topographical
features.
[b] The tentative location, plan, dimensions, elevation and
height of a typical building and other structures and
the approximate total gross floor area to be
constructed.
[c] The tentative location, dimensions and arrangement
of all open spaces, typical yards, typical accessways,
typical entrances, typical exits, typical off-street
parking facilities, typical loading and unloading
facilities, and the location and width of roads and
streets and sidewalks, if required.
[d] The capacity of typical areas to be used for automobile
access, parking, loading, and unloading.
[e] The typical location, dimensions, and arrangement of
all areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees, or similar
purposes.
[f] The provisions proposed for temporary and
permanent location of sewage disposal, water supply,
stormwater drainage, and other utilities, all meeting
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
regulations.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:795
[g] Sufficient data in all instances to enable the Board of
Supervisors to judge the effectiveness of the design
and the character of the proposed development and to
consider properly such things as its relationship to
surrounding areas, anticipated traffic, public health,
safety, and welfare.
[2] The plan submitted may not necessarily show a series of
individual lots, but rather large sectioned parcels within
the overall development plan that are to be further
subdivided and subsequently submitted for approval by
the Township as each industrial building is constructed.
[3] If, within 36 months of the approval, construction is not
undertaken by or for the applicant, said approved plan
may be declared null and void.
(14) H14 Resource Recovery Facility. A facility or land that is used for
any one or a combination of the following: composting,
incineration, material separation, or recycling.
(a) Related definitions.
[1] Composting facility: a facility for the composting of the
organic matter in municipal solid waste.
[2] Incinerator: a facility designed to reduce municipal solid
waste by combustion. This use may or may not include
heat exchange equipment for energy recovery.
[3] Material separation and/or refuse-derived fuel (RFD)
facility: the extraction of materials from municipal solid
waste for recycling or for use as refuse-derived fuel (RFD).
[4] Municipal solid waste: the unseparated and/or
unprocessed combination of residential and commercial
solid waste materials generated in a municipality.
[5] Recycling facility: a business that accumulates material
such as paper, glass, aluminum, and/or plastic that is no
longer useful for its intended purpose. The materials are
then sold to another business as a raw material which can
be used to manufacture a new product.
(b) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every resource
recovery facility shall be protected by locked barricades,
fences, gates, or other positive means designed to deny access
to the area at unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade
shall be a least six feet high and shall be kept in good repair
and neatly painted in a uniform color.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:796
[1] "Indiscriminate/unauthorized dumping" shall mean:
[a] Disposal of waste other than in designated areas
within the station.
[b] Disposal of waste outside the gates or its surrounding
areas when the station is closed.
[c] Disposal of prohibited waste.
(c) Disposal of hazardous waste, as defined by the state and
federal Departments of Environmental Protection, brush or
trees larger than five inches in diameter, boulders, stumps,
sewage, dead animals, explosive materials, ashes, or junk cars
shall not be processed or handled in a resource recovery
facility.
[1] Household trash mixed with materials this chapter
requires to be recycled shall be refused.
(d) Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
(e) Any such use shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any public
road as measured from the ultimate right-of-way of the road
and 200 feet from any property line. Additionally, an
incinerator shall be a minimum of 300 feet from any residential
zoning district or occupied residential dwelling unit.
(f) Parking areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line.
(g) Operation of a resource recovery facility shall at all times be in
full compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the provisions of this
chapter as well as Chapter 95. In the event that any of the
provisions of this chapter are less restrictive than any present
or future rules or regulations of PADEP, the more restrictive
PADEP regulations shall supersede and control.
(h) Unloading of municipal solid waste shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
(i) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
submitted to the municipality. To control blowing paper, there
shall be erected a fence having a minimum height of six feet,
with openings not more than three inches by three inches
along all boundaries. The entire area shall be kept clean and
orderly.
(j) All parts of the process (unloading, handling and storage of
municipal solid waste) shall occur within a building. However,
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:797
certain separated recyclable materials like glass, aluminum,
and other metals may be stored outdoors.
(k) The storage of paper shall be within a building.
(l) Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as
not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property.
(m) No material shall be placed or deposited to a height greater
than the height of the fence or wall herein prescribed.
(n) No municipal solid waste shall be processed or stored at a
recycling facility. For all other types of resource recovery
facilities, municipal solid waste shall not be stored on the site
for more than 72 hours.
(o) A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste during
a plant shutdown must be submitted to the municipality and
approved by the governing body.
(p) Leachate from the municipal solid waste and water used to
wash vehicles or any part of the operation shall be disposed of
in a manner in compliance with PADEP regulations. If the
leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage treatment
plant, appropriate permits shall be obtained from the
applicable agencies and authorities. In no event shall leachate
be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
(q) Waste from the resource recovery facility process (such as, but
not limited to, ash from an incinerator) shall be stored in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried from the site by
wind or water. This process waste shall be located at least 100
feet from any property line and stored in leakproof and
vectorproof containers. Such process waste shall be disposed
of in a sanitary landfill approved by PADEP or in another
manner approved by PADEP.
(r) A buffer area of at least 50 feet shall be provided around the
site. Within the buffer area, a dense evergreen buffer shall be
provided on the outside perimeter of the fenced area.
Evergreens shall be six feet in height and planted on nine-foot
staggered centers. In addition, the buffer requirements of
§ 195-63 of this chapter shall be met.
(s) Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any
material shall specifically be prohibited.
(t) No use shall emit noise in such quantity as to be audible
beyond its lot lines. In addition, the nuisance standards of
Article XIX of this chapter shall be met.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:798
(u) A traffic impact study and water impact study shall be in
accordance with specifications by the Township's consulting
engineers.
(v) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(15) H15 Solid Waste Landfill. A land site on which municipal solid
waste is disposed. A solid waste landfill shall utilize the best
current engineering principles to bury deposits of solid waste
without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances,
pollution or environmental degradation.
(a) Minimum lot area: 50 acres.
(b) The solid waste landfill operation shall be set back from any
property line or street right-of-way line at least 300 feet.
(c) Direct access to York Road (SR 263) shall be required for the
operation of a solid waste landfill.
(d) A traffic impact study shall be required.
(e) Operation of any solid waste landfill shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection and the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter are less
restrictive than any present or future rules or regulations of
the Department, the more restrictive Department rules or
regulations shall supersede and control in the operation of
such solid waste landfill.
(f) Suitable measures shall be taken to prevent fires by means and
devices mutually agreeable to the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township.
(g) A solid waste landfill operation shall be under the direction at
all times of a responsible individual who is qualified by
experience or training to operate a landfill.
(h) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every solid waste
landfill shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates,
or other positive means designated to deny access to the area
at unauthorized times or locations.
(i) Unloading of waste shall be continuously supervised.
(j) Measures shall be provided to control dust. To control blowing
paper, there shall be erected a fence having a minimum height
of six feet, with openings not more than three inches by three
inches along any boundary over which such a nuisance may be
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:799
spread. The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. Cracks
in, depressions in or erosion of cover shall be repaired daily.
(k) Hazardous materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes,
radioactive materials, liquids, and sewage, shall not be
disposed of in a solid waste landfill.
(l) The disposal of sewage liquids, solids, and other liquids shall
be specifically prohibited in a solid waste landfill.
(m) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area and a working plan of cleanup of litter shall be
accomplished.
(n) Salvaging shall be conducted by the operator only and shall be
organized so that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary
disposal of waste or create unsightliness or health hazards.
The storage of salvage shall be controlled in a manner that will
not permit the inhabitation or reproduction of deleterious
vectors.
(o) The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded and
provided with drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and
into the fill, to prevent erosion or washing of the fill, to drain off
rainwater falling onto the fill and to prevent the collection of
standing water. The operator shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 75 and Chapter 102 of Title 25,
Pennsylvania Code, and applicable Township ordinances so
that there is no adverse off-site impact from the drainage of
surface water.
(p) Operation of any solid waste landfill shall at all times be in full
compliance with the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 157
of 1980, as amended.207
(q) A one-hundred-foot buffer with dense evergreen screening and
fencing shall be constructed around the entire perimeter of the
site, except for the area of the entrance drive which shall be
landscaped to the satisfaction of the Township.
(r) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(s) A final inspection of the entire site shall be made by the
Department of Environmental Protection and the Township and
their authorized representatives to determine compliance with
approved plans and specifications before the earthmoving
equipment is removed from the site. Any necessary corrective
work shall be performed before the solid waste landfill project
is accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made for the
207. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:800
repair of all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final
cover during the first two years following completion of the
solid waste landfill. A bond shall be posted to ensure that all
corrective work is completed.
(16) H16 Flex Space.
(a) Building space designed for use as either office, light
manufacturing, assembly, warehousing, or repair shop. Each
flex space area shall have no less than 5% of the area devoted
to an office use. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(b) The buffer requirements of § 195-63 shall be met.
(c) Parking. If office space is less than 1/2 the square footage of
the facility, there shall be one space for every 300 square feet
of total floor area, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises. If office space is more than 1/
2 the square footage of the facility, there shall be one space for
every 250 square feet of total floor area, plus one space for
each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.
(d) The area and dimensional criteria for this use shall be as
required by the underlying zoning district, except when an H16
use is proposed in an H13 Industrial Park. If an H16 use is
proposed within an H13 Industrial Park, the area and
dimensional criteria of the H13 use shall govern. Parking
requirements for the H16 use shall be as stated in Subsection
H(16)(c), above, regardless of the zoning district or industrial
park requirements.
(17) H17 Trash Transfer Station. A facility where municipal solid waste
is delivered for the purpose of separating, compacting, or in some
other way preparing the material for transport in larger vehicles to
a final disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer station may
include the separation and collection of material for the purpose for
recycling.)
(a) Related definitions.
[1] Terms used in this subsection of the Zoning Ordinance
shall be as defined in Chapter 95 of the Warwick Township
Code of Ordinances (Chapter 95). Examples of terms
defined in Chapter 95 include, but are not limited to,
”municipal waste," "leaf waste," and "recyclable
materials."
[2] "Scrap metal" shall mean recyclable steel, aluminum,
copper, brass zinc and lead.
[3] "Prohibited waste" shall mean all materials, hazardous or
otherwise, that may not be disposed of at the transfer/
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:801
recycling station or comingled with other recyclables
under Chapter 95.
(b) Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
(c) Any such use shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any public
road as measured from the ultimate right-of-way of the road
and 200 feet from any property line. Additionally, a transfer
station shall be a minimum of 300 feet from any residential
zoning district or occupied residential dwelling unit.
(d) Parking areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line.
(e) Operation of a trash transfer station shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection (PADEP), provisions of Chapter 95
of the Township Code, and the provisions of this chapter. In the
event that any of the provisions of this chapter are less
restrictive than any present or future rules or regulations of
PADEP, the more restrictive PADEP regulations shall supersede
and control.
(f) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every trash transfer
station shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates,
or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade shall be a
least six feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly
painted in a uniform color.
[1] "Indiscriminate/unauthorized dumping" shall mean:
[a] Disposal of waste other than in designated areas
within the station.
[b] Disposal of waste outside the gates or its surrounding
areas when the station is closed.
[c] Disposal of prohibited waste.
(g) Unloading of municipal solid waste shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
(h) Disposal of hazardous waste, as defined by the state and
federal Departments of Environmental Protection, brush or
trees larger than five inches in diameter, boulders, stumps,
sewage, dead animals, explosive materials, ashes, or junk cars
shall not be processed or handled in a trash transfer station.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:802
[1] Household trash mixed with materials this chapter
requires to be recycled shall be refused.
(i) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
submitted to the municipality. To control blowing paper, there
shall be erected a fence having a minimum height of six feet,
with openings not more than three inches by three inches
along all boundaries. The entire area shall be kept clean and
orderly.
(j) All parts of the process (unloading, handling and storage of
municipal solid waste) shall occur within a building. However,
certain separated recyclable materials like glass, aluminum,
and other metals may be stored outdoors for a period not to
exceed 72 hours.
(k) The storage of paper shall be within a building.
(l) Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as
not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property.
(m) No material shall be placed or deposited to a height greater
than the height of the fence or wall herein prescribed.
(n) No municipal solid waste shall be processed at a trash transfer
station or stored on the site for more than 72 hours.
(o) A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste during
a plant shutdown must be submitted to the municipality and
approved by the governing body.
(p) Leachate from the municipal solid waste and water used to
wash vehicles or any part of the operation shall be disposed of
in a manner in compliance with PADEP regulations. If the
leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage treatment
plant, appropriate permits shall be obtained from the
applicable agencies and authorities. In no event shall leachate
be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
(q) Waste from the trash transfer station shall be stored in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried from the site by
wind or water. This process waste shall be located at least 100
feet from any property line and stored in leakproof and
vectorproof containers. Such process waste shall be disposed
of in a sanitary landfill approved by PADEP or in another
manner approved by PADEP.
(r) A buffer area of at least 50 feet shall be provided around the
site. Within the buffer area, a dense evergreen buffer shall be
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:803
provided on the outside perimeter of the fenced area.
Evergreens shall be six feet in height and planted on ninefoot
staggered centers. In addition, the buffer requirements of
§ 195-63 of this chapter shall be met.
(s) Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any
material shall specifically be prohibited.
(t) No use shall emit noise in such quantity as to be audible
beyond its lot lines. In addition, the nuisance standards of
Article XIX of this chapter shall be met.
(u) A traffic impact study and water impact study shall be in
accordance with specifications by the Township's consulting
engineers.
(v) A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
(18) H18 Recovery of Subsurface Gas and Oil Deposits. Activities
limited to the recovery and removal of subsurface gas and oil
deposits through direct on-site drilling as defined and set forth in
the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (58 P.S. § 601.101 et seq.). This
use does not include the recovery and removal of any other
subsurface minerals such as coal, gravel, sand, clay, topsoil, stone
or any other mineral other than oil and gas, such use being covered
by Use H12 Extractive Operations.
(a) Minimum lot area: 12 acres.
(b) All drilling and production operations including derricks,
retaining pits, vacuum pumps, storage tanks, vehicle parking,
structures, machinery and ancillary equipment shall be located
at least 600 feet from any building containing a residential
dwelling; or from any structure used for public assembly,
including schools and churches; or from any nonresidential
structure, where the owners of such structures are not a party
to the oil and gas instrument.
(c) All aspects of the recovery of subsurface gas and oil deposits,
including without limitation all drilling, production operations,
buildings, pipelines, etc., shall be located at least 100 feet from
the ultimate public right-of-way of any public or private street,
and 100 feet from any property line. Pipelines shall be
permitted to traverse the required setback only where
absolutely necessary to transport extracted product off site.
(d) Offensive or noxious odors, noises, fluids, gases, dust or glare
shall be confined to the subject parcel or leasehold premises
and shall not impact any occupied structure or dwellings.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:804
(e) Junk, refuse, trash or abandoned material shall not be disposed
of on site. All refuse stored on site for final off-site disposal
shall be indoors, in a dumpster or other permitted enclosure.
(f) Any hazardous or toxic material shall be securely contained,
stored and removed in accordance with applicable state or
federal regulations. On-site disposal is prohibited.
(g) All operations shall be in accordance with all applicable federal
laws and regulations; the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (58 P.S.
§ 601.101 et seq.), as amended, and pursuant to all rules,
regulations and procedures adopted thereto.
(h) The owner(s) and operator(s) shall be responsible for
prevention and prompt removal of spills involving waste
materials, oil and toxic or hazardous materials.
(i) A copy of a valid insurance policy, issued by a corporate insurer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be
provided to Warwick Township. Such insurance shall be of
sufficient amount to:
[1] Provide for payment for all damages or injury to persons or
property resulting from the drilling, operation or
maintenance of the proposed well and other structures,
machinery, appurtenances used in conjunction with it;
[2] Provide for payment to control and/or eliminate any
hazardous or dangerous event or condition, including a
blowout; and provide for payment for injury or damages to
persons, equipment or agencies responding to same event
or condition; and
[3] Contain no exclusion from coverage of contamination or
pollution of surface or subterranean streams,
watercourses, lakes, wetlands or public or private water
supplies.
(j) The drilling site, production site, access roads/driveways and
all structures shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize the removal of trees and shrubs, protect all natural
resources, and minimize the amount of surface disturbance.
The natural resources protection and setback provisions of this
chapter shall be met.
(k) Excavation, structures, and/or equipment in sensitive areas
such as ridges, hilltops, scenic or other areas of special visual
quality shall be avoided.
(l) The location and design of structures and site improvements
shall be integrated with the natural color, form and texture of
the surrounding area.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:805
(m) All structures, equipment and operations shall be fully
screened from off-site view. Methods may include, but are not
limited to:
[1] Existing and/or replanted vegetation.
[2] Existing and/or artificially created land forms.
(n) Glare from site lighting or gas flaring shall not impact on
nearby residences, excepting those whose owners are a party
to the oil/gas instrument.
(o) Operators shall conform to all current Warwick Township,
Pennsylvania and federal regulations and standards
concerning air quality, water quality, and noise.
(p) No habitat disturbance is to occur where threatened or
endangered species or critical habitats exist, as defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources. A Pennsylvania Natural Heritage Program study
shall be completed and provided to Warwick Township.
(q) All activity in an archaeologic or historic resource area, as
identified in the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance,
Warwick Township Comprehensive Plan, Bucks County
Comprehensive Plan, or by the Pennsylvania Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) or by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC),
shall provide for the preservation of the resource or provide for
the completion of necessary study and work as specified by the
DCNR and/or PHMC before any aspect of use begins. Should a
resource be uncovered during operations, those operations
shall be suspended pending recommendation of DCNR and/or
PHMC, as applicable.
(r) For areas of potential wildfire hazard, fire line intensities shall
be abated to less than 100 Btu/foot/second through fuel breaks
or other equally effective means around structures or areas of
activity. Required practices for grass/shrub lands include the
following:
[1] Fuel breaks of a width four times the height of adjacent
vegetation.
[2] Revegetation to short grasses.
(s) Drilling or production operations shall not cause the
acceleration of geologic processes such as erosion,
sedimentation or gravitational movement of earth and/or rock
material to the point that such processes become a hazard or
nuisance to life or property.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:806
(t) Activities or structures proposed within an identified floodplain
area shall independently meet the requirements of the
Warwick Township Floodplain Ordinance208 and shall be
carried out in a manner that does not increase flood hazards
upstream or downstream, nor that reduces the efficiency with
which floodwaters are carried through the site. [Amended
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
(u) Use of streets serving exclusively residential neighborhoods is
prohibited.
(v) All weather access roads, suitable to handle emergency
equipment, shall be provided to within 50 feet of any structure,
improvement or activity area.
(w) Reclamation shall be carried out on all disturbed areas and
achieve the following objectives:
[1] Final soil profiles designed to equal or reduce soil erosion
potentials over stable preoperation conditions.
[2] Restoration or enhancement of preexisting visual
character through planting of native or adaptive
vegetation.
(x) Final landforms shall be stable.
(y) Disturbance of soil cover shall be minimized.
(z) An abandoned site shall be securely and safely maintained
until reclamation has been completed and revegetation
permanently established.
(aa) Reclamation shall be initiated as soon as weather and growing
conditions permit after the abandonment of the well or
installation of production equipment and shall be completed no
more than one year later.
(bb) All watercourses and wetlands shall be preserved in a natural
undisturbed state. The gas and oil well casing and tank
structures normally used in drilling and recovery operations
shall be a minimum of 100 feet from the edge of any
watercourse or wetland. A wetland report, certified by a soil
scientist or wetland specialist, shall be provided.
(cc) Roads or other improvements obstructing drainage shall
provide for culverts sized for storm flows as determined by the
Township Engineer.
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:807
(dd) Any application for a zoning permit or land development shall
be accompanied by plans and other information to satisfy the
criteria set forth above and in addition shall depict:
[1] Name and address of the assessed owner of the surface
rights, owner of the oil and gas rights, the oil and gas
lessee, if any, and of the driller.
[2] Plan of the general area within a one-mile radius of the site
at a scale of 500 feet or less to the inch with a twenty-footor-
less contour interval to show:
[a] Location of proposed site.
[b] Land use pattern including building locations and
historical sites and buildings, if any.
[c] Roads, indicating major roads and showing width,
weight loads, types of surfaces and traffic data
(existing traffic and proposed additional traffic)
[d] Existing and proposed uses of adjacent properties
including:
[i] Subdivisions.
[ii] Parks, schools, churches.
[iii] Highways (new and reconstructed).
[iv] Other uses potentially affecting or affected by the
proposed oil and gas operation.
[3] Plan of proposed site at the scale of 100 feet or less to the
inch with a ten-foot-or-less contour interval to show:
[a] Soils and geology: groundwater data, watercourses
and wetlands.
[b] Vegetation: existing and areas of vegetation to be
removed, with species and vegetation types shown.
[c] Wind data: directions and percentage of time.
[d] Proposed route of ingress, egress and regress to the
proposed operations site.
[e] Proposed location of all drilling and production
facilities on the site, including but not limited to
derricks, retaining pits, dikes, vacuum pumps, storage
tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, storage
sheds, vehicle parking, structures, machinery and
ancillary equipment, access roads.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:808
[f] Type of derrick, if any, to be used, including the
height.
[g] Copies of all permits and applications for permit
obtained pursuant to the Oil and Gas Conservation
Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 58 P.S.
§ 401 et seq., and/or the Oil and Gas Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 58 P.S. § 601.101 et
seq., if applicable.
(ee) Any application for a zoning permit shall be initially referred to
the Planning Commission for review and to the Township
Engineer for review prior to final action by the Board of
Supervisors. When considering the application for a zoning
permit or land development approval, the Board of Supervisors
shall take into account the following:
[1] Compliance with the requirements set forth above.
[2] The impact that the proposed operations would have upon
the health, safety and welfare of the community including
specifically the finding that the use will not impact
adversely upon the following:
[a] Groundwater supply, surface water supplies, and
watercourses.
[b] Ground and air vibration.
[c] Noise.
[d] Dust dissemination.
[e] Ground, surface water, groundwater and air
contamination of toxic or hazardous substances.
(ff) No permit for any recovery of subsurface gas and oil deposits
shall be issued until the applicant has first demonstrated to the
Township that it has obtained all other permits and approvals
required from any other regulatory agencies to conduct the
recovery of subsurface gas and oil deposits.
(gg) Minimum parking requirement. All off-street parking spaces
shall be provided as the Township Board of Supervisors and
Planning Commission shall determine is adequate to serve
customers, employees, visitors and vehicles normally parked
on the premises.
I. General accessory uses and structures.
(1) I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building. Accessory building, or
structure, or uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted
within the zoning district, except outside storage. For any use
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:809
accessory to a use permitted only as a special exception or
conditional use, the accessory use shall only be provided as a
special exception or conditional use.
(a) Nonresidential accessory buildings shall meet the minimum
setbacks for the principal nonresidential use.
(b) School bus shelter. A structure for the use of person waiting for
a bus.
[1] Maximum floor area: 63 square feet.
[2] Such structures shall be located at least 12 feet from any
street line or lot line.
[3] Two parallel signs, no more than six square feet each, may
be erected. These signs may advertise goods, services,
businesses or organizations not located on the property.
(c) Greenhouse.
[1] Maximum floor area: 250 square feet.
[2] No retail or wholesale sales shall be permitted.
[3] The greenhouse shall not be permitted in the front yard.
The greenhouse will be permitted within the side and rear
yards and shall not be located closer to the street than the
front of the primary structure.
[4] The structure shall be located a minimum of 12 feet from
any property line.
(d) Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of the most
closely related use.
(2) I2 Outside Storage or Display. Outside storage and display shall
include any products, merchandise, materials, equipment,
vehicular advertisement or marketing advertisement which is not
enclosed by a roof with four opaque walls. [Amended 6-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(a) Outside storage or display, other than storage as a primary use
of the land, necessary but incidental to the normal operation of
a primary use.
[1] No part of the street right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas
intended or designed for pedestrian use, required parking
areas and portions of the required front yard shall be
occupied by outside storage or display except in the C1 or
C2 Zoning Districts where outside display shall not extend
more than five feet beyond the front of the building.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:810
[2] Outside storage and display areas shall occupy an area of
less than 1/2 the existing building coverage.
[3] Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from all
public streets by use of both a fence and a vegetative
buffer.
(b) Uses requiring more substantial amounts of land area for
storage or display may be exempt from the provisions of
Subsection I(2)(a)[1] and [2] above when granted as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
[1] No more than 25% of the lot area shall be used in outdoor
storage or display.
[2] In particular, uses appropriate under this provision
include, but are not limited to, nurseries (Use A6), lumber
yards (Use H8), automobiles sales (Use G23), truck
terminals (Use H6), and agricultural retail (Use A3).
[3] Among the uses that shall not be appropriate for inclusion
under this provision are retail store (Use G3), repair shop
(Use G12), service station or car-washing facility (Use
G22), automobile repair (Use G24), sale of automobile
accessories (Use G25), miniwarehouse (Use G28),
wholesale business and storage (Use H3), contractor office
and shops (Use H5), and crafts (Use H7).
(3) I3 Temporary Use or Structure.
(a) Definition. Temporary structure, building or use, including
portable temporary storage containers. A temporary permit
may be issued for structures or uses necessary during
construction, or other special circumstances of a nonrecurring
nature.
(b) Regulations.
[1] The time period of the initial permit shall be three months.
The permit may be renewed for one additional threemonth
time period, provided that the applicant must file an
application for a zoning permit under this chapter to
extend the initial permit beyond the initial three-month
term. The Zoning Officer may deny the application for an
extension to the initial three-month period if he or she
determines that the extension will have an adverse impact
on the surrounding neighborhood. In determining the
impact on the neighborhood, the Zoning Officer may
contact adjacent property owners.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:811
[2] Such structure or use shall be removed completely within
30 days of the expiration of the permit or renewal permit
without cost to the Township.
[3] Upon application and approval of a renewal permit for
more than six months, the applicant shall provide a $1,000
cash escrow account with the Township to guarantee the
removal of the temporary use. The foregoing cash deposit
shall be held by the Township until the use is removed by
the applicant. If the use is not removed at the end of the
renewal period, the cash escrow deposit shall be forfeited
to the Township in order to enforce the terms of the
temporary use permit.
[4] No residential parcel under this subsection may be issued
more than one permit for the placement of any temporary
structure, building or use on the property during any
twelve-month period.
[5] If the use is a temporary storage container, an outdoor
container commonly referred to as a "POD," or a similartype
container, such uses shall meet the following
standards:
[a] Temporary storage containers shall not exceed 20 feet
in length.
[b] Temporary storage containers may only be located
within the front yard of any property, provided that
such containers are set back from the edge of the road
or the sidewalk a minimum of five feet, whichever is
greater, provided that there is no encroachment into
the clear-sight triangle for any intersecting roads or
driveways.
[c] No more than one temporary storage container may
be placed on any one residential parcel at one time.
(c) Permits for extended hardship. Upon a finding by the Township
that a property which experienced a flood, fire, natural
disaster, or other act of God so as to render the primary
residential dwelling on the property uninhabitable, the
establishment of a temporary structure, building or use may be
permitted for periods longer than nine months, provided that if
the temporary structure, building or use is for dwelling
purposes, that any and all requirements of the Bucks County
Department of Health regarding water use and/or sewage are
met, and that all Township Building Code requirements are
met by the applicant.
(4) I4 Temporary Event. A temporary use including seasonal outdoor
sales, indoor/outdoor markets, public exhibitions, workshops,
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:812
social assemblies, picnics for fund-raising and similar
organizational events and meetings, except for events sponsored
by Warwick Township. [Amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-1]
(a) Such temporary uses shall be limited to occurrences of not
more than seven days per occurrence which may be extended
at the discretion of the Zoning Officer for an additional seven
days. Such occurrences shall be limited to not more than four
occurrences in a calendar year for each property. There shall
be at least a thirty-day period between such occurrences.
(b) Signs advertising a temporary community event shall be
limited to 12 square feet in size on the premises that the event
is being held. No more than four off-premises signs limited to
six square feet in size shall be placed off-premises. The location
of off-premises signs must be approved by the property owners
of the properties upon which they are to be fixed. Such signs
shall be posted no more than 14 days prior to the first day of
the event and shall be removed on the final day of the event.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of property or
person in charge of property to initiate, organize, promote,
permit, conduct or cause to be advertised a temporary event
unless a zoning permit has been obtained. A separate permit
shall be required for each temporary event for the period
designated by the permit. Temporary events with anticipated
participation of 300 or more requires a special event permit in
accordance with Chapter 49 of the Code of Warwick Township.
(d) The total area of the temporary activity shall be limited to
2,000 square feet, not including parking and restrooms.
(e) The applicant shall provide plans to ensure adequate parking,
emergency access, road access, sanitary facilities, refuse
collection, noise control, and cleanup after the event.
(f) The applicant shall provide any other information deemed
required by the Zoning Officer.
(5) I5 Accessory Heliport. A private noncommercial landing area for
helicopters.
(a) An accessory heliport is permitted accessory only to office,
institutional or industrial uses located in the LI Limited
Industrial District.
(b) An accessory heliport shall not be located within 300 feet of
any street or property line.
(c) Helicopters using the accessory heliport shall be travelling to
or from the property on which the heliport is located. The
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:813
accessory heliport shall host only flights whose passengers
have business on the property on which the heliport is located.
(d) No fuel service, maintenance or overhaul facilities shall be
included.
(e) A minimum landing area of 100 feet by 100 feet shall be
provided, except for rooftop landing areas that shall have a
minimum landing area of 40 feet by 40 feet.
(f) A fence at least four feet in height shall surround all landing
areas. The fence shall be sufficient to prevent loose stone and
other debris and materials from being blown on to adjacent
properties.
(g) The proposed heliport will not adversely affect adjoining land
uses, the safety of nearby residents or employees or the future
growth and development of the area in which it is to be located.
(h) The heliport shall meet all the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and shall
have the approval of this agency and of any other airstrip
licensing agencies of the federal or state government.
(i) No activities shall be permitted which will violate the
regulations of this chapter or any other Township ordinance
controlling noise, dust, dirt, electrical disturbance, hazards, or
other nuisances.
(6) I6 Accessory Air Landing Field. A private, noncommercial air
landing field.
(a) Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Aviation and the Federal Aviation Administration
shall be secured.
(b) No air landing field shall be established if its flight pattern will
overlap with the flight pattern of any existing air landing field,
or if the first 0.25 mile of takeoff or landing is over parkland or
a residential area.
(7) I7 Towers, Masts, Flagpoles, Dish Antennas, and Nonagricultural
Silos. An accessory use for a principal use other than Use E1.
(a) All structures shall be set back from all property lines and
street lines a distance at least the height of the facility plus 20
feet. Height of the structure shall be measured from ground
level to the top of the structure if freestanding or the total
height of the structure in addition the height of any other
building or structure upon which the accessory structure is
anchored.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:814
(b) The structure shall be anchored to the ground in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
(c) Amateur radio antennas shall not exceed 65 feet in height.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(d) Dish antennas shall be permitted only in the RA and R1 Zoning
Districts on lot sizes of one acre or greater and shall not exceed
12 feet in diameter.
(e) When separately supported, the total height of the dish
antenna shall not exceed 14 feet, unless approved as a
conditional use.
(f) If roof-mounted, the antenna shall be located on a portion of
the roof sloping away from the front of the lot and no part
thereof shall project above the ridgeline. Dish antennas shall
not be mounted on chimneys.
(g) When not roof-mounted, the dish antenna shall be screened by
staggered plantings of evergreens which present a solid visual
barrier to adjoining houses and to the street. Before a permit
will be issued for the erection of a dish antenna, a screening
plan must be submitted to and approved by the local Municipal
Planning Commission.
(8) I8 Commercial Accessory Office. An accessory office is a clerical,
administrative or professional use normally associated with a
principal commercial or industrial use of a building, lot, or portion
thereof. An accessory use office is an incidental component of a
permitted principal use of structure or lot, and shall be subject to
the requirements of the F3 use of this chapter.
(9) I9 Accessory Retail Use. An accessory retail use open to the public
and incidental to those uses permitted in the VC, VC2, C1, C2, and
LI Districts and clearly connected to the principal use subject to the
following conditions: [Amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
(a) The accessory retail use shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor
area of the principal use.
(b) The accessory use shall be conducted entirely within the
building housing the principal use and shall be under the same
ownership as the principal use.
(c) No new building or structure shall be established for the
accessory retail use.
(d) Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of the G3
Retail Store use set forth in this chapter consistent with the
proposed square footage of the new accessory use.
(10) (Reserved)
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:815
(11) I11 Wind Energy Conversion System. A wind energy conversion
system is a device which converts wind energy to mechanical or
electrical energy and which is permitted as an accessory use and
structure in accordance with the following regulations:
(a) A wind system shall be permitted as an accessory use only.
(b) Uses for which the wind system is a permitted accessory use
are: A Agricultural uses; B Residential uses on sizes of greater
than three acres; and H Industrial uses.
(c) No wind system shall be permitted in any open space area that
has been set aside, either as part of a development or
preserved through a township, county, state, federal, or
conservancy preservation program.
(d) A wind energy system may be a freestanding pole structure or
may be attached to another structure or building.
(e) Every proposed wind system, whether freestanding or
attached to another structure, shall be designed and
engineered to provide for safe operation. Detailed engineering
plans, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, for all
proposed wind systems shall be submitted with applications for
approval. If an attached system is proposed, these engineering
studies shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
that the wind system shall not compromise the structural
integrity of the building to which it is attached.
(f) Maximum height. The maximum height of any wind system is
75 feet from finished grade. This height shall include the pole
or mounting structure and the blade when extended to its
highest position. The pole or mounting device shall not exceed
60 feet.
(g) All wind systems shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from
any street or property line.
(h) The power generated by any wind system shall not be sold to
any other customers except a public utility and shall be limited
to use on the lot where the system is located.
(i) All facilities shall meet the applicable electrical codes and shall
be performed by a licensed electrical contractor.
(j) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size on which a wind
energy system is permitted is three acres, or the minimum lot
size for the use to which it is accessory, whichever is greater.
There shall be no more than one wind energy system on any lot
of three acres or less in size. For each wind energy system on
any lot, there shall be a minimum of three acres for each
system.
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:816
(k) No wind system shall be permitted within 300 feet of any
identified floodplain area in the Township. [Amended
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
(l) Nuisance standards. All wind systems shall be designed to
avoid any adverse impacts on surrounding properties. No
lights shall be permitted on the wind system. All applications
shall contain information on the proposed color, orientation,
design of the system, and any electrical interference effects.
(m) Access control. Access to the system shall be controlled by a
fence with a height of eight feet with locking portal. The
ground level equipment and structures shall be adequately
buffered from adjacent properties and street rights-of-way with
landscaping or fencing.
(n) A minimum of one hazard warning sign shall be posted near
ground level on the fence or on the tower structure.
(o) The electric and utility lines to and from a wind system shall be
underground.
(p) Abandonment. There shall be an escrow account established
and maintained to ensure that the system will be removed if
abandoned.
(q) Conditional use approval. Wind energy systems shall be
permitted by conditional use only.
(r) Natural resource protection standards. All wind energy
systems shall meet the environmental protection standards,
Article XIX, of this chapter.
(12) I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System. Any solar collector or other
solar energy device, or any structural design feature whose
primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and
distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, for water
heating or for electricity, that may be mounted on a building or on
the ground and is not the principal use of the property. [Amended
11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12]
(a) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
SOLAR PANELS — A structure containing one or more
receptive cells, the purpose of which is to convert solar energy
into usable electrical energy by way of a solar energy system.
(b) Applicability.
[1] This subsection applies to small-scale solar energy
systems to be installed and constructed after the effective
date of this subsection, and all applications for small-scale
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:817
solar energy systems on existing structures or property.
Small-scale solar energy systems constructed prior to the
effective date of this subsection shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this subsection; provided that
any structural change, upgrade or modification to an
existing small-scale solar energy system that materially
alters the size or placement of the existing small-scale
solar energy system shall comply with the provisions of
this Section.
[2] Small-scale solar energy systems and solar panels
associated therewith as ground arrays shall be subject to
the following:
[a] Small-scale solar energy systems located as ground
arrays shall be permitted only on lots of two acres or
greater.
[b] Small-scale solar energy systems located as ground
arrays shall be set back the same as setbacks for
principal uses in the district, provided that no solar
panel shall be located closer to the property line than
1.1 times the height of the solar panel.
[c] Small-scale solar energy systems located as ground
arrays shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any
structure, including structures on the same lot as the
ground array solar panel.
[d] Small-scale solar energy systems located as a ground
array shall be considered impervious and considered
as such in the calculation of the maximum impervious
surface ratio.
[e] Small-scale solar energy systems shall not be
permitted in a front yard.
[f] Small-scale solar energy systems located as ground
arrays shall be located so that any reflection is
directed away or is properly buffered from an
adjoining property.
[g] Small-scale solar energy systems located as ground
arrays shall not exceed a height at the highest point of
the structure, of 20 feet.
[3] Small-scale solar energy systems and roof-mounted solar
panels associated therewith shall be subject to the
following regulations:
[a] Permitted roof-mounted small-scale solar energy
systems shall include integrated solar panels as the
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:818
surface layer of the roof structure with no additional
apparent change in relief or projection (the preferred
installation) or separate flush-mounted solar panels
attached to the roof surface.
[b] Integrated or separate flush-mounted small-scale
solar energy systems and solar panels associated
therewith shall be located on a rear- or side-facing
roof, as viewed from any adjacent street, unless such
installation is proven to be ineffective or impossible.
Small-scale solar energy systems and solar panels
associated therewith may be located on any part of a
roof of an accessory structure which is located
entirely behind the principal structures, as viewed
from any adjacent street. The removal of potential
obstructions such as interceding vegetation shall not
be sufficient cause for permitting a front-facing
installation. Front-facing installation may be
permitted by conditional use in accordance with the
following provisions:
[i] The applicant must indicate valid reasons as to
why this is the only effective or possible means for
utilizing solar energy on the property. Such
information shall be certified by a professional
deemed qualified by Warwick Township and
reviewed by the Warwick Township Engineer and
any other Township professional deemed
necessary.
[c] Any roof-mounted small-scale solar energy system or
solar panels associated therewith other than those
described in Subsection I(12)(b)[3][a] and [b] of this
section, shall be permitted as a conditional use in
accordance with the following conditions:
[i] Such other small-scale solar energy system shall
be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, as viewed
from any adjacent street.
[ii] Such other roof-mounted small-scale solar energy
system shall not exceed a height of three feet
from the rooftop at any point. Parts of small-scale
solar energy systems, including but not limited to
solar panels installed on a building or structure
with a sloped roof, shall not project vertically
above the peak of the roof to which they are
attached or project vertically more than five feet
above a flat roof installation.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:819
[iii] The applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer that the
proposed small-scale solar energy system is the
only effective or possible means for utilizing solar
energy on the property. Such information shall be
certified by a professional deemed qualified by the
Board of Supervisors and may be reviewed by any
other Township professional that the Board of
Supervisors deems necessary.
[d] In no event shall the placement of any small-scale
solar energy system result in a total height exceeding
35 feet.
[e] The electricity generated from the small-scale solar
energy system shall only be used on the property on
which it is generated. Selling or sharing electricity
generated by the small-scale solar energy system or
solar panel is prohibited, provided that no more than
10% of the electricity generated on the property daily
may be sold to an electric utility.
(c) Design and installation.
[1] To the extent applicable, the small-scale solar energy
system shall comply with the Pennsylvania Construction
Code (Act 45 of 1999), 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., as
amended, and the applicable regulations adopted by the
Department of Labor and Industry, 34 Pa. Code § 401.1 et
seq.
(d) The design of the small-scale solar energy system shall
conform to applicable industry standards.
(e) On existing construction, a small-scale solar energy system
may be installed as long as it meets the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable construction codes.
(f) Easements.
[1] On plans for new subdivision or land development that
propose to provide for small-scale solar energy systems, a
notation shall be placed on the approved plan stating that
restrictions have been placed on the lots in question,
pursuant to a recorded declaration of covenants,
concerning the placement of structures and vegetation as
they relate to the small-scale solar energy systems. The
terms of the declaration of covenants shall be as approved
by the Township Solicitor.
[2] An applicant submitting a building permit plan not subject
to subdivision or land development regulations shall
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:820
submit evidence that an easement, the terms of which
have been approved by the Township Solicitor, has been
obtained from adjoining landowner(s) concerning the
placement of structures and vegetation as they relate to
the proposed small-scale solar energy system.
(g) Abandonment and removal of solar energy systems.
[1] Any part of a small-scale solar energy system (roof or
ground) which has not been in active and continuous
service for a period of one year shall be removed from the
property to a place of safe and legal disposal.
[2] All structural enclosures accessory to the small-scale solar
energy system shall be completely removed from the
property to a place of safe and legal disposal.
[3] The former solar site shall be restored to as natural
condition as possible within six months of the removal
from the property.
(h) Small-scale solar energy systems shall not be used for
displaying any advertising, except for reasonable identification
of the manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall
any identification be visible from the property line.
(i) The design of small-scale solar energy systems shall, to the
extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend the facility into the
natural setting and existing environment.
(j) The installation of small-scale solar energy systems is subject
to all utility providing electric service requirements for
interconnection.
(k) This section's height provisions shall supersede all height
provisions of other sections with respect to solar energy
systems. The highest point of solar panels on rooftops shall not
exceed 35 feet.
(13) I13 Outdoor Furnaces. "Outdoor furnace" means any equipment,
device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed
or situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel
to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system
providing heat for any interior space or water source.
(a) Regulations applicable to all outdoor furnaces.
[1] In addition to the regulations set forth in this chapter,
outdoor furnaces shall comply with any and all regulations
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP). All outdoor furnaces
shall be installed, operated, and maintained in strict
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:821
conformance with manufacturer's instructions and the
regulations promulgated by the PADEP and set forth in
this chapter unless the manufacturer's instructions are
stricter than the regulations promulgated hereunder, in
which case the manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
[Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
[2] The outdoor wood-fired furnace may burn only those
materials approved by PADEP. [Amended 3-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-1]
[3] No person may operate an outdoor furnace unless it is
upon a lot of at least two acres in size. Any outdoor woodfired
furnace shall meet the required setbacks for principal
uses in the district in which the furnace is located,
provided that in no event shall a furnace be less than 50
feet from the nearest property line nor less than 200 feet
from the nearest residence which is not served by the
furnace. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
[4] The chimney height shall be determined by the distance
from the nearest residence not served by the furnace as
follows:
[a] Fifty feet to 100 feet: height of the eave line of the
tallest residence not served plus two feet.
[b] One hundred feet to 250 feet: 75% of the height of the
eave line of the tallest residence not served plus two
feet.
[c] Two hundred fifty feet or more: minimum of
manufacturer's recommendation.
[d] Due to the rolling topography of the Township, there
may be circumstances where the furnace may be
located in a depressional area, with adjacent home(s)
located at a higher elevation. In these situations, the
Township may require the chimney must be at a
greater height, in order to be, in fact, higher than the
eave of the adjacent house. The Zoning Hearing
Board, upon recommendation from the Building
inspector, may approve a lesser height on a case-bycase
basis if necessary to comply with manufacturer's
recommendations and if the property owner can
demonstrate that the smoke from the lower chimney
height does not create a nuisance for neighbors. Any
exception to required height granted under this
subsection is contingent upon the lower height not
being a nuisance to neighboring residences and is
§ 195-16 WARWICK CODE § 195-16
187:822
subject to further modification by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
[5] The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be operated and
maintained to meet all emission standards required by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
Underwriter's Laboratory (UL) listing. This documentation
must be provided at the time the permit is applied for.
[6] All processed wood products used for fuel in outdoor
wood-fired furnaces must be screened from sight.
Processed wood products include, but are not limited to,
pallets, crates and cut lumber. These fuel items must be
screened from public view of roads and lot lines. Screening
may consist of solid fences, evergreens or similar types of
fencing. All nonprocessed wood products used for fuel in
outdoor wood-fired furnaces may be stored on the
property without required fencing. Nonprocessed wood
products would be cut wood that has not been treated with
paint, stain or any other products.
(b) Permits required.
[1] No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor woodfired
furnace without first having obtained a zoning permit
and a building permit from the Township Building
Inspector.
[2] Permit fees shall be established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 195-16 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-16
187:823

ARTICLE IV
RA Residential-Agricultural Districts
§ 195-17. Applicability.
Within the RA Residential-Agricultural District, a building may be erected,
altered, or used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance
with the conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design
regulations of this district.
§ 195-18. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right:
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A3 Agricultural Retail
A4 Intensive Agriculture
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A7 Farm Support Facility
A9 Riding Academy
A10 Kennel - Noncommercial
B1 Detached Dwelling*
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
§ 195-17 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-18
187:825
§ 195-19. Area and dimensional requirements.
I13 Outdoor Furnace
* For tracts in excess of 20 acres in the RA District, Use B2 is
mandatory for development of new residential developments, and
Use B1 is not permitted.
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B2 Cluster Subdivision*
E4 Airport/Heliport
* For tracts in excess of 20 acres in the RA District, Use B2 is
mandatory for development of new residential developments, and
Use B1 is not permitted.
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Services
B10g Family Day-Care
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home Facility
C8 Cemetery
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
D4 Golf Course
D5 Camp
D6 Miscellaneous Golf Uses
E1 Utility
F2 Veterinary Office
A. Unless a maximum height regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use
regulations, for a specific use, no use in the RA Zoning District shall
exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the RA Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 195-18 WARWICK CODE § 195-19
187:826
§ 195-19.1. Standards for farmland preservation.
All farmland set aside areas as required by the natural resource protection
standards in Article XIX of this chapter shall comply with the following
standards:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth in
§ 195-16
2.0 200 10% 20% 40 30 30
A. The farmland tract shall consist of a contiguous area which shall not be
less than 300 feet in length, width or any other dimensional standards
except as permitted below. This dimensional requirement does not
apply to land remnants that may be associated with the farmland tract if
they are not included in the required farmland preservation calculation.
B. The farmland tract shall be of such shape so as to be suitable for the
convenient use of modern farm equipment and machinery.
C. The farmland tract shall have suitable access, including frontage on a
public street of not less than 175 linear feet. In the case where the
farmland tract does not have road frontage due to the location of
preserved prime farmland soils, the tract shall be provided with direct
access to a public street. Such accessway shall not be less than 25 feet
in width or greater than 45 feet in width.
D. A Class D buffer shall be provided between the farmland tract and the
proposed residential lots or development in accordance with § 195-63,
unless modified by the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission. The required buffer yard and plant material
shall be located on the buildable portion of the lot, and not on the
farmland tract.
E. The preserved farmland tract may include the existing farmhouse and
accessory farm buildings for the continued use of the individuals and
their family members engaged in the agricultural operation on the
property, provided the farmland tract consists of at least 10 acres. The
existing structures must comply with the required setback provisions of
§ 195-19B above.
§ 195-19 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-19.1
187:827
F. One single-family detached dwelling and accessory farm buildings may
be constructed on a vacant farmland tract for the use of individuals and
their family members engaged in the agricultural operation on the
property, provided the farmland tract consists of at least 20 acres. The
proposed structures must comply with the setback requirements of
§ 195-19B above.
G. To the greatest extent possible, farmland resulting from subdivisions
shall be situated adjacent to one another to form large contiguous farm
tracts.
H. The farmland tract shall comply with the provisions of § 195-62 of this
chapter.
§ 195-19.1 WARWICK CODE § 195-19.1
187:828
ARTICLE V
R1 Residential-Agricultural Districts
§ 195-20. Applicability.
Within the R1 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-21. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A3 Agricultural Retail
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A10 Kennel - Noncommercial
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B2 Cluster Subdivision
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
§ 195-20 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-21
187:829
§ 195-22. Area and dimensional requirements.
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C8 Cemetery
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the R1
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design, or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the R1 Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet/acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth in
§ 195-16
2.0 200 10% 20% 40 30 30
§ 195-21 WARWICK CODE § 195-22
187:830
ARTICLE VI
R1a Residential-Agricultural District
§ 195-23. Applicability.
Within the R1a Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area, and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-24. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A5 Commercial Forestry
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Tower/Masts, etc.
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10a Professional Offices
§ 195-23 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-24
187:831
§ 195-25. Area and dimensional requirements.
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C8 Cemetery
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the R1a
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the R1a Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet/acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth in
§ 195-16
1.0 150 20% 30% 50 30 40
§ 195-24 WARWICK CODE § 195-25
187:832
ARTICLE VII
R2 Residential District
§ 195-26. Applicability.
§ 195-27. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. R2 Residential Districts provide for the development of affordable
housing for older persons subject to applicable federal and state laws
and regulations. These districts are also designed to preserve natural
features, such as woods, streams, floodplains and open space areas
which add to the natural beauty of the community.
B. Within the R2 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area, and design
regulations of this district.
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A3 Agricultural Retail
A4 Intensive Agriculture
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A7 Farm Support Facility
A8 Kennel - Commercial
A9 Riding Academy
A10 Kennel - Noncommercial
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
§ 195-26 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-27
187:833
§ 195-28. Area and dimensional requirements.
E2 Emergency Services
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B2 Cluster Subdivision
B6 Retirement Community
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B7 Residential Conversion
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home Facility
C8 Cemetery
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
D4 Golf Course
D5 Camp
D6 Miscellaneous Golf Uses
E1 Utility/Public Services
F2 Veterinary Office
G2 Day-Care Center
§ 195-27 WARWICK CODE § 195-28
187:834
A. Unless a maximum height regulation less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the R2
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the R2 Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth
in § 195-16
2.0 200 10% 20% 40 30 30
§ 195-28 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-28
187:835

ARTICLE VIII
RR Residential-Agricultural District
§ 195-29. Applicability.
Within the RR Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-30. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A3 Agricultural Retail
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A9 Riding Academy
A10 Kennel - Noncommercial
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Tower/Masts, etc.
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
§ 195-29 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-30
187:837
§ 195-31. Area and dimensional requirements.
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B7 Residential Conversion
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Services
B10g Family Day-Care
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home Facility
C8 Cemetery
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the RR
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the RR Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 195-30 WARWICK CODE § 195-31
187:838
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth
in § 195-16
1.0 150 20% 30% 50 30 50
§ 195-31 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-31
187:839

ARTICLE IX
RG Residential-Agricultural District
§ 195-32. Applicability.
Within the RG Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-33. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A2 Farm Unit
A3 Agricultural Retail
A4 Intensive Agriculture
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A7 Farm Support Facility
A9 Riding Academy
A10 Kennel - Noncommercial
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C3 School
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts, etc.
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
§ 195-32 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-33
187:841
§ 195-34. Area and dimensional requirements.
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B9 Golf Course Community
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B7 Residential Conversion
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home Facility
C8 Cemetery
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
D4 Golf Course
D5 Camp
D6 Miscellaneous Golf Uses
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the RG
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the RG Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 195-33 WARWICK CODE § 195-34
187:842
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth
in § 195-16
1.0 150 20% 30% 50 30 50
§ 195-34 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-34
187:843

ARTICLE X
MF-1 Multifamily Residential District
§ 195-35. Applicability.
Within the MF-1 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered
or used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-36. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A3 Agricultural Retail
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B1a Single-Family Semidetached Dwelling (twin)
B1b Two-Family Detached Dwelling (duplex)
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts, etc.
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B3 Performance Standard Development
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
§ 195-35 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-36
187:845
§ 195-37. Area and dimensional requirements.
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the MF-1
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the MF-1 Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth
in § 195-16
1.0 150 20% 20% 50 30 50
§ 195-36 WARWICK CODE § 195-37
187:846
ARTICLE XI
MF-2 Multifamily Residential District
§ 195-38. Applicability.
Within the MF-2 Residential District, a building may be erected, altered,
or used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the
conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations
of this district.
§ 195-39. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
A1 General Farming
A3 Agricultural Retail
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B1a Single-Family Semidetached (twin)
B1b Two-Family Detached (duplex)
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
I3 Temporary Use or Structure
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts, etc.
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
B3 Performance Standard Development
E4 Airport/Heliport
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
§ 195-38 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-39
187:847
§ 195-40. Area and dimensional requirements.
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B10a Professional Offices
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Service
B10g Family Day-Care
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the MF-2
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the MF-2 Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth
in § 195-16
1.0 150 20% 20% 50 30 50
§ 195-39 WARWICK CODE § 195-40
187:848
ARTICLE XII
VC Village Center District
§ 195-41. Purpose and statement of intent.
§ 195-41.1. Conditions of eligibility.
§ 195-41.2. Mix of uses, building types and height regulations.
A. The Village Center (VC) District is intended to promote a mix of
commercial, institutional, and recreational uses in Jamison Village
[situated at and in the vicinity of the intersection of York Road (Route
263) and Almshouse Road].
B. The VC District is intended to promote an interconnected network of
streets, service lanes and alleys.
C. The VC District is intended to promote walkability, with sidewalks on
both sides of streets located close to streets and buildings, and with
crosswalks and connections to existing sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian
paths.
D. The VC District is intended to promote small-scale buildings in a
compact arrangement so as to emulate the character of the villages of
Warwick Township and Bucks County.
A. All development shall be served by public water and public sewer.
B. The VC District shall be as shown on the Warwick Township Zoning
Map, as amended.209
A. Mix of uses.
(1) A mix of office, retail, service and civic uses is encouraged in order
to enhance the village character of Jamison. The size and number of
uses to be located on a tract shall be governed by the use
regulations and the building coverage and the impervious coverage
limits.
B. Building types.
(1) Small- to medium-sized buildings with up to 3,500 square feet on
the ground story shall be governed by the regulations for permitted
uses.
(2) Larger-size buildings of 3,500 square feet or more on the ground
story shall be governed by the regulations for conditional uses.
C. Height regulations.
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
209. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-41 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-41.3
187:849
§ 195-41.3. Use regulations.
A. Uses permitted by right, involving a building or buildings with a gross
floor area on the first floor/ground floor of up to 3,500 square feet, may
include: [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-12; 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-3]
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C2 Community Place of Worship
C3 School
C4 Library/Museum
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
D6 Miscellaneous Golf
E2 Emergency Services
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
F4 Business Park
G1 Commercial School
G2 Day-Care Center
G3 Retail Store
G5 Village-Oriented Shop/Service Business
G6 Adult Day Care
G7 Financial Establishment
G8 Funeral Home
G9 Eating Place
G11 Tavern
G14 Theater
G15 Indoor Athletic Club
G16 Amusement Hall/Arcade
G29 Dwelling in Combination
H7 Crafts
§ 195-41.3 WARWICK CODE § 195-41.3
187:850
§ 195-41.4. Area and dimensional requirements.
I9 Accessory Retail Use
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
(1) B4 Rooming or Boardinghouse.
(2) All uses listed in § 195-41.3A (except I9, I11, and I13), involving a
building or buildings with a gross floor area on the ground story of
3,500 square feet or greater, subject to the design standards of
§ 195-41.5A, the special plan review requirements of § 195-41.6A,
and the Corridor Overlay District, § 163-50.3, of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance. [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-12]
A. Unless a different area and dimensional regulation is stated in the use
regulations of § 195-16 for a specific use, all uses permitted by right in
the VC District shall meet the following requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses
30,000 85 40% 75% 15 15 25
B. Unless a different area and dimensional regulation is stated in use
regulations of § 195-16 for a specific use, Conditional Use G19 in the VC
District shall meet the following requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
Motel-hotel 4.0 150 25% 65% 25 50 100
C. The foregoing area and dimensional requirements shall be exempt from
the Article XIX site capacity calculations of § 195-61.
§ 195-41.3 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-41.5
187:851
§ 195-41.5. Design standards.
A. Parking shall be located as follows:
(1) Parking lots shall be built and maintained in the rear of buildings or
on the side of buildings. No off-street parking lots shall be built
between any building and any street. If parking is located on the
side of buildings, it shall be screened by a thirty-six-inch-high wall
or evergreen hedge.
(2) Parking for mixed-use developments shall be provided on the basis
of three parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of nonresidential buildings.
(3) Parking may be on street in parking bays parallel to the curbline
and along a lot that fronts upon a Township road. Any such onstreet
parking may be counted toward the total parking
requirement for the use(s).
(4) On-street parking areas may only be counted along the frontage
owned by the applicant or landowner, exclusive of any driveway or
other curb cut and exclusive of any existing cartway and
perpendicular street.
(5) A bona-fide on-street parking area shall measure at least seven feet
in width and 22 feet in length, exclusive of any street cartway, and
shall be parallel to the curbline.
(6) All eligible on-street parking areas shall be clearly depicted on a
plan. Such parking areas shall not conflict with any turning
movements off the cartway or obstruct access to any street,
driveway, sidewalk, crosswalk, other accessway or fire hydrant.
B. A continuous sidewalk of at least four feet six inches in width shall be
installed and maintained on both sides of all streets.
C. All streets, service drives, alleys, and sidewalks shall be connected to
form an interconnected network. All such thoroughfares shall also be
connected to any existing sidewalk or trail.
D. Whenever buildings are across from one another on opposite sides of a
new street, they shall be located no more than 90 feet from one another,
so as to create the built-to line and streetscape dimension as is found in
other villages in Bucks County.
E. Whenever buildings are 3,500 square feet or more on the ground story
but less than 30,000 square feet on the ground story, the following shall
apply:
(1) The maximum building length shall be 150 feet.
(2) The width of the facade of any new building which exceeds 24 feet
in width shall have vertical design elements such as pilasters,
§ 195-41.5 WARWICK CODE § 195-41.5
187:852
§ 195-41.6. Special plan review requirements.
columns, piers, or recesses or projections of up to four feet so that
no new vertical bay or section of a building facade exceeds 24
continuous feet in width.
(3) Building windows and openings shall constitute no less than 30% of
all frontage walls on the ground floor.
(4) No building shall have opaque walls on the ground floor.
(5) No principal building shall have a flat roof.
F. Whenever buildings are 30,000 square feet or more on the ground
story, the following shall apply:
(1) The maximum building length shall be 250 feet.
(2) The width of the facade of any new building which exceeds 32 feet
in width shall have vertical design elements such as pilasters,
columns, piers or recesses or projections of up to four feet so that
no new vertical bay or section of a building facade exceeds 32
continuous feet in width.
(3) Building windows and openings shall constitute no less than 25% of
all frontage walls on the ground floor.
(4) No building shall have opaque windows on the ground floor.
(5) No principal building shall have a flat roof.
(6) If buildings of 60,000 square feet or more on the ground story are
proposed, then separate buildings shall be constructed such that
no individual building under one roof exceeds 60,000 square feet.
Each separate building shall be located at least 60 feet but not
more than 90 feet from one another. The space between buildings
shall have twelve-foot sidewalks adjoining each building.
G. At least 5% of the gross site area shall be devoted to civic or
recreational use in the form of a park, plaza, memorial garden,
sculpture garden, or like amenity.
H. All development shall be landscaped with street trees and shade trees
as required in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.210
I. All utilities shall be installed underground.
J. The standards of § 163-50.3, Corridor Overlay District, shall apply, with
particular emphasis on the standards for development in § 163-50.3D.
A. Prior to submission of a preliminary plan or a preliminary/final plan, the
applicant is encouraged to submit a concept plan depicting the
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-41.5 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-41.6
187:853
proposed layout of the development. The concept plan should illustrate
the proposed village character in terms of such features as building
placement, parking location, interconnected streets, alleys, sidewalks,
and street trees.
B. The concept plan may be reviewed by Warwick Township. The Planning
Commission may provide informal comments that may be useful to the
applicant in preparing the sketch, preliminary, and final plans.
§ 195-41.6 WARWICK CODE § 195-41.6
187:854
ARTICLE XIII
VC 2 Village Center District
§ 195-42. (Reserved)
§ 195-42.1. Purpose and statement of intent.
§ 195-42.2. Conditions of eligibility.
§ 195-42.3. Mix of uses, building types and height regulations.
A. The Village Center II (VC 2) District is intended to promote a mix of
commercial, municipal and recreational uses in Jamison Village along
the York Road (Route 263) corridor.
B. The VC 2 District is intended to promote an interconnected network of
commercial and retail uses.
C. The VC 2 District is intended to promote and encourage an active retail
center, with sidewalks on both sides of streets and with crosswalks and
connections to existing sidewalks, trails, and pedestrian paths. The
appropriate markings, buffers and road changes shall be required to
promote safe pedestrian passage.
D. The VC 2 District is intended to promote small-scale buildings in a
compact arrangement so as to emulate the character of the villages of
Warwick Township and Bucks County.
A. All development in the VC 2 District shall be served by public water and
public sewer.
B. The VC 2 District shall be as shown on the Warwick Township Zoning
Map, as amended.211
A. Mix of uses.
(1) A mix of office, retail, service and municipal uses is encouraged in
order to enhance the village character of Jamison. The size and
number of uses to be located on a tract shall be governed by the use
regulations and the building coverage and the impervious coverage
limits.
(2) Mixed uses on a single parcel will be permitted by conditional use
in accordance with the conditions set forth at § 195-42.4B.
B. Building types.
(1) Small- to medium-sized buildings with up to 3,500 square feet on
the ground story shall be governed by the regulations for permitted
uses.
211. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-42 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-42.3
187:855
§ 195-42.4. Use regulations.
(2) Larger-sized buildings of 3,500 square feet or more on the ground
story shall be governed by the regulations for conditional uses. In
no event shall the total building size exceed 30,000 square feet.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
C. Height regulations.
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height measured from any
elevation to the highest point of the roof, including any mechanical
or HVAC equipment.
A. Uses permitted by right, involving a building or buildings with a gross
floor area on the first floor/ground floor of up to 3,500 square feet, may
include: [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C2 Community Place of Worship
C3 School
C4 Library/Museum
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
D3 Community Center
D6 Miscellaneous Golf
E2 Emergency Services
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
F4 Business Park
G1 Commercial School
G2 Day-Care Center
G3 Retail Store
G5 Village-Oriented Shop/Service Business
G6 Adult Day Care
G7 Financial Establishment
G8 Funeral Home
G9 Eating Place
§ 195-42.3 WARWICK CODE § 195-42.4
187:856
G11 Tavern
G14 Theater
G15 Indoor Athletic Club
G21 Convenience Store
G29 Dwelling in Combination
G31 Drug Store with Drive-Through Service
H7 Crafts
I9 Accessory Retail Use
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
(1) B4 Boarding or Rooming House.
(2) A use in a building or buildings with a gross floor area on the
ground story of 3,500 square feet or greater. Uses in a building
greater than 3,500 square feet may include: all uses listed in
§ 195-42.4A (except I9), subject to the design standards of
§ 195-42.6, the special plan review requirements of § 195-42.7, and
the Corridor Overlay District, as well as the Corridor Overlay
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.212
(3) Mixed uses on a single parcel will be permitted by conditional use
subject to the following conditions: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-1]
(a) The minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
(b) The uses on the lot shall be part of an integrated office,
institutional or commercial project.
(c) The buildings shall be interconnected by a system of walkways
to form a cohesive development consistent with the purposes
of this article.
(d) The landscaping materials shall be consistent throughout the
site to promote the uniform look of the project.
(e) The project shall include village-type amenities such as lowlevel
lighting, benches and attractive waste receptacles to
further the village and community atmosphere of the project.
(f) The building styles and materials shall be uniform and
consistent throughout the site.
(g) The buildings shall meet the requirements of the York Road
Corridor Overlay District as set forth in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance at § 163-51.3. [Amended
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
212. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-42.4 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-42.4
187:857
§ 195-42.5. Area and dimensional requirements.
Unless a different area and dimensional regulation is stated in the use
regulations of § 195-16 for a specific use, all uses permitted by right in the
VC 2 District shall meet the following requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses
30,000 85 20% 45% 15 15 25
§ 195-42.6. Design standards.
(h) There shall be a fifty-foot-wide buffer through all arterial
streets and against residential properties and a forty-foot-wide
buffer along all other streets and other properties. This buffer
shall consist of one canopy tree every 30 feet, plus one
evergreen tree per every 60 feet. In addition to the canopy and
evergreen trees, a combination of brick wall and evergreen
hedge shall surround the site and shall be planted in or
immediate to the rear of the buffer area.
(i) The requirements of § 195-42.6 below notwithstanding,
parking lots serving a project approved under this section may
be located in front and rear yards, provided there is a fifty-foot
landscaped buffer between any parking lot and a street. At the
time of conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors may
waive the buffer requirements if the Board determines that
additional landscaping throughout the project justifies the
waiver.
(4) A conditional use in this zoning district may require additional
common open space to allow for appropriate placement of villagetype
amenities, including but not limited to lighting, benches,
waste receptacles, landscaping and trees, parking, trails and
sidewalks.
A. Parking lots shall be built and maintained in the rear of buildings or on
the side of buildings. No off-street parking lots shall be built between
any building and any street. If parking is located on the side of
buildings, it shall be screened by a thirty-six-inch-high wall or
evergreen hedge.
B. Rows of parking spaces shall not be contiguous, but rather separated by
a curbed, landscape island no less than four feet in width. Ends of the
§ 195-42.4 WARWICK CODE § 195-42.6
187:858
parking rows shall be treated with landscaped islands with a minimum
width of 10 feet. Pavement may be included in the landscape islands
only if the pavement forms part of a walkway system serving the entire
site.
C. A continuous sidewalk of at least four feet in width shall be installed
and maintained on both sides of all streets.
D. All streets, service drives, alleys and sidewalks shall be connected to
form an interconnected network. All such thoroughfares shall also be
connected to any existing sidewalk or trail.
E. Whenever buildings are across from one another on opposite sides of a
new street, they shall be located no more than 90 feet from one another
so as to create the built-to line and streetscape dimension as is found in
other villages in Bucks County. Buildings housing public works and
emergency service facilities are exempted from this criteria.
F. Whenever buildings are 3,500 square feet or more on the ground story
but less than 30,000 square feet on the ground story, the following shall
apply:
(1) The maximum building length shall be 150 feet.
(2) The width of the facade of any new building which exceeds 24 feet
in width shall have vertical design elements such as pilasters,
columns, piers or recesses or projections of up to four feet so that
no new vertical bay or section of a building facade exceeds 24
continuous feet in width. These design elements will be consistent
with those required as part of the Corridor Overlay District.
(3) The design of the buildings shall include a mixture of glass and
building materials sufficient to satisfy the needs of the use of each
building while creating a visually interesting facade.
(4) No building shall have a flat roof.
G. At least 10% of the gross site area shall be devoted to civic or
recreational use in the form of a park, plaza, memorial garden,
sculpture garden, or like amenity.
H. All development shall be landscaped with street trees and shade trees
as required in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.213
Both the number, size and variety is to be determined as part of plan
approval.
I. All utilities shall be installed underground. Every possible effort will be
demonstrated and documented to have utilities brought along streets to
serve the property installed underground.
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-42.6 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-42.6
187:859
§ 195-42.7. Special plan review requirements.
J. Unless superseded by a stricter standard set forth in this article, or as a
requirement for the particular use to be located on the site, the
standards of § 163-50.3, Corridor Overlay District, shall apply, with
particular emphasis on the standards for development in § 163-50.3D.
A. Prior to submission of a preliminary plan, or a preliminary/final plan,
the applicant is encouraged to submit a concept plan depicting the
proposed layout of the development. The concept plan should illustrate
the proposed village character in terms of such features as building
placement, parking location, interconnected streets, alleys, sidewalks
and street trees. This plan must be submitted in color both on electronic
file (TIF) and hardcopy. All submissions will be accompanied by the
appropriate professional service agreements to be considered a
submission.
B. The concept plan may be reviewed by Warwick Township Board of
Supervisors. The Planning Commission and staff, including the
Township Engineer, may provide informal comments that may be useful
to the applicant in preparing the sketch, preliminary and final plans.
§ 195-42.6 WARWICK CODE § 195-42.7
187:860
ARTICLE XIV
C1 Local-Commercial District
§ 195-43. Applicability.
§ 195-44. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. C1 Local-Commercial Districts provide for the special requirements of
retail-convenience-type establishments which serve primarily the dayto-
day needs of the immediately surrounding neighborhood and
encourage attractive, compact, retail commercial development in
locations close to the residences served.
B. Within the C1 Local-Commercial District, a building may be erected,
altered or used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance
with the conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design
regulations of this district.
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
A1 General Farming
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A8 Kennel - Commercial
B6 Retirement Community
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
D3 Community Center
D6 Miscellaneous Golf
E2 Emergency Services
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
G2 Day-Care Center
§ 195-43 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-44
187:861
G3 Retail Store
G5 Village-Oriented Shop/Service Business
G6 Adult Day Care
G7 Financial Establishment
G8 Funeral Home
G9 Eating Place
G11 Tavern
G12 Repair Shop
G14 Theater
G15 Indoor Athletic Club
G27 Shopping Center
G31 Drug Store with Drive-Through Service
H7 Crafts
H16 Flex Space
I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building
I2 Outside Storage or Display
I4 Temporary Community Event
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
G10 Drive-Ins/Eating Places
G17 Outdoor Entertainment
G19 Motel/Hotel
G22 Service Station/Car-Washing Facility
G23 Vehicular Sales
G24 Vehicular Repair
G25 Vehicular Accessories
G26 Heavy Equipment/Farm Equipment
G28 Miniwarehouse
G32 Garden Center
H3 Wholesale/Storage/Warehousing
H4 Printing
H5 Contracting
H6 Truck Terminal
H8 Lumber Yard
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
§ 195-44 WARWICK CODE § 195-44
187:862
§ 195-45. Area and dimensional requirements.
B10g Family Day-Care
E1 Utility/Public Services
G1 Commercial School
G16 Amusement Hall/Arcade
G29 Dwelling in Combination
G30 Nonresidential Conversion
I3 Temporary Use Structure
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the C1
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater area, dimensional, design or other regulation is stated
in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, all uses in the
C1 Zoning District shall meet the following requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres/
square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses (with
public sewer)
10,000
square feet*
100 55% 70% 35 12 25**
All permitted
uses (on-lot
sewer)
1.0*** 100 55% 70% 35 12 25**
NOTES:
* With public sewer.
** Or 20% of the lot depth, whichever is greater.
*** On-lot sewer.
C. For all nonresidential permitted uses, a buffer yard of not less than 50
feet in width as defined in § 195-63 shall be provided along each side or
rear property line which directly abuts a residential district or use in
the Township or a similar district or use in an adjoining municipality.
§ 195-44 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-45
187:863

ARTICLE XV
C2 Highway-Commercial Districts
§ 195-46. Applicability.
§ 195-47. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. C2 Highway-Commercial Districts may make appropriate provision for
a wide range of highway or oriented retail, automotive and heavier
service-type business activities which ordinarily require main highway
locations and cater to the transient as well as to local customers.
B. Within the C2 Highway-Commercial District, a building may be erected,
altered, or used and a lot or premises may be used when in
conformance with the conditions of this chapter and the specific area
and design regulations of this district.
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
A1 General Farming
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
A8 Kennel - Commercial
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
D3 Community Center
D6 Miscellaneous Golf
E2 Emergency Services
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
G3 Retail Store
G5 Village-Oriented Shop/Service Business
G6 Adult Day Care
§ 195-46 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-47
187:865
G7 Financial Establishment
G8 Funeral Home
G9 Eating Place
G10 Drive-Ins/Eating Place
G11 Tavern
G12 Repair Shop
G14 Theater
G15 Indoor Athletic Club
G19 Motel/Hotel
G22 Service Station/Car-Washing Facility
G23 Vehicular Sales
G24 Vehicular Repair
G25 Vehicular Accessories
G27 Shopping Center
G28 Miniwarehouse
G31 Drug Store with Drive-Through Service
G32 Garden Center
H3 Wholesale/Storage/Warehousing
H4 Printing
H5 Contracting
H7 Crafts
H8 Lumber Yard
H16 Flex Space
I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building
I2 Outside Storage or Display
I4 Temporary Community Event
B. Uses permitted by conditional use: none.
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B10g Family Day-Care
E1 Utility/Public Services
G1 Commercial School
G2 Day-Care Center
G16 Amusement Hall/Arcade
G17 Outdoor Entertainment
G26 Heavy Equipment/Farm Equipment Sales
G29 Dwelling in Combination
§ 195-47 WARWICK CODE § 195-47
187:866
§ 195-48. Area and dimensional requirements.
G30 Nonresidential Conversion
H6 Truck Terminal
I3 Temporary Use/Structure
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the C2
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater area, dimensional, design or other regulation is stated
in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, all uses in the
C2 Zoning District shall meet the following requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses (with
public sewer)
20,000
square feet*
100 55% 70% 50 20 25**
All
permitted
uses (onlot
sewer)
1.0*** 100 55% 70% 50 20 25**
NOTES:
* With public sewer.
** Or 20% of the lot depth, whichever is greater.
*** On-lot sewer.
C. For all nonresidential permitted uses, a buffer yard of not less than 50
feet in width as defined in § 195-63 shall be provided along each side or
rear property line which directly abuts a residential district in the
Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality.
§ 195-47 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-48
187:867

ARTICLE XVI
C3 Commercial/Multifamily Residential District
§ 195-49. Applicability.
Within the C3 Commercial/Multifamily Residential District, a building may
be erected, altered, or used and a lot or premises may be used when in
conformance with the conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area
and design regulations of this district.
§ 195-50. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
A1 General Farming
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B1a Single-Family Semidetached (twin)
B1b Two-Family Detached (duplex)
B3 Performance Standard Development
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C1 Neighborhood Place of Worship
C2 Community Place of Worship
C4 Library/Museum
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
G3 Retail Store
G5 Village-Oriented Shop/Service Business
G6 Adult Day Care
G7 Financial Establishment
G8 Funeral Home
G9 Eating Place
§ 195-49 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-50
187:869
G10 Drive-Ins/Eating Places
G11 Tavern
G12 Repair Shop
G17 Outdoor Entertainment
G19 Motel/Hotel
G22 Service Station/Car-Washing Facility
G23 Vehicular Sales
G24 Vehicular Repair
G25 Vehicular Accessories
G26 Heavy Equipment/Farm Equipment Sales
G27 Shopping Center
G28 Miniwarehouse
G31 Drug Store with Drive-Through Service
G32 Garden Center
H7 Crafts
H16 Flex Space
I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building
I2 Outside Storage or Display
I4 Temporary Community Event
I7 Towers/Masts, etc.
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
H3 Wholesale/Storage/Warehousing
H4 Printing
H5 Contracting
H6 Truck Terminal
H8 Lumber Yard
C. Uses permitted by special exception:
B7 Residential Conversion
B10g Family Day-Care
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
G1 Commercial School
G2 Day-Care Center
§ 195-50 WARWICK CODE § 195-50
187:870
§ 195-51. Area and dimensional requirements.
G16 Amusement Hall/Arcade
G29 Dwelling in Combination
G30 Nonresidential Conversion
I3 Temporary Use/Structure
A. Unless a maximum height regulation of less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the C3
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the C3 Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth in
§ 195-16
2.0 200 10% 20% 40 30 30
§ 195-50 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-51
187:871

ARTICLE XVII
O Office District
§ 195-52. Applicability.
Within the O Office District, a building may be erected, altered, or used and
a lot or premises may be used when in conformance with the conditions of
this chapter and the specific use, area and design regulations of this district.
§ 195-53. District use regulations.
Uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
A1 General Farming
A3 Agricultural Retail
A5 Commercial Forestry
A6 Nursery
B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
B1a Single-Family Semidetached (twin)
B1b Two-Family Detached (duplex)
B3 Performance Standard Development
B8 Accessory Family Apartment
B10a Professional Office
B10d Home Crafts
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
B11 Bed-and-Breakfast
B12 Residential Accessory Building Structure
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
G30 Nonresidential Conversion
H2 Research
H16 Flex Space
I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building
I4 Temporary Community Event
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
F4 Business Park
§ 195-52 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-53
187:873
§ 195-54. Area and dimensional requirements.
C. Uses permitted by special exception: [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-1]
B5 Community Treatment Facility
B10b Personal Services
B10c Instructional Services
B10e Trades/Business
B10f Repair Services
B10g Family Day-Care
D2 Private Club
D3 Community Center
E1 Utility/Public Services
E2 Emergency Services
G2 Day-Care Center
A. Unless a maximum height regulation less than 35 feet is stated in
§ 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, no use in the O
Zoning District shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater or different area, dimensional, design or other
regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific
use, all uses in the O Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses where no
or incomplete
dimensional
requirements
are set forth in
§ 195-16
5.0 300 30% 60% 100 75 75
§ 195-53 WARWICK CODE § 195-54
187:874
ARTICLE XVIII
LI Limited Industrial District
§ 195-55. Applicability.
§ 195-56. District use regulations.
A. The Limited Industrial District is intended to establish reasonable
standards for the size of buildings, the areas and dimensions of yards or
open spaces and the provision of facilities and operation of industries to
minimize noise, air pollution, water pollution and fire and safety
hazards in such districts.
B. Within the LI Limited Industrial District, a building may be erected,
altered or used and a lot or premises may be used when in conformance
with the conditions of this chapter and the specific use, area and design
regulations of this district.
A. Uses permitted by right: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1;
4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3; 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
A1 General Farming
A5 Commercial Forestry
A8 Kennel - Commercial
B10h No-Impact Home-Based Business
C5 Hospital
C6 Continuing Care Facility/Assisted Living
C7 Skilled-Care/Nursing Home
C9 Municipal Use
D1 Recreational Facility
E2 Emergency Services
F1 Medical Office
F2 Veterinary Office
F3 Office
G6 Adult Day Care
G12 Repair Shop
G15 Indoor Athletic Club
G17 Outdoor Entertainment
G23 Vehicular Sales
G24 Vehicular Repair
G25 Vehicular Accessories
G26 Heavy Equipment/Farm Equipment Sales
G30 Nonresidential Conversion
§ 195-55 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-56
187:875
H1 Manufacturing
H2 Research
H3 Wholesale/Storage/Warehousing
H4 Printing
H5 Contracting
H6 Truck Terminal
H7 Crafts
H8 Lumber Yard
H9 Mill
H13 Industrial Park
H16 Flex Space
I1 Nonresidential Accessory Building
I2 Outside Storage or Display
I4 Temporary Community Event
I9 Accessory Retail
I11 Wind Energy Conversion System
I12 Small-Scale Solar Energy System
I13 Outdoor Furnace
B. Uses permitted by conditional use:
E3 Terminal
F4 Business Park
H12 Extractive Operations
H14 Resource Recovery Facility
H15 Solid Waste Landfill
I6 Air Landing Field
H17 Trash Transfer Station
H18 Recovery of Subsurface Gas and Oil Deposits
C. Uses permitted by special exception: [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-1]
B10g Family Day-Care
E1 Utility/Public Services
E4 Airport/Heliport
E5 Large-Scale Solar Energy System
G1 Commercial School
G2 Day-Care Center
G4 Adult Commercial
§ 195-56 WARWICK CODE § 195-56
187:876
§ 195-57. Area and dimensional requirements.
§ 195-58. (Reserved)
§ 195-59. (Reserved)
G19 Motel/Hotel
G20 Billboard
G22 Service Station/Car-Washing Facility
G28 Miniwarehouse
H10 Fuel Storage/Distribution
H11 Auto Salvage Recycling Center
I3 Temporary Use Structure
I5 Accessory Heliport
I7 Tower/Masts, etc.
A. Unless a maximum height regulation is stated in § 195-16, General use
regulations, for a specific use, no use in the LI Zoning District shall
exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Unless a greater area, dimensional, design, or other regulation is stated
in § 195-16, General use regulations, for a specific use, or Subsection C
of this section, all uses in the LI Zoning District shall meet the following
requirements:
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
(percent) Front Side Rear
All permitted
uses
3.0 200 25% 55% 100 40 50
C. No industrial building shall be located closer than 200 feet to any
existing residential use or residential district boundary line and 50 feet
of this 200 feet must be landscaped in accordance with § 195-63 (side
yard requirement).
D. No industrial building shall be located closer than 125 feet to any
existing residential use or residential district or parking area closer
than 50 feet to the required minimum distance from any existing
residential use or residential district (rear yard requirement).
§ 195-56 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-59
187:877

ARTICLE XIX
Performance Standards, Site Capacity Calculations and Nuisance
Standards
§ 195-60. Natural resource protection standards.
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the following standards. Site alterations, regrading,
filling, or clearing of vegetation prior to the submission of applications for
zoning or building permits or the submission of plans for subdivision or land
development shall be a violation of this chapter. In the event that two or
more resources overlap, the resource with the greatest protection standard
(the least amount of alteration, regrading, clearing or building) shall apply
to the area of overlap.
A. Floodplains. Any use or activity within an identified floodplain area
shall comply with the provisions of the Warwick Township Floodplain
Ordinance.214 [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
B. Floodplain soils. All such areas shall not be altered, regraded, or built
upon. Roads and utilities may cross floodplain soils where design
approval is obtained from the Township and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and where no other
reasonable access is available. Floodplain soils shall not be used where
a floodplain has been delineated in accordance with the Warwick
Township Floodplain Ordinance.215 [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-5]
C. Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) Eight percent to 15%: No more than 40% of such areas shall be
altered, developed, regraded and/or stripped of vegetation.
(2) Fifteen percent to 25%: No more than 30% of such areas shall be
altered, developed, regraded and/or stripped of vegetation.
(3) Twenty-five percent or more: No more than 15% of such area shall
be altered, developed, regraded and/or stripped of vegetation.
D. Woodlands. The following standards shall apply to woodlands:
(1) Woodlands in environmentally sensitive areas: No more than 10%
of woodlands located in environmentally sensitive areas shall be
altered, regraded, cleared, and/or built upon. Environmentally
sensitive areas shall include floodplains, floodplain soils, steep
slopes (greater than 25%), wetlands, wetland margins, and lake or
pond shorelines.
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-60
187:879
(2) Other woodland areas: No more than 20% of woodlands which are
not located in environmentally sensitive areas [as defined in
Subsection D(1) above] shall be altered, regraded, cleared, or built
upon.
(3) RA District: On a tract utilizing the cluster option (B2), no more
than 40% of woodlands which are not located on environmentally
sensitive areas [as defined in Subsection D(1) above] shall be
altered, regraded, cleared, or built upon.
E. Streams, watercourses, wetlands, lakes, or ponds. Such areas shall not
be altered, regraded, developed, filled, piped, diverted, or built upon
except that roads and utilities may cross streams, watercourses, and
wetlands where design approval is obtained from the Township and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and where no
other reasonable access is available.
(1) In the event that a wetlands delineation validated by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (ACOE) is shown to vary from the wetlands
boundary derived from the definition in § 195-9 of this chapter, the
ACOE delineation will govern. The wetlands margin will then be
measured from the ACOE-delineated boundary.
F. Lake or pond shorelines. No more than 20% of such areas shall be
altered, regraded, filled or built upon.
G. Stormwater. All applicants proposing development in the Township
should review their proposals with the Township to assess the impacts
and the potential for development of regional stormwater controls. All
stormwater management plans must comply with the Storm Water
Management Act (Act 167) and the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 325) and Warwick Township stormwater
management ordinances.216
H. Soil erosion and sedimentation. All uses shall protect streams, lakes,
and ponds from sedimentation damage and control erosion in
accordance with the Clean Streams Law, P.L. 187, Chapter
102,217except that in addition, all subdivision and land developments
shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation plan as part of the
preliminary subdivision or land development plan even where they are
less than 25 acres in extent.
I. Sewage disposal.
(1) All sewage disposal systems, regardless of type, shall meet the
requirements and procedures of the Warwick Township Sewage
Facilities Plan and the Bucks County Department of Health. The
216. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.; 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.; and Ch. 157, Stormwater
Management, respectively.
217. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 195-60 WARWICK CODE § 195-60
187:880
applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
this section for all applications for zoning or building permits.
(2) Where an existing or proposed on-site sewage treatment system
with either surface discharge or subsurface discharge is proposed
adjacent to a stream or water body, including lakes, ponds, and
wetlands, it shall be set back not less than 300 feet from the edge
or bank of such stream or water body to ensure that the
contaminated water moves through the soil a sufficient distance to
allow contaminants to be removed by the soil before discharging
into a stream or water body.
J. Prime farmland in the RA District. On a tract(s) containing 20 acres or
more, no more than 50% of prime farmland as defined in § 195-9 of this
chapter may be developed.
K. Riparian corridor preservation.
(1) Establishment. The establishment of the Riparian Corridor
Conservation District (RCCD) applies to all streams and tributaries
as well as perennial and intermittent streams leading to those
streams and including all lakes and ponds shown on the map
included in the Township's Official Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537
Plan).
(2) A residential lot legally in existence as of the effective date of this
chapter may expand the area of the principal building on the lot by
not more than 25% of the ground-floor area of the principal
building on the property as of the effective date of this chapter
without the provisions of the RCCD being applicable.
(3) Measurement of the RCCD boundary shall extend a minimum of 75
feet from each defined edge of an identified watercourse or surface
water body at the top of the bank, or shall equal the extent of the
one-hundred-year floodplain, whichever is greater. The district will
consist of two distinct zones designated as:
(a) Zone One.
[1] This zone will begin at each edge of an identified waterway
(which can include wetlands and intermittent
watercourses) and occupy a minimum width of 25 feet
measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the topof-
bank. The width of Zone One may be required to extend
beyond the minimum 25 feet depending upon existing
topography, woodlands, and other natural conditions.
[2] Where steep slopes (in excess of 25%) are located within
25 feet of a municipally designated watercourse, Zone One
shall extend the entire distance of this sloped area. If the
distance of this sloped area is greater than 75 feet, there
will be no requirement for the establishment of Zone Two.
§ 195-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-60
187:881
If the distance is less than 75 feet, the width of Zone Two
will be adjusted so that the total corridor width (Zone One
and Zone Two) will be 75 feet maximum.
(b) Zone Two.
[1] This zone will begin at the outer edge of Zone One and
occupy a minimum width of 50 feet in addition to Zone
One, unless modified herein.
[2] Where the one-hundred-year floodplain extends greater
than 75 feet from the waterway, Zone One shall remain a
minimum of 25 feet wide, and Zone Two shall extend from
the outer edge of Zone One to the outer edge of the onehundred-
year floodplain.
(c) Width determination. The developer, applicant, property owner
or designated representative shall be responsible for the initial
width determination of the riparian corridor and identifying
this area on any plan that is submitted to the municipality for
subdivision, land development, or other improvements that
require plan submissions or permits. This determination shall
be subject to review by the Township Engineer.
(4) Uses permitted in the RCCD. The following uses are permitted,
either by right or as a conditional use, in the RCCD. Within any
corridor, however, no construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the activity is described in
the corridor management plan.
(a) Zone One.
[1] Uses permitted by right. Open space uses that are
primarily passive in character shall be permitted to extend
into the area defined as Zone One, including:
[a] Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves, fishing areas, passive areas of public and
private parklands, and reforestation in compliance
with the guidelines of the corridor management plan.
[b] Stream bank stabilization in compliance with the
guidelines of the corridor management plan.
[c] Corridor crossings by livestock.
[2] Uses permitted by conditional use:
[a] Corridor crossings of recreational trails, roads,
railroads, centralized sewer and/or waterlines, and
public utility transmission lines, provided that any
disturbance is offset by corridor improvements
identified in the corridor management plan.
§ 195-60 WARWICK CODE § 195-60
187:882
[b] Selective cutting of extremely high economic value
trees when removal is consistent with approved
standards in the corridor management plan and
complies with § 195-16A(5).
(b) Zone two.
[1] Uses permitted by right. The following uses, which are
primarily passive in character, shall be permitted by right
to extend into the area defined as Zone Two:
[a] Open space uses including wildlife sanctuaries, nature
preserves, forest preserves, passive areas of public
and private parklands, and recreational trails
conducted in compliance with methods prescribed by
Chapter 102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Administrative Code.
[b] Reforestation in compliance with the guidelines of the
corridor management plan.
[c] Minimum required front, side, and rear yards on
private lots, provided that no yard may extend into
Zone Two more than half the distance between the
outer boundaries of Zone One and Zone Two.
[d] Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter, so long as they are conducted in
compliance with methods prescribed by Chapter 102
of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Administrative Code.
[e] Corridor crossings by livestock.
[2] Uses permitted by conditional use:
[a] New agricultural uses in compliance with methods
prescribed by Chapter 102.4(b) of Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Administrative Code.
[b] Corridor crossings of roads, railroads, centralized
sewer and/or waterlines, and public utility
transmission lines, provided that any disturbance is
offset by corridor improvements identified in the
corridor management plan.
[c] Centralized sewer and/or waterlines and public utility
transmission lines running along the corridor,
provided that any disturbance is offset by corridor
improvements identified in the corridor management
plan. These lines shall be located as far from Zone One
as practical.
§ 195-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-60
187:883
[d] Selective cutting of trees when removal is consistent
with approved standards in the corridor management
plan and complies with § 195-16A(5).
[e] Passive-use areas such as camps, campgrounds, picnic
areas, and golf courses. Active recreation areas such
as ball fields, playgrounds, and courts, provided these
uses are designed in a manner that will not permit
concentrated flow.
[f] Naturalized stormwater basins in compliance with the
guidelines in the corridor management plan. The
entire basin shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
from the defined edge of identified watercourses.
(5) Uses specifically prohibited in the RCCD. Any use or activity not
authorized by Subsection L(4) of this section shall be prohibited
within the RCCD. By way of example, the following activities and
facilities are specifically prohibited:
(a) Clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation.
(b) Selective cutting of trees and/or the clearing of other
vegetation within Zone One or Two except where such clearing
is necessary to prepare land for a use permitted herein and
where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
revegetation, as specified herein.
(c) Removal of trees in excess of selective cutting, except where
such removal is necessary as a means to eliminate dead,
diseased, or hazardous tree stands that jeopardize public
safety or as part of a reforestation project, provided that the
removal is in compliance with a corridor management plan
approved by the Township.
(d) Removal or disturbance of vegetation in a manner that is
inconsistent with erosion control and corridor protection.
(e) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
(f) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals in excess of prescribed industry standards or the
recommendations of the Bucks County Conservation District.
(g) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor
crossings herein.
(h) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designated to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
(i) Parking lots for a use permitted herein.
(j) Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
§ 195-60 WARWICK CODE § 195-60
187:884
(k) Sod farming.
(l) Topsoil removal.
(6) Inspection of Riparian Corridor Conservation District.
(a) Lands within or adjacent to an identified Riparian Corridor
Conservation District shall be inspected by the Township
Engineer when:
[1] A subdivision or land development plan is submitted.
[2] A building permit is requested.
[3] A zoning permit is requested.
[4] A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is
proposed.
(b) The district may also be inspected periodically by the
municipal representatives for compliance with an approved
restoration plan, excessive or potentially problematic erosion,
hazardous trees, or at any time when the presence of an
unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the attention of
Township officials.
(7) Management of the Riparian Corridor District.
(a) Corridor management plan. Within any Township-identified
corridor area, no construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of such
development are accompanied by implementation of an
approved corridor management plan.
(b) The developer, applicant or property owner shall submit to the
Township Engineer a corridor management plan, prepared by a
landscape architect, engineer, or other qualified professional,
which fully evaluates the effects of any proposed uses on the
Riparian Corridor Conservation District. The corridor
management plan shall identify the existing conditions
(vegetation, one-hundred-year floodplain, soils, slopes, etc.),
all proposed activities, and all proposed management
techniques, including any measures necessary to offset
disturbances to the Riparian Corridor Conservation District.
The plan shall be approved by Township Council as part of the
subdivision and land development process.
(c) Vegetation selection. To function properly, dominant vegetation
proposed to be planted in the corridor management plan shall
be selected from a list of plants most suited to the riparian
corridor. Plants not included on the lists may be permitted
when evidence is provided from qualified sources certifying
their suitability.
§ 195-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-60
187:885
[1] In Zone One, dominant vegetation shall be composed of a
variety of native riparian tree and shrub species and
appropriate plantings necessary for stream bank
stabilization.
[2] In Zone Two, dominant vegetation shall be composed of
riparian trees and shrubs, with an emphasis on native
species and appropriate plantings necessary to stabilize
the soil.
[3] Disturbed areas shall be revegetated with riparian
corridor plants, in compliance with an approved corridor
management plan.
[4] Areas that cannot be revegetated shall be restored in
compliance with an approved corridor management plan.
[5] Where natural wooded areas, meadows, and old fields do
not exist within the stream protection area, the applicant
shall be required to either plant native species
characteristic of the indigenous vegetation community or
allow the adjacent areas to become reestablished by native
plant communities through the natural process of
succession. For the purpose of this section, "native
species" shall include wooded areas, meadows, and old
fields and shall be defined as follows:
MEADOWS — A natural community consisting primarily
of herbaceous plant material, such as grass, sedges and
reeds, with few or no woody plants.
OLD FIELDS — Areas consisting primarily of herbaceous
plant species, such as goldenrod, buttercups, milkweed
and daisies, with some woody plant species, such as
cedars, sumac, blackberries, and raspberries.
WOODED AREAS — Areas consisting of oak, chestnut,
hickory or hardwood species characteristic of the original
forests of southeastern Pennsylvania, including ash,
beech, maple, birch, dogwood, and others. Wooded areas
generally consist of a well-developed canopy with
understory trees, shrubs, and herbaceous layer and
provide valuable aesthetic and environmental benefits,
including wildlife habitat and erosion control.
(8) The disturbance standards described in this section shall apply to
all uses and activities established after the effective date of this
chapter, provided that residential accessory uses will be permitted
in the RCCD on residential lots in existence as of the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 195-60 WARWICK CODE § 195-61
187:886
§ 195-61. Application of natural resource protection standards.
In order to meet the natural resource protection standards of § 195-60,
the applicant shall provide the following information with application for a
zoning permit or building permit, and/or for application for subdivision and
land development approval.
A. For all uses on lots established by subdivision approved after the
effective date of this chapter:
(1) All lots shall have a contiguous buildable area of at least an area as
indicated below within the overall lot which does not encroach
upon natural features to an extent greater than allowed by
§ 195-60. The purpose of the identification of a buildable area is to
provide sufficient area for the general location of the building,
driveway, parking areas, patios, other improvements, and site
alterations while meeting the natural protection standards and
minimum setback requirements of this chapter.
(a) Minimum buildable area.
[1] All districts, residential uses other than described above:
15,000 square feet or minimum lot size, whichever is less.
[2] All districts, uses other than residential: 20,000 square
feet or minimum lot size, whichever is less.
(2) For uses with on-lot sewage systems, an area not less than 3,000
square feet shall be identified for location of the sewage disposal
system in addition to the "buildable area" specified in Subsection
A(1) above. Such additional area shall not include natural features
with a one-hundred-percent protection standard and the portion of
those natural features that may not be developed or intruded upon
as specified in this article.
(3) Applicants for zoning permits and/or subdivision or land
development approval shall submit the following information:
(a) A site plan which illustrates all natural resources on the site
and the proposed use on the site; and
(b) All encroachments and disturbances necessary to establish the
proposed use on the site; and
(c) Calculations which indicate the area of the site with natural
resources as noted in Subsection B(2)(a) and (b) below; the
area of natural resources that would be disturbed or
encroached upon; and the area of the site included in the
buildable area.
B. The following site capacity calculations shall be submitted with
applications for all subdivisions and land developments classified in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance218 as major subdivisions
§ 195-61 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-61
187:887
and land developments. Through these calculations, the net buildable
site area, maximum number of lots or dwelling units, maximum amount
of impervious surface, and required open space will be determined for
the site.
(1) Base site area. Calculate the base site area. From the total site
area, subtract future road rights-of-way (for existing roads); land
which is not contiguous or which is separated from the parcel by an
arterial or collector road, railroad, Neshaminy Creek or Little
Neshaminy Creek; or land shown on previous subdivision or land
development plans as reserved for open space and/or natural
resource protection.
Total site area - acres
Base site area = acres
acres
(2) Land with resource restrictions and resource protection land. All
land within the base site area shall be mapped and measured for
the purpose of determining the amount of land that is nonbuildable
due to the presence of natural resources. First, indicate the entire
amount of natural resources that exist on the tract. Calculate the
amount of land containing the natural resource that is required to
be preserved by multiplying the amount of land in resource by the
resource protection ratio. In the event that two or more natural
resources overlap, only the resource with the highest protection
ratio shall be used in the calculations.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all zoning districts,
unless the tract of land is less than 20 acres in size and located
in the RA Zoning District:
Resource
Resource
Protection
Ratio
Acres of
Land in
Resource
Acres of
Resource
Protection
Land
Floodplain 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Floodplain 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Floodplain
soils
1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Lakes or
ponds
1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Riparian
buffer
1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Wetlands 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-61 WARWICK CODE § 195-61
187:888
Resource
Resource
Protection
Ratio
Acres of
Land in
Resource
Acres of
Resource
Protection
Land
Wetlands
margins
0.80 X _____ = _____ acres
Lake or pond
shorelines
0.80 X _____ = _____ acres
Steep slopes 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
(25% or
more)
0.85 X _____ = _____ acres
(15% to
25%)
0.70 X _____ = _____ acres
(8% to 15%) 0.60 X _____ = _____ acres
Watercourse 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Woodlands
Environmentally
sensitive
0.90 X _____ = _____ acres
Other 0.80 X _____ = _____ acres
Total land with
resource
restrictions
_____ acres
Total resource
protection
land
_____ acres
(b) For all tracts of land on the RA District which are 20 acres or
greater in size, the following standards shall apply:
Resource
Resource
Protection
Ratio X
Acres of
Land in
Resource =
Acres of
Resource
Protection
Land
Prime
farmland
0.50 X _____ = _____ acres
Watercourses 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Floodplain 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Floodplain
soils
1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Lakes or ponds 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Riparian buffer 1.00 X _____ = _____ acres
Wetlands
margins
0.80 X _____ = _____ acres
§ 195-61 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-61
187:889
Resource
Resource
Protection
Ratio X
Acres of
Land in
Resource =
Acres of
Resource
Protection
Land
Lake or pond
shorelines
0.80 X _____ = _____ acres
Steep slopes X _____ = _____ acres
(25% or
more)
0.85
(15% to
25%)
0.70
(8% to 15%) 0.60
Woodlands X _____ = _____ acres
Environmentally
sensitive
0.90
Others 0.60
Total land with
resource
restrictions
X _____ = _____ acres
Total resource
protection land
_____ acres
(3) Net buildable site area. Calculate the net buildable site area:
Base site area - _____ acres
Subtract resource protection land - _____ acres
Net buildable site area - _____ acres
Note: Calculation of NBSA is required only for those residential
uses with a specified density requirement. Skip to Subsection
B(5) when the proposed use is nonresidential or does not have a
maximum density requirement.
(4) Number of dwelling units/lots. Calculate the maximum number of
dwelling units:
Net buildable site area = _____ acres
Multiply by applicable density1 _____ acres
Maximum allowable dwelling units2 _____ dwelling acres
§ 195-61 WARWICK CODE § 195-61
187:890
NOTES:
1 If applicable sections of this chapter do not specify an
allowable maximum density, this section shall not be
applicable. The number of lots shall be determined by the tract
area remaining after subtraction of the required open space
and resource protection areas.
2 For cluster subdivisions, maximum number of units shall not
exceed the requirements of § 195-16, Use B2.
(5) Open space requirements.
(a) Common open space (COS). Twenty percent common open
space area shall be provided in all subdivisions and land
developments identified as major subdivisions and land
developments in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,219 and shall contain no more than 70% land with
natural resource restrictions.
Base site area [Subsection B(1) above] x _____ acres
Multiply by common open space ratio3 = _____
Common open space _____
NOTES:
3 Ratio shall be 0.20 unless otherwise specified in § 195-15
or 195-16.
(b) Active open space (AOS) shall be provided as required in
Article III (§ 195-16). [NOTE: Active open space shall not
contain land with natural resource restrictions.]
Required active open space pursuant to
§ 195-164
_____ acres
NOTES:
4 Applicable for residential uses only. Minimum 2.5 acres.
(c) Total required open space.
Common open space + _____ acres
Add active open space = _____
Total required open space _____ acres
(6) Site capacity summary.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-61 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-61
187:891
§ 195-62. Open space and recreation facilities.
Net buildable site area [Subsection B(3)] _____ acres
Maximum number of dwelling units/lots
[Subsection B(4)]
_____ units
Total required open space [Subsection B(5)] _____ acres
A. Purpose of open space. In order to ensure adequate open space,
agricultural and recreational areas to serve the future residents of
Warwick Township, all residential land developments, industrial and
office park developments, and major residential subdivisions shall
include suitable and adequate open space and recreation areas and/or
facilities to serve the needs of the residents of the community.
B. Layout and quality of open space.
(1) Common open space.
(a) Common open space shall be a parcel or parcels of land within
a development site logically located and interrelated,
interconnected and designed to disperse density and separate
individual development clusters. Common open space shall not
include any streets or street rights-of-way, off-street parking
areas, stormwater management facilities (including, but not
limited to, detention basins), minimum required yard areas,
minimum lot areas or areas required for active open space.
Common open space shall be free of surface structures except
those existing structures determined by the Township to be of
historical or aesthetical importance. Common open space may
contain subsurface structures, conduits, pipes or other utilities
determined to be necessary by the Township, provided that
they are properly restricted and subject to necessary
easements to the satisfaction of the Township. Required
common open space areas may include no more than 70%
natural resources protection area, provided that the location
and configuration of the proposed common open space meets
the requirements of this definition as determined by the
Township. Common open space may be set aside and
maintained in one or a combination of the ways upon approval
of the Township as set forth in this chapter.
(2) Active open space.
(a) Active open space shall be a parcel of land located by
determination of the Township, which is generally flat, dry, and
clear of any trees or other vegetation other than grass
(exclusive of required yard and buffer areas) and which is
suitable for agricultural use or active recreational use, such as
baseball, football, soccer, tennis, basketball, or other general
municipal or school district uses. Active open space areas shall
§ 195-61 WARWICK CODE § 195-62
187:892
not merely be left over or unusable land. It shall be laid out to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors according to sound
site design principles. Except where the active open space is
suitable for and restricted to agricultural uses, active open
space shall be accessible to a maximum number of residents.
Active open space shall be one single area or a few large areas
linked by a common means of access and circulation. Active
open space shall be contiguous to the developed area and
not separated from it by existing roads or streets unless safe
pedestrian access can be provided. Active open space areas
shall be developed by the applicant according to the Township
requirements. In general, active open space shall have an area
of not less than five acres. If, based on the requirements of this
chapter, a tract of less than five acres would result, the Board
may require such land to be located on the periphery of the
development so that a tract of sufficient size will result when
additional active open space land is obtained via dedication
when adjacent land is developed. The recreation facilities or
other general municipal or school district uses and design of
active open space areas shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors. At the discretion of the Township
Supervisors, the required active open space, recreational
facilities, or other general municipal or school district uses
may be provided.
(3) Ownership of open space. The following forms of open space shall
be acceptable. The Township Board of Supervisors shall determine
which form is appropriate for each development:
(a) Dedicated open space: "Dedicated open space" is defined as an
area or areas dedicated in fee simple to the Township for use
by all residents or general municipal or school district uses.
(b) Homeowners' association: ownership by a planned community
association incorporated in accordance with the Planned
Community Act (68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq, as amended), and
established to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor.
(c) Private ownership: When the Board of Supervisors is assured
through easement and restrictions of record that the property
may only be used for agricultural purposes, the Board of
Supervisors may approve private ownership of the open space.
The easement or restriction of record shall include a clause
providing that the open space shall revert to the Township in
the event it is no longer used for agriculture.
(4) Fee-in-lieu of open space. Where the Board of Supervisors, after
conferring with the Park and Recreation Board, finds that, because
of the size, shape, location, accessibility, contour, or slope of the
land or other physical features, any of the land to be provided as
active or common open space by this chapter (the Zoning
§ 195-62 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-62
187:893
§ 195-63. Buffer yards.
Buffering serves to soften the outline of buildings, screen glare and noise,
and create a visual and/or physical barrier between conflicting land uses.
Ordinance) herein is unsuitable for recreation purposes or other
general municipal or school district uses as required by this
chapter, the Supervisors shall require the payment of a fee in lieu
of such land to the Township prior to approval of each final section
of the overall plan by the Board of Supervisors. Said fees shall be
used for acquisition, development, expansion, or maintenance of
recreation and open space land.
(a) The amount of the fee shall be 100% of the fair market value of
the improved land in the particular subdivision, determined at
the time of final plan approval. If agreement cannot be reached
between the developer and the Township on this value, the
amount shall be determined by an independent, licensed land
appraisal firm acceptable to the Township and developer who
shall offer the value based on the value of land upon which
houses can be built subsequent to the approval of the final
plan. The appraiser shall be hired by the Township and the
appraisal costs shall be equally divided between the developer
and the Township.
(5) Recreation facilities. Recreation facilities must be provided for
active open space areas as per the requirements of Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) Cumulative open space requirements. Any subdivision or land
development of any tract which occurs after November 16, 1998,
the effective date of the 1998 Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance,
will be cumulative for the purpose of determining the number of
lots in order to calculate active open space requirements set forth
in Article III, Use Regulations, of this chapter. The required open
space shall be based on the total (cumulative) number of lots or
units as of the most recent subdivision. The total (cumulative)
number of lots shall be calculated by adding the number of lots in
the current subdivision to the number of lots subdivided from the
parcel in existence as of the effective date of this subsection.
A. The extent of buffering required shall be determined by the type of use
proposed and the adjacent uses or streets surrounding the proposed
development. The impact of the proposed use on adjoining properties is
the basis for establishing buffer yard standards.
B. To determine the required buffer yard and planting schedule, a threestep
procedure shall be followed.
Step 1: Site analysis and determination of buffer yard class
Step 2: Selection of the planting option for the buffer class
§ 195-62 WARWICK CODE § 195-63
187:894
Step 3: Selection of the plant materials from the plant materials
list
(1) Site analysis and determination of buffer yard class. For each
property boundary, the applicant shall determine the adjacent land
use or street classification. Land use information shall be
determined by an on-site survey. Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall be utilized to determine street
classifications (refer to Appendix220). The applicant shall match the
proposed land use with the corresponding adjacent land use,
Zoning District, or street classification for each property boundary
(refer to Table 1221). The letter indicates the buffer yard class,
unless otherwise specified for a specific use set forth at § 195-15 or
195-16. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
(2) Selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(a) After determining the buffer class, the applicant shall select a
planting option from Table 2.222 For each buffer class, several
planting options are available, one of which the applicant shall
select to meet the buffer yard requirement for each boundary.
The Board of Supervisors may consider an alternative planting
option and/or use of solid fencing which shall have a screening
capability equal to, or greater than, any of the available
options.
(b) The options included indicate the amount of plant material that
is required per linear foot of property line. Plantings are not
required to be aligned on property or right-of-way boundaries,
but may be located on any appropriate portion of the buffer
yard. Grouping of plant materials is encouraged, except where
a solid screen is desirable.
(3) Selection of plant materials from the plant materials list. Each
planting option may utilize plant materials outlined in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.223 The Board of
Supervisors may permit other planting types if they are hardy to
the area, are not subject to blight or disease, and are of the same
general character and growth habit as those listed in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Solid fencing may
also be used when approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) The applicant may be relieved of the requirement to install buffer
yard plantings should existing vegetation, topography, or man-
220. Editor's Note: See Appendix E: Street Name and Classification List, included at the end of
Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
221. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
222. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
223. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-63 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-63
187:895
§ 195-64. Reforestation requirements.
In the event that an applicant proposes to alter, clear, or regrade an area
of woodlands in excess of the maximum permitted by §§ 195-60 and 195-61,
the applicant shall be required to reforest the area of woodlands which was
required to be preserved and shall not develop or disturb any portion of the
made structures be deemed acceptable for screening purposes by
the Board of Supervisors.
C. Planting materials shall be in accordance with the planting
requirements and acceptable plant lists set forth in the Warwick
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 163
of this Code).
D. General buffer yard requirements.
(1) The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side, or
rear yards and, in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements
shall apply.
(2) All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris,
rubbish, weeds, and tall grass in conformance with existing
regulations.
(3) No structure, manufacturing, or processing activity, parking or
other paved surfaces, or storage of materials shall be permitted in
the buffer yard except access driveways and fences permitted
pursuant to § 195-16B(12) of this chapter. [Amended 6-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-1]
(4) At a minimum, a Class B buffer shall be maintained along each side
and/or rear property line where other than a B1 residential use
directly abuts an existing residential use.
(5) Planting design. It is encouraged that plant materials in buffer
yards be planted in natural clusters that will give privacy but do not
block views or vistas. The exception shall be commercial or
industrial uses bordering residential uses where a dense, visual
screen is encouraged.
(6) The buffer yard may be part of the open space area or individual
lots.
(7) Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, complete plans showing
the arrangement of all buffer yards, the placement, species and
size of all plant materials, and the placement, size, materials, and
type of all fences to be placed in such buffer yard shall be reviewed
by the Zoning Officer, Township Engineer, and/or Planning
Commission (where applicable) to ascertain that the plans are in
conformance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 195-63 WARWICK CODE § 195-64
187:896
reforested area. Reforestation of the lot is in accordance with the following
formula:
§ 195-65. Smoke.
A. The total number of caliper-inches of the trees to be removed, in excess
of the 20% permitted by right, shall be determined.
B. The resulting figure shall be multiplied by 0.80 to determine the total
number of caliper-inches to be replaced on the lot.
C. The amount of caliper-inches determined in Subsection B above shall
then be divided by three to determine the total gross number of trees to
be planted on the lot for reforestation.
D. Replacement trees shall meet the following specifications:
(1) Trees shall meet the following minimum size requirements:
(a) Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of three inches to 3 1/2
inches in caliper (meeting the American Association of
Nurserymen specifications).
(b) Coniferous trees shall be a minimum of eight feet to 10 feet in
height.
(2) The types of trees to be planted shall be selected on the basis of the
tree list and guidelines found in this article. Trees shall be
compatible with existing forest association.
(3) Up to 25% of the new trees to be planted may be of the coniferous
variety.
(4) Where 25 or more trees need to be planted to meet the
reforestation requirements, a minimum of three tree species shall
be planted.
E. Trees required to be planted under these reforestation procedures shall
be in addition to any street trees or buffer requirements which this
article or any other applicable ordinance shall require.
F. Replacement trees may be dispersed throughout the proposed
development or throughout Warwick Township at locations approved by
the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
G. Zoning permits shall be required for the removal of any trees protected
by §§ 195-60 and 195-61.
H. Commercial forestry operations shall be defined and regulated by
§ 195-16A(5) of this chapter. Additionally, no permit shall be required
for the removal or clearing of nursery stock in the normal operation of a
nursery where trees or shrubs are raised for sale and where such
nursery is a permitted use.
§ 195-64 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-65
187:897
§ 195-66. Dust and dirt; fly ash; and gases.
§ 195-67. Noise.
A. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of visible
gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published
by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not
darker than No. 3 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not
more than three minutes in any 60 minutes.
B. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color, but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
A. No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health, to
animals or vegetation, or to other forms of property which can cause
excessive soiling at any point.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 100 milligrams per cubic meter of the emitting gas at any
point at 70° F. and one atmosphere.
A. General.
(1) Noise shall be measured with a calibrated Type II sound level
meter having an A-weighted filter constructed in accordance with
specifications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Measurements are to be made at any point on the boundary line of
any residential, commercial or other district property within the
Township.
(2) Impact noise shall be measured using the fast response of the
sound level meter. Impact noises are intermittent sounds such as
from a punch or drop forge hammer. Measurements are to be made
at any point on the boundary line of any residential, commercial or
other district property within the Township.
(3) In all zoning districts, as defined and designated under the
provisions of the Code of Warwick Township, at no point on or
beyond the boundary of any adjacent property shall the sound level
of any person, property, residence, business or corporation exceed
the dBA levels shown in Table I below. Between the hours of 10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m., the permissible sound levels shall be reduced by
20 decibels as measured under the test procedures established
under this chapter.
B. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of these
regulations:
(1) Police, fire, ambulance and other governmental emergency
vehicles.
§ 195-65 WARWICK CODE § 195-67
187:898
(2) Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves.
(3) Governmental warning devices.
(4) Aircraft (except model aircraft).
(5) Temporary construction, specifically authorized by the Township.
(6) The work to provide electricity, water or other utilities when public
health or safety is involved.
(7) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Township.
C. Permissible sound levels. The following table describes the maximum
pressure level permitted from all properties located in any zoning
district, as defined and designated by the Code of Warwick Township.
The noise level shall be measured from any point on or beyond the
boundary line of any adjacent property.
Table I
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels From Any Source
[Decibels (dBA)]
Sound Measured In
Continuous Slow
Meter Response
Impact Fast Meter
Response
Residential districts 50 60
Commercial districts 65 75
All other districts 70 80
D. Vibration.
(1) Vibration shall be measured at or beyond any adjacent lot line
indicated in Table II below and such measurements shall not
exceed the particle velocities so designated. The instrument used
for these measurements shall be a three-component measuring
system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three
mutually perpendicular directions.
(2) The maximum vibration is given as particle velocity, which may be
measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on
the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the
following formula shall be used:
PV = 6.28 F x D
Where:
PV = Particle velocity, inches per second
F = Vibration frequency, cycles per second.
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches.
§ 195-67 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-67
187:899
§ 195-68. Odors, fumes and gases.
There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in
such quantities as to be offensive at a lot boundary line. Any process
which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided
with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if
the primary safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as
a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 1 (Order
Thresholds in Air), Research on Chemical Odors: Part I - Order Thresholds
for 53 Commercial Chemicals, October 1968, Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
§ 195-69. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.
There shall be no electrical disturbance, except from domestic household
appliances, adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
(3) The maximum particle velocity shall be the vector sum of the three
individual components recorded. Such particle velocity shall not
exceed the values given in Table II.
Table II
Maximum Ground-Transmitted Vibration for O District
District
Particle Velocity
Adjacent Lot Line (in
inches/second)
In Inches/Second
Residential Districts
O Office 0.10 0.02
Table II
Maximum Ground-Transmitted Vibration for C1 C2, C3, VC,
VC 2 and LI Districts
Districts Particle Velocity
Adjacent Lot Line (in
inches/second)
In Inches/Second
Residential Districts
C1, C2, C3, VC
and VC 2
Commercial
Districts
0.20 0.02
LI Limited
Industrial
District
0.20 0.02
NOTE: Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses, and such
impulses do not exceed frequency of 100 per minute, then the
values in Table II may be multiplied by two.
§ 195-67 WARWICK CODE § 195-70
187:900
§ 195-70. Glare and heat; outdoor illumination.
This section provides for the regulation of intense heat and glare,
specifically for outside lighting to reduce the intensity to the minimum
required for safety and commercial purposes and to reduce to an absolute
minimum the spillover of light and glare, horizontally and skyward for
persons on adjacent properties, roads, operators of motor and other types
of vehicles and pedestrians.
A. Standards.
(1) All zoning districts of the Township:
(a) This chapter shall apply when exterior lighting is first installed
or substantially modified. Cumulative modification or
replacement of exterior lighting constituting 25% or more of
the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual
amount of lighting already on a nonconforming site, shall
constitute a substantial modification for purposes of this
section.
(b) An exterior lighting plan is required to be submitted for the
Township's review and approval whenever an application for a
zoning permit, building permit, or land development is made.
The lighting plan must include all the information necessary
for the Township to ensure that the outdoor lighting complies
with the requirements of this section, and prior to issuance of a
zoning permit and construction of the outdoor lighting
installation. The submission shall contain, but shall not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
[1] Plans indicating the location on the premises of each
illuminating device, both proposed and any already
existing, on the site;
[2] Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The
description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts
and illustrations by manufacturers (including sections
where required);
[3] Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers
or similar data showing the angle of cutoff of light
emissions; and
[4] Descriptions and data sufficiently complete to enable the
official or reviewer to readily determine whether
compliance with the requirements of this chapter will be
secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot
enable this ready determination, the application shall
additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable
such determination such certified reports of tests as will
§ 195-70 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-70
187:901
do so, provided that these tests shall have been performed
and certified by a recognized testing laboratory.
(c) Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed
within an enclosed building or behind adequate shielding in
such manner as not to create a nuisance to those working or
living in the area.
(d) Parking, loading, ingress and egress areas of commercial,
industrial, office, institutional, and multifamily uses shall be
provided with a minimum of 0.9 footcandle (with
corresponding uniformity ratios for maximum to minimum and
average to minimum of 20:1 and 4:1 respectively) of
illumination at any point on the intended area on the ground
consistent with the use.
(e) All outside lighting shall be directed such that the projected
light and glare are within property or lighting area lines with
the cutoff angle arranged to avoid projecting light on adjacent
properties, roads or skyward. Cutoff angles shall not exceed
72° from the vertical.
(f) All luminaries shall be designed or equipped with shielding so
that the light source (bulb, filament, etc.) within the luminaire
is not visible outside the intended illuminated area. The
intended illuminated area shall not extend beyond the
boundaries of the property on which the light source is located.
(g) The spacing and height of poles should be designed to provide
uniform ground illumination with a minimum number of poles
and the lowest possible height of poles while minimizing stray
light outside the intended lighted area and skyward. The
maximum pole height for residential areas shall be 12 feet;
parking lots for commercial and institutional areas shall be 20
feet; and 25 feet for parking lots in industrial areas. Lighting,
other than parking lot lighting, for commercial, institutional,
and industrial areas shall not exceed 16 feet in height. The
height of poles on state highways shall be governed by
PennDOT requirements.
(h) The use of energy-efficient lighting sources is encouraged.
Where possible, outside lighting sources should be timer and
photocell controlled. With this arrangement, the "on" time is
set first by a timer and then by photocell with the timer
determining the "off" time. Motion-sensitive lighting shall be
used on site where possible.
(i) Structural lighting for commercial, industrial, institutional and
residential properties shall be designed such that luminaries
are directed at the structure as opposed to lighting from the
structure outward with a minimum of stray light. Light source
§ 195-70 WARWICK CODE § 195-70
187:902
shielding and cutoff requirements must meet the requirements
of this section.
(j) The use of searchlights, laser source lights, strobe lights,
flashing lights and similar high-intensity lighting is prohibited
unless required by civil authorities.
(k) Lights for sports and recreational uses, including recreational
uses accessory to residential uses, must comply with the
requirements of this chapter as well as the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code as adopted by Warwick
Township.224 The permit application requesting lights for
sports and recreational uses shall include a design plan.
(l) All nonresidential uses shall apply outside lighting at dusk, and
lighting shall be turned off or greatly reduced during the hours
when the use is closed for business.
(m) Except as otherwise permitted in this section, the incident
illumination spill projected onto any nonresidential property
from another property shall not exceed 0.2 vertical footcandle,
measured at grade at the common property line, and the
intensity of illumination projected onto a residential property
from another property shall not exceed 0.1 vertical footcandle,
measured at grade at the common property line. The intensity
of illumination projected onto adjoining public roadways shall
not exceed 0.5 vertical footcandle.
(n) Lighting standards to the rear of the parking spaces shall be
placed a minimum of five feet outside paved areas; on concrete
pedestals at least 30 inches above the pavement; or suitably
protected by other means approved by the Township.
(o) Lighting exempt from these regulations:
[1] Lighting in swimming pools and other water features
governed by Article 680 of the National Electric Code.
[2] Exit signs and other illumination required by building
codes.
[3] Lighting for stairs and ramps, as required by the building
codes.
[4] Signs are regulated by Article XXII, but lighting for all
signs shall be fully shielded.
[5] Holiday and temporary lighting (less than 30 days in a
calendar year).
224. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 195-70 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-70
187:903
[6] Low-wattage, low-intensity landscape lighting is exempt
from this requirement providing stray light does not
infringe on adjacent or nearby properties or roads.
(p) Luminaires which do not meet the strict definition for cutoff
luminaires, yet employ advanced or alternative technology
which causes the photometric performance to approach that of
cutoff luminaires, may be approved by the Township on a caseby-
case basis. Such luminaires include, but are not limited to,
period-style luminaires with refractive globes and internal
cutoff reflectors.
(2) Additional requirements:
(a) Residential security lighting.
[1] All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so
the illumination is directed at only to the designated area
and not cast on other areas. In no case may the light
extend past the property line nor shall lighting be directed
above a horizontal plane through the top of the fixture, and
said fixture shall include shields that prevent the light
source or lens from being visible from the adjacent
properties, roadways and sidewalks.
[2] All residential security lighting shall include primers and
motion sensors to be designed to be off unless triggered or
such triggering shall be limited to movement occurring
exclusively on the subject property. Once triggered,
security lighting shall remain on for not more than five
minutes without manual intervention.
(b) Residential lighting.
[1] The use of general floodlighting fixtures for other than
occasional use shall be prohibited. All residential spot or
floodlamps are to be aimed at no higher than 60° below
horizontal. In no case shall the spot or floodlamp be aimed
above the roof eave.
[2] The light source or bulb for all exterior lights shall not be
directly visible from the adjacent properties or roadways.
[3] Temporary seasonal lighting displays are permitted;
however, flood or spotlighting associated with such
displays must conform with this chapter.
[4] All lighting in model or sample homes, except security
lights illuminated by a motion detector, shall be turned off
within one hour of the sample or model home closing for
the day or 9:00 p.m. prevailing time, whichever is earlier.
§ 195-70 WARWICK CODE § 195-70
187:904
[5] Only low-output, fully shielded, luminaires may be utilized
for landscape lighting, and the use of spotlights or
floodlights is specifically prohibited. Lighting fixtures shall
not be directed towards adjacent streets or roads nor shall
they contribute glare, disabling glare, discomfort player,
light trespass, or sky glow.
(c) Private outdoor recreation lighting.
[1] Outdoor lighting of private tennis courts and sports courts
shall be permitted only by conditional use. The applicant
shall bear the burden of proving that the proposed lights
do not impact or offend abutting property owners or the
community in general. In no case may such lights be
placed on properties of less than three acres and in no
case may the light be closer than 200 feet to the nearest
property line. The Board of Supervisors may, at its sole
discretion, require the addition of buffer plantings or
exercise other options to minimize the impact lights have
on neighboring properties, roads, and/or the community at
large.
[2] All luminaires shall be designed or equipped with shielding
so that the light source (bulb, filament, etc.) within the
luminaire is not visible outside the intended illuminated
area. The intended illuminated area shall not extend
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the light
source is located. All light shall be limited to 15 feet in
height and be extinguished by 10:00 p.m. Lighting fixtures
shall be specified, mounted and aimed so that their beams
fall within the primary playing area and immediate
surroundings, and so that no direct illumination is directed
off the site.
(d) Outdoor sports and recreational lighting. These regulations
apply to all sports and recreational facilities including, but not
limited to, ball fields, ballparks, stadiums, tennis courts,
basketball courts, soccer fields, recreation fields, swimming
pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, golf courses, and the
like. Where permitted, the outdoor lighting of sports and
recreational facilities shall comply with the following
requirements:
[1] The requirements of this subsection apply to all outdoor
lighting installations employed for nighttime area
illumination of sports and recreational facilities. All sports
and recreational facilities shall be illuminated with the
following two systems:
[a] Performance area lighting. This is the lighting
directed upon the field, court, rink, etc., to illuminate
§ 195-70 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-70
187:905
the sports/recreational activity taking place upon/
within that facility. The maximum permitted post
height for the performance area lighting is 60 feet.
Post height shall be limited to minimum height
necessary to meet the performance area lighting
needs of that specific sports/recreational use as
determined by the Township.
[b] General area lighting. This is a low-level lighting
system used to facilitate pedestrian circulation,
patrons leaving the facility, cleanup, nighttime
maintenance, etc. General area lighting shall meet all
of the requirements listed above.
[2] Use of cutoff luminaires required. All luminaires employed
in outdoor sports and recreational lighting installations
shall be the cutoff luminaire type unless the performance
area lighting needs of the sports/recreational use cannot
be met through the use of cutoff luminaries, as determined
by the Township.
[3] Use of glare shields required for noncutoff luminaire
types. Where noncutoff luminaires such as floodlights
must be used to meet the lighting design objectives for the
performance area lighting, the luminaires shall be
equipped with glare shields, visors, barn doors, and other
similar shielding accessories as required to meet the
following criteria:
[a] The candlepower distribution from all lighting
installations shall be cutoff at and above the horizontal
(level).
[b] To the extent practicable, the candlepower
distribution from all lighting installations shall be
further cutoff at angles below the horizontal (level) to
restrict direct illumination to within the performance
area being illuminated for sports and recreation
purposes.
[c] No direct illumination shall project off the property.
[4] Design submittal and approval requirements. The design
for all outdoor sports and recreation lighting installations
shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Township.
[5] All outdoor sports and recreation lighting shall be
extinguished between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sunday
through Thursday nights and between 11:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights and nights preceding
federal holidays. In addition, the performance area
§ 195-70 WARWICK CODE § 195-70
187:906
§ 195-71. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
lighting shall be turned off no more than 30 minutes after
the end of the event or use of the sports/recreational
facility.
(3) Communication towers. Communications tower lighting is
prohibited unless required by the FCC (Federal Communications
Commission) or FAA (Federal Aircraft Administration) regulations.
(4) Temporary lighting. Unless the lighting poses a risk to the health,
safety, and welfare, temporary or seasonal lighting (except as
prohibited elsewhere in this chapter for residential uses) is exempt
from these regulations. Unless the lighting poses a risk to the
health, safety and welfare, temporary commercial activities such as
carnivals are also exempt if the temporary commercial activity lasts
no more than 10 consecutive days' use.
(5) Nuisance prohibition. All outside lighting, including sign lighting,
shall be directed in such a way as not to create a nuisance in any
agricultural, institutional, or residential area. In all areas of the
Township, all lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street
or highway and adjoining properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. All luminaires shall be equipped with a
glare-shielding device.
(6) Light source covering. All luminaires and light sources shall be
covered so that the source of light is not visible from any adjacent
property.
(7) Overlay districts. Properties in overlay districts may also be subject
to additional lighting requirements of overlay districts.
A. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in
bulk aboveground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from
this provision.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products; and
all fuel and all raw materials and products stored outdoors; and all
waste disposal dumpster areas shall be enclosed by an adequate fence
or other enclosure to provide security for the property. Outside storage
and waste disposal areas shall be shielded from view from public
streets and adjoining properties. The enclosure shall be made
aesthetically pleasing to the community.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
Dikes must be constructed around aboveground liquid storage facilities
to preclude such transference in the event of failure of the facility.
§ 195-70 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-71
187:907
§ 195-72. Electric, diesel, gas, or other power.
Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines,
substation, etc., shall conform to the highest safety requirements known,
shall be so constructed or installed as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant or, if visible from abutting residential
properties, shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
§ 195-73. Industrial waste or sewage.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
E. All aboveground and below-ground storage shall be in compliance with
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes, Pennsylvania DEP
regulations and all Township building code requirements.
F. No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas intended
or designed for pedestrian use, no parking areas, fire lanes, and no part
of the required front yard shall be occupied by outside storage or waste
disposal dumpsters.
G. No lot or parcel may be used for the accumulations of trash, garbage,
rubbish, or other waste materials, the storage of abandoned or junked
automobiles, or any open dump or open dumping ground, as set forth in
the Township's nuisance ordinances.225
H. In cases of construction sites, contractor sales offices and storage
trailers will be permitted upon application to the Township Zoning
Officer. No storage trailers of any kind are permitted in commercial and
industrial districts for the purposes of storage of materials and supplies
for a business activity.
A. Waste disposal. No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge
any treated or untreated sewage or industrial waste into any reservoir
or lake, or discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any
stream. All methods of sewage industrial waste treatment and disposal
shall be approved by the Township and Pennsylvania Department of
Health, as appropriate.
B. Erosion control and sedimentation. Appropriate Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection permits are required.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Nuisances.
§ 195-71 WARWICK CODE § 195-73
187:908
ARTICLE XX
Regulations Governing All Districts; Parking Requirements
§ 195-74. Lot area or yard required.
The lot or yard requirements for any new building or use shall not include
any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply
with the requirements of this chapter. No required lot or area shall include
any property, the ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter, if such property was a part of the area
required for compliance with the dimensional requirements applicable to
the lot from which such transfer was made.
§ 195-75. Minimum lot area.
§ 195-76. Exceptions to minimum lot areas.
A. Where a minimum lot area is specified, no principal building or use
shall be erected or established on any lot of lesser size than as specified
in Articles IV through XVIII, except as specified in § 195-76.
B. In addition, if a parcel or property proposed for subdivision is subject to
a restrictive covenant under Act 319, and is located in a zoning district
requiring a minimum lot size of greater than one acre, the following
provisions shall apply:
(1) The minimum lot size for each lot in the subdivision shall be 43,560
square feet provided the Act 319 regulations for the subdivision are
met.
(2) All other applicable zoning regulations including lot width and yard
setbacks shall apply.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the construction of a
single-family detached dwelling on any lot that was lawful when created
and which, prior to the effective date of this chapter, was in separate
ownership duly recorded by plan or deed, and provided that:
(1) Such lot is not less than one acre in the RA District and not less
than 80% of the minimum lot area in all other districts.
(2) Those lots not served by public water and sewer shall meet all
requirements of the Bucks County Department of Health.
(3) The percentage of lot area covered by the detached dwelling shall
not exceed 15% of the area of the lot.
(4) Front and rear yards shall aggregate at least 60% of the total lot
depth or meet the normal requirements of the district in which the
lot is located; but in no case shall either the front yard or the rear
yard be less than 30 feet.
§ 195-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-76
187:909
§ 195-77. Minimum lot width; lane lots.
No principal building shall be erected on any part of a lot which has a width
less than that specified in Articles IV through XVIII, except as specified
in § 195-76 or in the case of lane lots. Lane lots may be permitted as an
exception to the minimum lot width requirement at the building setback line
as defined in § 195-9. A lane lot is a parcel of land which does not have the
required minimum lot width at the minimum front yard line but has direct
access to a public street through a narrow strip of land which is part of the
same lot. The lot lines of the narrow portion of the lot (the lane) shall be
parallel or nearly parallel.
(5) The side yards shall aggregate at least 40% of the total lot width or
meet the normal requirements of the district in which the lot is
located, but in no case shall either side yard be less than 12 feet.
B. This exception shall not apply to any two or more vacant contiguous lots
in a single ownership as of or subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter. These lots shall be consolidated to minimize the nonconformity.
A. Lane lot may serve one detached dwelling only.
B. Each lot must have a separate lane.
C. Lane lots may not be used in a subdivision of lots containing any new
streets.
D. If the proposed lane lot is not large enough to further subdivide under
the zoning requirements at the time the subdivision is proposed, then
the lane shall have a minimum width of 25 feet at the street line of a
public street and shall not narrow to a lesser dimension. However, if the
proposed lot is large enough to further subdivide under the zoning
requirements at the time the subdivision is proposed, then the
minimum lane width shall be 50 feet at the street line and shall not
narrow to a lesser dimension; provided, however, that should the
property owner agree by plan notation and recorded document that the
lot will not be further subdivided, then a lane of 25 feet in width shall be
sufficient.
E. The area of the lane shall not be included in the calculation of the
minimum lot area.
F. Only one tier of lane lots will be permitted on a tract.
G. The front yard setback for a lane lot shall be a distance equal to the
front yard requirements for the district in which the lot is located and
shall be measured from the point where the lot first obtains a minimum
lot width measurement.
H. The length of the lane shall be limited to a maximum length of 500 feet.
I. The improvement requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be met.
§ 195-76 WARWICK CODE § 195-77
187:910
§ 195-78. Yard requirement exceptions.
No portion of a building or structure shall be built within the minimum
depth of front, side or rear yards as specified in the dimensional
requirements for each zoning district (Articles IV through XVIII), except
in accordance with this section. A proposed building may be constructed
nearer to the street than a required minimum front yard depth under the
following conditions:
§ 195-79. Off-street parking regulations.
J. Lane lots of three or more will not be permitted if a public street could
feasibly be constructed.
A. There shall be existing buildings on the lots on either side of lot which
would contain the proposed building.
B. The proposed building would front on the same side of the same street
in the same block as the existing buildings on lots on either side.
C. The existing buildings on the lots on either side would be no greater
than 50 feet from the proposed building.
D. The proposed building may be constructed at a front yard depth that is
not less than the average of the front yard setbacks of the existing
buildings on the lots on either side.
E. In no case shall the front yard of the proposed building be less than 20
feet.
F. Ground-story bays, porches, and chimney flues may project into
required yard areas no more than three feet. Such projections into the
required minimum yard areas shall not occupy more than 1/3 the length
of the building wall. Cornices and gutters may project no more than two
feet over a required yard. Fire escapes may be permitted in accordance
with this section in side or rear yards only.
G. The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences, hedges or walls
less than six feet high above the natural grade in the required yard, nor
to terraces, steps, decks, or uncovered patios, except that no such
uncovered patio or deck may be built or extend more than 50% within
the minimum depth of side or rear yards as specified in Articles IV
through XVIII.
A. Ingress and egress for nonresidential uses shall be designated so that
vehicles shall not be required to back out onto a street or another lot.
Whenever possible, ingress and egress for residential uses shall be
designed so that vehicles shall not be required to back out onto a street
or another lot.
B. Parking areas for all uses except residences shall be designed to permit
each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided
§ 195-77 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-79
187:911
for without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle. Wherever
possible, parking areas for residential uses shall be designed to permit
each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
C. Structures and uses in existence at the date of the adoption of this
chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this section so long
as the kind or extent of use is not changed, provided that any parking
facility now serving such structures or uses shall not, in the future, be
reduced below such requirements.
D. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or a change or extension
of a use which increases the parking requirements according to the
standards of this chapter, the total additional parking required for the
alteration, change or extension shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of that section.
E. No parking area shall be used for any use that interferes with its
availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
F. All required facilities shall be provided and maintained so long as the
use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street parking
facilities shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision,
except upon the approval of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board for reason of diminution in floor area, seating area, number of
employees or change in other factors controlling the regulation of the
number of parking spaces.
G. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common
parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum of the
spaces required for each use individually. However, the number of
spaces required in a common parking facility may be reduced below
this total by special exception if it can be demonstrated to the Zoning
Hearing Board that the hours or days of peak parking needed for the
use are so different that a lower total will provide adequately for all
uses served by the common parking facility. The uses utilizing the
common parking facility shall be located on the same parcel or shall be
located on contiguous parcels, but in no event shall the common
parking area be located on the opposite side of an arterial or collector
street. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
H. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
appropriate use regulations of § 195-16. For any use where parking
provisions are not specifically listed in § 195-16, the number of parking
spaces required shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer.
I. All areas for the loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles for servicing of establishments and/or shops by refuse
collection, fuel, or their service vehicles, shall have adequate and
§ 195-79 WARWICK CODE § 195-79
187:912
unobstructed access from a street, service driveway, or alley and shall
be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise
interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities, or
pedestrian ways or backing out onto a street.
J. Maintenance of parking areas. For parking spaces of three or more
vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including
driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other suitable
material, and drained to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer to
the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion, or excessive water flow
across streets or adjoining property. All parking lots for commercial
purposes shall be paved in accordance with the standards within
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development. All off-street parking
spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their location. Failure to keep
parking areas in satisfactory condition, i.e., from holes, clearly
delineated, or properly graded, shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.
K. Off-street loading. Off-street parking requirements as specified herein
shall be provided on any lot on which a building exceeding 6,000 square
feet of gross floor area for business, industry, or otherwise indicated is
hereafter erected.
(1) Every retail store, shopping center, or industrial use exceeding
6,000 square feet shall have at least one off-street loading space.
Where there is an aggregate gross floor area of 20,000 square feet
or more arranged, intended, or designed for such use, there shall
be provided off-street truck loading or unloading berths in
accordance with the following table:
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross
Floor Area Devoted to Each Use
Required Number of
Berths
6,000 up to 19,999 1
20,000 up to 79,999 2
80,000 up to 127,999 3
128,000 up to 191,999 4
192,000 up to 255,999 5
256,000 up to 319,999 6
320,000 up to 391,999 7
For each additional 72,000 square
feet
1 additional berth
(2) Every school, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, funeral
home, multifamily/apartment building of 20 units or more, office
building, eating place, hotel, sports arena, nursing home, hospital,
or life/full-care facility exceeding 6,000 square feet shall have at
least one off-street loading space. Where there is an aggregate
gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or more, arranged, intended
§ 195-79 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-79
187:913
or designed for such use, there shall be provided off-street truck
loading and unloading berths in accordance with the following
table:
Square Feet of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area Devoted to
Each Use Required Number of Berths
30,000 up to 44,999 1
45,000 up to 119,999 2
120,000 up to 197,999 3
198,000 up to 290,999 4
291,000 up to 389,999 5
390,000 up to 488,999 6
489,000 up to 587,999 7
588,000 up to 689,999 8
For each additional 105,000
square feet
1 additional berth
L. Required off-street parking of business vehicles.
(1) In addition to off-street parking spaces required by this section, and
the specific use regulations of § 195-16, all uses shall be provided
with adequate parking spaces for all vehicles used for business
purposes by the tenants and/or owners of the foregoing uses.
(2) For safety purposes, these parking spaces shall be adjacent to the
buildings in a location designated by the Township Board of
Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Township Planning
Commission.
(3) If the foregoing uses are adjacent to a residential use or district,
the parking spaces for business vehicles shall be on a side of the
building away from the residential use or district.
(4) In no case shall business vehicles related to the foregoing uses be
parked for more than one hour closer than 60 feet to the front of
the property.
(5) Business and commercial vehicles, trailers and vehicles awaiting
repair shall be screened from view, when parked overnight, by
parking in a garage or by screening consisting of dense plantings
or opaque wooden fencing when the number of vehicles exceeds
two or when any vehicle exceeds 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight.
(6) No business vehicles which present danger to the health, safety
and welfare of the public shall be parked overnight in residential
areas. Additionally, no business vehicles containing explosives, bulk
§ 195-79 WARWICK CODE § 195-79
187:914
§ 195-80. Reduction of nonresidential parking requirements.
In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces
than is actually required to serve the needs of nonresidential uses, the
Board of Supervisors, after consulting with the Planning Commission and
Township Engineer, may permit a conditional reduction of parking space if
the following conditions are satisfied:
§ 195-81. Street access.
For all nonresidential uses, access to roads shall be at least 200 feet from
the intersection of any street lines.
inflammables or other potentially dangerous materials shall be
parked overnight in residential areas.
A. This conditional reduction of parking space shall apply to any permitted
institutional, commercial or industrial uses.
B. The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land development
plan, must designate sufficient space to meet the parking requirements
of this chapter. The plan shall also illustrate the layout for the total
number of parking spaces.
C. The conditional reduction may provide for the establishment of not less
than 80% of the required number of parking spaces, as specified in this
chapter. This initial phase of the parking provision shall be clearly
indicated on the plan.
D. The balance of the parking area conditionally reserved shall not include
areas for required buffer yards, setbacks or areas which would
otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical
characteristics of the land or other requirements of this chapter. This
parking area which is reserved shall be located and have
characteristics so as to provide amenable open space should it be
determined the additional parking spaces are not required. The
developer shall provide a landscaping plan for the reserved area with
the land development plan.
E. The developer shall enter into a written agreement with the Board of
Supervisors providing for the installation of the reserved parking areas
upon recommendation and review by the Township Engineer at any
time after the issuance of the last occupancy permit. The additional
parking spaces shall be provided at the developer's or owner's expense
should it be determined by the Township that the required number of
parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the need of the particular land
development.
F. Land which has been determined and designated by the Board of
Supervisors to remain as open space rather than as required parking
shall not be used to provide parking spaces for any addition or
expansion but shall remain as open space.
§ 195-79 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-81
187:915

ARTICLE XXI
Nonconformities
§ 195-82. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR LOT — A structure or lot, or part
of a structure or lot, which does not comply with the applicable area,
dimensional, parking, buffer, height, environmental or other provisions of
this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure or lot lawfully existed prior to enactment of such ordinance or
amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs. Nonconforming lots are also governed by § 195-76 of
this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment.
§ 195-83. Buildings under construction.
A building for which a valid building permit has been issued and is actually
under construction to the extent of completion of footings may be completed
as a nonconforming use. Buildings for which no permit has been issued or
for which the footings have not been completed at the time of passage of
this chapter shall be built in conformity with its requirements.
§ 195-84. Change of use.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use only under all of the following conditions:
A. Such change shall be permitted only as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot reasonably
be changed to a permitted use.
C. The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming use,
with respect to:
(1) Traffic generation and congestion including truck, passenger car,
and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare, or
vibration.
(3) Storage and waste disposal.
§ 195-82 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-84
187:917
§ 195-85. Discontinuation or abandonment.
No nonconforming use which has been abandoned or discontinued shall be
resumed. For purposes of this section, cessation of use for the period of one
year shall raise a presumption of abandonment or discontinuance, and no
use which has ceased for one year shall be resumed except upon special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall only be given when
the Board is satisfied that the applicant has overcome the presumption of
abandonment or discontinuance.
§ 195-86. Extension of nonconformity.
§ 195-87. Destruction of building.
A nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to time
or neglect) may be reconstructed and used for the nonconforming use,
(4) Appearance and aesthetics.
A. A structure that does not conform with the dimensional, area, parking,
buffer, environmental and all other requirements of the district in this
chapter may be extended only if the extension meets all of the
requirements of this chapter. Such a structure may be extended by right
along the building lines of the existing nonconformity in keeping with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be
extended throughout the building and any lawful nonconforming
building or any building of which a lawful nonconforming use is made
may be extended upon the lot occupied by such buildings and held in
single and separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter,
provided that the area of the building or structure in which the use is
located shall not be increased by more than a total of 25% of the area of
such building existing on the date it first became a lawful
nonconforming building or a building of which a lawful nonconforming
use is made, and provided, further, that any structural alteration,
extension or addition shall conform to all the height, area, width, yard
and coverage requirements for the district in which it is located. A
nonconforming use conducted mostly out of doors shall not be
increased to occupy more than an additional 25% of the square footage
actively devoted to the nonconforming use on the date the use first
became nonconforming, provided that the expansion shall comply with
applicable area and dimensional requirements of this chapter.
C. Permission to extend a nonconforming use as described in this article
shall not be construed to mean that a new use or uses may be
established. A nonconforming use shall be prohibited from encroaching
on another parcel of land subsequently added to the original parcel. A
structure which is nonconforming in terms of height shall not be
extended to increase the height.
§ 195-84 WARWICK CODE § 195-87
187:918
provided that the reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area
and volume the building destroyed and that the building reconstruction
shall be started within one year from the date the building was destroyed
and shall be carried on without interruption and completed within two
years.
§ 195-88. Condemnation of building.
A nonconforming building which has been legally condemned shall not be
rebuilt or used except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-89. Signs.
Any sign existing at the time of passage of this chapter and which was
legally erected that does not conform with these regulations shall be
considered a nonconforming sign. Owners of property upon which a
nonconforming sign exists shall make application for a registration of the
nonconformity with the Zoning Officer for a determination as to the sign
nonconformity. Failure of an owner to comply with this provision shall be a
forfeiture of the right to use the nonconforming sign or to transfer its use to
a subsequent owner or tenant of the property.
§ 195-90. Identification and registration.
A. Upon request by the Board of Supervisors or a property owner who
desires to register a nonconforming use, structure or lot, and
subsequent to the provision by the property owner of documentation
and verification of the proposed nonconforming use, structure or lot,
the Zoning Officer shall identify and register a nonconforming use,
structure or lot as follows:
(1) The location and description of the use and/or structure, including
county parcel number.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the nonconforming use or
structure.
(3) The date when the nonconforming use or structure came into
existence.
(4) A description of the nonconforming use or structure under one or
more of, but not limited to, the following classifications in regard to
the type, extent and volume of said nonconformity:
(a) Nonconforming uses of open land (for example, junkyards or
used car lots).
(b) Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings (for example, a
funeral home utilizing an old residence in a residential
district).
§ 195-87 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-90
187:919
(c) Nonconforming uses of buildings usable only for
nonconforming purposes (for example, a gasoline service
station in a residential district).
(d) Buildings that are nonconforming only so far as they violate
dimensional regulations.
B. The failure to register a nonconforming use for a period of two years
shall be evidence of abandonment of the same.
C. The Zoning Officer at any time may challenge any registration by
ordering the same stricken or amended in any respect, which order
shall be conclusive and shall determine the nature and scope of the
nonconforming use or structure unless appealed within 30 days of
receipt of the order to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. The registration of a nonconforming use or structure shall be prima
facie evidence of the validity of the nonconforming use or structure
until such time as the Zoning Officer challenges the registration.
§ 195-90 WARWICK CODE § 195-90
187:920
ARTICLE XXII
Signs
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
§ 195-91. Scope and applicability.
§ 195-92. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign made of any cloth, bunting, plastic,
paper, or similar nonrigid material attached to any structure, staff, pole,
rope, wire, or framing which is anchored on two or more edges or at all four
corners.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLES — An area of unobstructed vision at
intersections, defined by horizontal and vertical lines of sight between
points at a given distance from the intersection. Intersections may be
comprised of two streets, two driveways or a street and a driveway.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC) — A sign, or portion thereof,
that displays animated images, moving video images, graphics, or scrolling
messages electronic images, static images, static graphics or static
pictures, with or without textual information. EMCs are capable of change
or alteration by electronic means on a fixed display screen composed of
a series of lights including light emitting diodes (LED's), OLEDs LCDs,
DLPs, plasma, fiber optics, lights bulbs, or other illumination devices within
the area where the message is displayed. EMCs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays.
EMCs include signs that utilize technology not listed in this definition and
shall include similar technology which may be developed in the future, or
the use of which may become widespread in the future.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign permanently supported by an upright or
uprights which are permanently anchored into the ground. This may have
two display sides.
NONRESIDENTIAL USES — All uses listed in § 195-16C, D, E, F, G, and H
of this chapter.
A. In all zoning districts, signs shall be erected, altered, maintained, used,
removed or moved in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
any other applicable ordinances and regulations.
B. Signs existing at the time of the passage of this chapter, which were
legally erected, and which do not conform with the requirements of the
ordinance shall be considered nonconforming signs and, once removed,
shall be replaced only with conforming signs. Nonconforming signs may
be repainted or repaired (including lighting), providing such repainted
or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign;
wording may also be changed.
§ 195-91 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-92
187:921
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS — The VC Village Center District,
the VC2 Village Center District, C1 Local Commercial District, the C2
Highway Commercial District, the C3 Commercial/Multifamily District, the
O Office District, and the L1 Limited Industrial District.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Also known as an outdoor advertising sign or
billboard. A type of sign which directs attention to a business, industry,
profession, message commodity, service, or entertainment not sold or
offered on the premises where the sign is located.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC AND HIGHWAY SIGN — Official highway route number
signs, street name signs, directional signs, and other traffic signs erected
and maintained on public highways and roads by the Commonwealth, the
County, the Township or, in the case of private streets, the owner of the
road, in the interest of public safety or for the regulations of traffic.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign, including vehicular signs, not permanently
attached to the ground or a building.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is dependent on a building for support and
which projects more than 12 inches from the building, including an awning
sign. Whenever a canopy or awning is affixed with any lettering, design,
symbol, or made from any special material that is intended to be or by its
nature is an identification of a business, the applicable measurable area of
the awning or canopy is a projecting sign.
RESIDENTIAL USES — Those uses listed in § 195-16A and B of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS — The RA Residential Agricultural,
RG Residential Agricultural, R1 Residential District, R1a Residential-
Agricultural District; R-2 Residential District, RR Residential Agricultural
District, MF-1 Multifamily Residential District; and the MF-2 Multifamily
Residential District.
ROOF SIGN — A sign on or above the roof or the eaves of a building.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses
words, graphics, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for the
purpose of communicating a message which is displayed in any manner
whatsoever so that it can be seen from the right-of-way of any public or
private road or from a neighboring property. Sign includes the sign faces as
well as any sign supporting structure.
WALL or PARALLEL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to the face of a
structure and not projecting above the eaves of the structure nor more than
12 inches from the plane or facade of the structure.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign mounted or painted on a window or inside a
structure such that it can be seen through the window.
§ 195-93. Sign height and area.
A. Sign area.
§ 195-92 WARWICK CODE § 195-93
187:922
§ 195-94. General regulations.
The following regulations shall govern the placement, erection, and
maintenance of signs:
(1) The area of a sign shall include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing which are
incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual
letters or symbols attached to or painted on a building, wall or
window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest
rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, logos, and symbols.
The computation of area of the sign shall include decorative trim in
addition to the portion devoted to the message and lettering.
(2) For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, structure, or
natural element, the area shall be considered to include all
lettering, working, accompanying designs, or symbols together
with any backing associated with the sign.
(3) In computing the size of a double-faced sign where the sides are
parallel to each other, only one side shall be considered, provided
the size of both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by
the two faces of the double-faced sign is greater than 45° then both
sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
B. Sign height.
(1) The height of the sign shall be measured from the elevation of the
sidewalk or from grade to the highest point above grade to the top
of the sign.
(2) For projecting and parallel signs, the maximum height shall be
determined by its placement on the building.
(3) For all residential districts and all residential uses, projecting and
parallel signs, or portions of such signs, shall not be located at a
height greater than the ceiling/floor division of the first story of the
building.
(4) For all residential districts and all residential uses, freestanding
signs shall not exceed six feet in height from grade to the highest
point above grade to the top of the sign.
(5) For nonresidential zoning districts and all nonresidential uses
freestanding signs may not exceed 12 feet in height from grade to
the highest point above grade at the top of the sign.
A. Official traffic and highway signs. All official traffic and highway signs
shall be of the size and construction specified in § 163-42 of Chapter
163, Subdivision and Land Development and in the Commonwealth of
§ 195-93 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-94
187:923
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Regulations governing the
design, location and operation of all official traffic signs, signals and
markings on and along highways within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, which regulations will control the erection and
replacement of the same.
B. Unless the regulations of this article specifically state that a sign may
be placed off the lot or premises to which it relates, signs may be placed
only on the same lot with the use or establishment to which the sign
relates.
C. No sign shall be placed in such a position that will cause danger to
traffic on a street or entering a street by obscuring the view, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic
control device. No sign shall be placed in a clear sight triangle.
D. No part of any sign shall be erected or maintained within the ultimate
right-of-way of any state or Township public road except for official
street signs.
E. In no case, except for official traffic and highway signs shall any sign be
erected so that it:
(1) Lies within 10 feet of or projects over a point within 10 feet of the
legal right-of-way of any street or is within 10 feet of the shoulder
or curb, whichever is greater;
(2) Lies within the clear sight triangle;
(3) Obscures a motorist's view of traffic signals, stop signs or other
warning devices as viewed from any distance of 500 feet along
established thoroughfares;
(4) Obscures a motorist's view of roadway or intersections ahead as
viewed from a distance of 500 feet along established
thoroughfares;
(5) Limits a pedestrian's view of vehicular traffic to less than 500 feet
while he stands inside the curbline at an intersection or other
established crossing point;
(6) Lies within a distance of 10 feet from any property line;
(7) Lies within a parking space or fire lane;
(8) Blocks the movement of pedestrians traveling on public
thoroughfares;
(9) Blocks the entrance, exit, fire escape, or fire lane to a building;
(10) Projects over a sidewalk, street, driveway or pedestrian path; or
contains flashing, rotating or revolving type lights with the
exception of barber poles which are used for a barber shop use;
§ 195-94 WARWICK CODE § 195-94
187:924
§ 195-95. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
(11) Uses the words "stop," "look," "danger," or any other word or
character which attempts or appears to attempt to direct the
movement of traffic or which interferes with or resembles any
official traffic sign, signal or device;
(12) Uses red, green or yellow lights within 75 feet of a public right-ofway
or within 300 feet of a traffic control device signal, whichever
is greater.
F. All signs shall meet the design and construction requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania. All electrical signs shall be
manufactured in accordance with the underwriter's laboratories'
specifications and shall bear the laboratory label.
A. Signs of a flashing, rotating, or revolving type, with the exception of
barber poles.
B. Novelty signs, including but not limited to objects (i.e., tires,
automobiles, food products, etc.) pennants, balloons, bulletin boards,
animated signs, and inflatable signs.
C. Roof signs: Any sign placed above or at the same level as the roofline of
a flat roof or the lowest point of eaves of a sloping or mansard roof.
D. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound, or odor.
E. No electronic message centers shall be permitted in the area of the
Township identified in Subdivision and Land Development § 163-51.3 as
the Corridor Overlay District.
F. Electronic message centers with animated, scrolling, or moving video
or graphics, or flashing lights shall be prohibited in all zoning districts
within the Township.
G. Any sign suspended between poles and lighted by a series of lights.
H. Any sign which imitates any official traffic sign, signal or device.
I. Any vehicle or trailer, which is not regularly and customarily used to
transport persons and property for the business it advertises, which is
parked on a public right-of-way or on public or private property so as to
be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or
located thereon any sign or advertising device for the primary purpose
of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business
or activity located on the same or on another property.
J. Any sign erected on a tree, streetlight, street sign, or utility pole, or
painted or drawn on a rock or other natural feature.
§ 195-94 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-95
187:925
§ 195-96. Sign illumination.
Any illuminated sign, whether illuminated from within or by exterior light,
shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 195-97. Regulations for temporary and permanent signs in
specific zoning districts.
In addition to the regulations set forth in §§ 195-93, 195-94 and 195-96
the following regulations shall govern the erection and maintenance of
temporary and permanent signs, depending on their classification:
K. Any sign suspended between poles which is either a pennant which
blows in the wind or a spinner which spins in the wind.
L. A series of lights or lighting outlining the edges of commercial buildings
or commercial building elements shall be considered a sign under the
terms of this article and shall be prohibited.
M. Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance which were in effect when the sign was erected.
N. Signs containing information on which it states or implies that a
property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the
provisions of the Warwick Township Zoning Ordinance in the Zoning
District on which the property to which the sign relates is located.
A. There shall be no illumination of any sign within 200 feet of an occupied
dwelling in a residential zoning district.
B. Indirectly illuminated signs shall shine with white or clear light only.
Fully shielded fixtures shall be used, and the source of illumination shall
not be visible from any adjoining property or roadway. The planting of
vegetation, while a desirable additional means to reduce the impact of
the light source, shall not be considered as a replacement for this
requirement.
C. The internal light source of directly illuminated signs shall be a white or
clear light only.
D. Illuminated signs with any form of exposed neon or other tubes are
prohibited.
E. No red, green or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300
feet of a traffic signal.
F. Signs which contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing,
intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited.
A. Temporary signs. All temporary signs, except those described in
§§ 195-97.1B and § 195-97A(2)(i), may be erected only after receipt of a
permit from the Township. Permit fees are established by the Township
Board of Supervisors. The permit will be issued only after the
§ 195-95 WARWICK CODE § 195-97
187:926
regulations outlined in Article XXII are met to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer.
(1) Temporary signs in residential zoning districts or on properties
with residential uses in nonresidential zoning districts.
(a) No temporary sign shall be displayed for a period exceeding 30
days or more than five days after the cessation of the event or
occurrence being advertised, whichever is less.
(b) There shall be no more than two temporary signs in any
calendar year.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this § 195-97A(1), temporary
signs in residential districts shall not exceed six square feet in
size.
(d) Signs indicating the location and direction of premises
available for or in process of development and having inscribed
thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent
may be erected and maintained, provided that:
[1] The area of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet
for more than 10 dwelling units, and six square feet for
projects with less than 10 dwelling units.
[2] Not more than two such signs shall be erected on
premises.
[3] Such signs shall be removed within 20 days after the last
structure has been occupied.
(2) Temporary signs in nonresidential zoning districts with
nonresidential uses.
(a) No temporary sign may be displayed for a period exceeding 30
days.
(b) No property shall have more than two temporary signs in any
calendar year. No temporary sign may use flashing or revolving
lights.
(c) Signs shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(d) Signs may not be displayed earlier than 30 days before the
function for which they are erected. The signs must be
removed within five days after the function for which they were
displayed, but in no case later than 30 days from the day they
were displayed.
(e) No more than one sign shall be displayed for each 1,000 feet of
road frontage.
§ 195-97 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-97
187:927
(f) Banners shall not exceed eight feet in length and three feet in
width.
(g) Bunting and banner signs are permitted to announce the
opening of a new business or industry provided that such signs
do not extend into, or over, a public right-of-way. All such signs
must be removed after seven days of the opening day of the
first day of business.
(h) Not more than one such sign shall be placed on any property
held in single and separate ownership, unless such property
fronts upon more than one public street, in which event, one
such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
B. Permanent signs.
(1) In residential zoning districts, on properties with residential uses,
and on properties with agricultural uses, signs may be erected and
maintained provided that:
(a) The area of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet.
(b) Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, there shall only
be one sign per property.
(c) Freestanding signs for residential developments or apartment
buildings containing more than 10 units shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations:
[1] Number: One sign per street frontage.
[2] Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 15 square
feet per sign face.
[3] Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
[4] Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 195-96.
(2) Signs for nonresidential uses on individual lots in nonresidential
districts, signs for C — Institutional uses on individual lots in
residential zoning districts, signs advertising nonresidential uses
on individual lots in nonresidential districts and signs for C —
Institutional uses on individual lots in residential zoning districts
(except the VC and VC2 zoning districts), may be permitted in
accordance with one of the options listed below in subsections
B(2)(a) through (e). Signs for nonresidential uses on individual lots
in VC and VC2 Zoning Districts are regulated in §§ 195-97B(2) and
195-97B(4), respectively. [Amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-1]
(a) One wall or window sign up to 24 square feet.
§ 195-97 WARWICK CODE § 195-97
187:928
(b) Two wall or window signs mounted on separate walls, one up to
20 square feet and one up to 16 square feet.
(c) One freestanding sign up to 24 square feet, plus one of the
following:
[1] One window sign consisting of individual letters or
symbols not to exceed 40% of window area; or
[2] One projecting sign extending not more than five feet from
the wall up to eight square feet in size; or
[3] One wall or window sign up to 10 square feet.
(d) If the building fronts upon more than one street, one additional
sign in conformity with either Subsection B(2)(c)[1], [2] or [3]
above may be permitted on each street frontage from which
access is taken.
(e) Two freestanding signs, one up to 12 square feet, and one up to
eight square feet on separate poles, plus one of the following:
[1] One window sign consisting of individual letters or
symbols not to exceed 40% of window area; or
[2] One projecting sign extending not more than five feet from
the wall up to eight square feet in size; or
[3] One wall sign up to 10 square feet.
(f) If the building fronts on more than one street, one additional
sign in conformity with either Subsection B(2)(e)[1], [2], or [3]
above may be permitted on each street frontage from which
access is taken.
(g) For multioccupant uses, such uses shall comply with
Subsection B(3) below.
(3) Signs for multiple nonresidential uses as a single approved land
development in a nonresidential zoning district (other than the VC
or VC2 Zoning Districts), either on one lot or multiple lots making
the land development. Signs advertising multiple nonresidential
uses as a single approved land development, either on one lot or
multiple lots making one land development other than the VC or
VC2 Zoning Districts, including but not limited to those uses in
shopping centers, industrial parks and office parks, may be erected
in accordance with the following:
(a) One freestanding sign which identifies the multiple occupancy,
including but not limited to, shopping center, industrial park or
office park and may serve as a directory sign for uses in the
development in which it may be erected. No additional
directory sign may be erected. Such sign shall not exceed 40
§ 195-97 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-97
187:929
square feet per side and shall only identify the name of the
center or park and/or the names of the various businesses or
firms located within such center or park. Not more than one
such sign shall be erected on any property held in single and
separate ownership, unless such premises fronts upon more
than one street, in which event one such sign may be erected
on each street frontage from which access is taken.
(b) One sign which shall be limited to the name of the firm,
building, or business may be erected on each individual use in
accordance with one of the following:
[1] Either one window sign consisting of individual letters or
symbols not to exceed 40% of the window area, for all such
signs; or
[2] One projecting sign extending not more than five feet from
the wall up to 10 square feet in size; or
[3] One wall sign up to 12 square feet.
[4] Individual uses in industrial parks (use H-13) may have
signage in accordance with § 195-97(B)(2).
(4) Signs in VC or VC2 Zoning Districts.
(a) For properties with one use on an individual property, signs
shall be permitted in accordance with § 195-97(B)(2).
(b) For properties in the VC or VC2 Zoning Districts with more
than one principal use in separate structures on one property,
the following regulations shall apply:
[1] One freestanding sign which identifies the development
and may serve as a directory sign for uses in the
development. No additional directory signs may be
erected regardless of number of street frontages. Such
sign shall not exceed 40 square feet per side and shall only
identify the name of the center or development and/or
names of the various businesses or firms located within
such center or development.
[2] One freestanding sign up to 12 square feet may be erected
for each principal use which exceeds 20,000 square feet in
leasable space.
[3] One wall sign up to 16 square feet, or one projecting sign
extending not more than five feet from the wall up to 10
square feet, or one window sign consisting of letters or
symbols not to exceed 40% of the window area for all such
signs may be erected for each principal use.
§ 195-97 WARWICK CODE § 195-97
187:930
§ 195-97.1. Permits required.
[4] If the building fronts on two or more streets, a maximum of
one additional sign in conformity with Subsection
B(4)(b)[3] shall be permitted.
(5) Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising signs shall
be erected in compliance with use G-20 [§ 195.16G(20)].
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, or alter any
sign not included as an "exempt" sign under in this chapter without first
filing with the Zoning Officer an application in writing and obtaining a
formal permit. Normal sign maintenance, which only includes cleaning
and repairs, shall not require a permit.
(1) Application form. An application for a permit for the erection,
construction, or alteration of a sign shall be submitted on a form
prescribed by the Township. The application shall contain the full
names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the premises
where a sign is to be erected, constructed or altered, and the
person or firm engaged to erect, construct, or alter the sign. The
application shall contain the affidavits of the owner of the premises
authorizing the application and a description of the work to be
completed.
(2) Plans to accompany application. Applications for permits for the
erection, construction, or alteration of signs shall be accompanied
by drawings of the proposed work showing the structural details of
the sign, plot plans depicting the location of proposed signs, and
other details the Zoning Officer may require.
(3) Fees. All applicants for permits for the erection, construction, or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making such application, pay
a fee to the Township in accordance with the effective fee schedule
adopted by annual resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Exempted signs. The following signs do not require a permit, provided
the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met:
(1) Governmental flags or insignias.
(2) Legal notices.
(3) TODS sign along a state highway. All TODS signs shall comply with
Section 1.7 of PennDOT's Traffic Engineering & Operations Manual
- Tourist Oriented Directional Signing (TODS) Policy. A TODS sign
installed along a state highway shall not require a sign permit. The
Township shall not be responsible for the cost, installation,
maintenance, repair, or replacement of any TODS sign. Any TODS
sign that becomes noncompliant with the PennDOT Manual shall be
immediately brought into compliance or removed.
§ 195-97 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-97.1
187:931
§ 195-97.2. Maintenance.
All signs permitted in this article must be constructed of durable materials
and must be kept in good condition and repair. If any sign is allowed to
become dilapidated, then the owner of the property upon which the sign
is located shall be notified by the Zoning Officer to restore said sign to
good and proper condition within 30 days. The Zoning Officer shall make
the determination as to whether the sign has become dilapidated and,
also, whether said sign has been restored to good and proper condition.
Should the landowner object to the Zoning Officer's determination, then
said landowner shall appeal the Zoning Officer's decision to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 30 days after receiving notice from the Zoning Officer.
Failure of a landowner to either rectify the condition of the sign within 30
days or to appeal the decision of the Zoning Officer to the Zoning Hearing
Board within 30 days shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(4) Internal traffic directional signs. All internal traffic directional
signs must comply with all of the following regulations:
(a) Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area.
(b) Must not interfere with state or local road traffic signs.
(c) Must not be erected in the right-of-way of any street or road.
(5) Official traffic signs installed or authorized by a government unit.
(6) Temporary signs not exceeding six square feet offering the sale or
lease of an individual lot.
§ 195-97.1 WARWICK CODE § 195-97.2
187:932
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 195-98. Establishment and membership.
§ 195-99. Organization.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary for its membership annually. For the conduct of any hearing and
the taking of any action, the quorum shall not be less than a majority of all
members of the Board, but where two members are disqualified to act in
a particular matter, the remaining member may act for the Board. Within
the limits of funds appropriated by the Township Board of Supervisors, the
Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal
counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. The Board
shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of its
activities to the Township Board of Supervisors once a year or as requested
by the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members may be appointed to the
Zoning Hearing Board by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-100. Compensation.
The Zoning Hearing Board members shall be compensated for each
individual hearing at a fixed rate established by the Board of Supervisors.
If a hearing is continued for any reason for a length of time, it will be
considered as one hearing for compensation purposes. Alternate members
may receive compensation as fixed by the Board of Supervisors when
designated by the Zoning Hearing Board Chairman to sit on the Board as
provided by law.
§ 195-101. Hearings.
The Board shall meet monthly to hear and consider all matters which shall
properly come before it. All such meetings shall be open to the public.
A. A Zoning Hearing Board, consisting of three members appointed by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution for overlapping terms of three years
each, is established for the purpose of carrying out the functions of a
Zoning Hearing Board as provided by law. Members of the Board shall
be residents of the Township, except that no elected official or members
of the Planning Commission may serve on the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one
resident of the municipality to serve as an alternate member of the
Board. When seated, the alternate member shall have the right to
participate in the proceedings and cast a vote during the proceedings.
The alternate shall hold no other appointed or elective position in the
Township. The Chairperson of the Zoning Hearing Board may seat the
alternate member when, by reason of absence or disqualification of one
or two members of the Zoning Hearing Board, no quorum of permanent
members is reached
§ 195-98 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-101
187:933
Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).226
§ 195-102. Persons entitled to initiate action before Board.
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any person or
municipal official aggrieved or affected by any provision of this chapter or
by any decision, including a notice of violation beginning a civil enforcement
proceeding in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code227 issued by the Zoning Officer in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter or by any interpretation of the provisions of this chapter by the
Zoning Officer or other municipal official. Requests for a variance or special
exception must be filed by the landowner or tenant with the permission of
such landowner.
§ 195-103. Manner of initiating action before Board.
All action before the Board shall be initiated by a written application for
hearing, which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. All applications shall
be made on forms specified by the Board, and no application form shall be
accepted unless the same shall be fully and legibly completed and unless
all exhibits and supplemental material required by the application shall be
attached and until all fees required under this chapter shall have been paid.
§ 195-104. Time limits.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer and all requests for variances shall be filed
within 30 days following the refusal of the Zoning Officer to grant a zoning
permit or building permit. All hearings shall be held within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant agrees to an extension
in writing. Time limits for subsequent hearings shall be in accordance with
MPC Section 908.
§ 195-105. Notice of hearing.
A. Notice of the time and place of all hearings and where materials may be
examined shall be given by mail to the applicant, Zoning Officer and to
all persons who shall own real estate within 300 feet on the same street
and within 150 feet not on the same street as the property which shall
be the subject of the application. Notice of the hearing of any particular
application shall also be given to any person who timely requests the
same in writing, such request to be accompanied by a fee in the sum of
$2.
B. The property which is subject to a hearing shall be posted with notice of
the hearing at least one week prior to the hearing date.
226. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
227. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-101 WARWICK CODE § 195-106
187:934
§ 195-106. Parties to hearing.
The parties to the hearings shall be the municipality, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic or community organizations,
permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have the power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
§ 195-107. Witnesses.
The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board shall have the power
to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
§ 195-108. Representation.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and crossexamine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
§ 195-109. Rules of evidence.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
§ 195-110. Record of proceedings.
The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings, and a
transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material
received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.
§ 195-111. Communications.
The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party
or his representative in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. In addition, the Board
shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or
other materials, excluding the advice from the Board's Solicitor, unless the
parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present. "Board," as used herein, shall include not only
the members but also any hearing officer, secretary, clerk, legal counsel, or
consultant to the Board.
§ 195-112. Decisions.
A. The Board shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called
for, make written findings on the application within 45 days of the last
§ 195-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-112
187:935
§ 195-113. Copies of decisions.
A copy of the final decision or, when no decision is called for, of the findings
shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than
the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name
and address with the Board, not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings
may be examined.
§ 195-114. Appeals to court.
Appeals may be taken to the Court of Common Pleas by any party aggrieved,
filed not later than 30 days after notice of the report or decision of the Board
is issued.
§ 195-115. Appeals from Zoning Officer's determination.
The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has
misinterpreted or misapplied any provisions of this chapter or the Zoning
Map. These appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date the written
decision is rendered by the Zoning Officer, and all appeals shall be on forms
prescribed by the Zoning Hearing Board, accompanied by the requisite fees.
All appeals shall refer to the specific provisions of this chapter involved.
§ 195-116. Substantive and procedural challenge to chapter or
Zoning Map.
hearing. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision
shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions
of this chapter or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion
is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
B. In the event that a hearing officer is used to hear a case, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall render a written decision on the hearing officer's
report within 30 days of the last hearing, although an applicant may
agree to an extension of time from these specified time limits either on
the record or in writing. The municipality, appellant or applicant may
accept the decision of a hearing officer as final.
C. Where the Board has the power to render a decision and the Board or
the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails to render the same within
the period required by this section, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has
agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
A. When a landowner questions the validity of this chapter or the Zoning
Map on substantive grounds, he may present the challenge to the
§ 195-112 WARWICK CODE § 195-116
187:936
§ 195-117. Variances.
Zoning Hearing Board or as a curative amendment to the governing
body following the procedures outlined in § 195-122. Any aggrieved
person who challenges the validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map
must submit the challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Procedural challenges to the validity of this chapter, including
challenges raising questions of defective enactment, shall be reviewed
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Except as provided in § 195-117, relating to variances, § 195-118,
relating to special exceptions, and as otherwise provided by law, the
Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this chapter or the Zoning
Map and in all such challenges to the Board shall take evidence and
make the record thereon. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board
shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all
relevant issues of fact, which shall become part of the record on appeal
to the Court.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board must render a decision within 45 days of the
conclusion of the last hearing.
E. In order that a landowner may be assured in an expeditious manner
that the ordinance or map under which he proposes to build is free from
challenge, he may advance the date from which time any challenge may
be made to this chapter or the Zoning Map by the following procedure:
(1) The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing
his proposed land use or development to the Zoning Officer for a
preliminary opinion as to their compliance with the applicable
zoning ordinance or map. These plans need not meet the required
standards for preliminary, tentative or final approval as long as
they provide a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to their
compliance.
(2) If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the proposed use
or development complies with this chapter or the Zoning Map,
notice thereof shall be published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. The favorable preliminary opinion of the Zoning Officer
shall be deemed as preliminary approval, and that time specified
for initiating action before the Board shall commence upon the
publishing of the second public notice.
F. When a substantive challenge is upheld by the Zoning Hearing Board or
a curative amendment is approved by the governing body, the applicant
has two years from the date of approval to file for subdivision approval
or one year to file for a building permit.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
§ 195-116 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-117
187:937
§ 195-118. Special exceptions.
appellant. The Board may grant a variance, provided that the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter.
C. Life of decision. A variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with this section shall expire one year from the date of the
decision, unless the applicant or owner or successor in interest has
commenced construction within that time. Construction will be deemed
commenced upon the issuance of a building and/or zoning permit for
the approved use.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to approve special
exceptions when this chapter specifically requires the obtaining of such
approval and for no other use or purpose.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception only if it finds
adequate evidence presented by the applicant that the proposed special
exception is duly authorized under provisions of this chapter; that the
application falls within the terms of the specific provisions allowing for
special exceptions; and that the proposed use complies with all other
§ 195-117 WARWICK CODE § 195-118
187:938
§ 195-119. Additional jurisdiction of Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear the following matters:
requirements of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board, in granting
a special exception, may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of
this chapter. The Board shall, among other things, require that any
proposed use and location be:
(1) In accordance with the Township Comprehensive Plan and
consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of this chapter.
(2) In the best interests of the Township and the public welfare.
(3) Suitable for the property in question and designed, constructed,
operated and maintained so as to be in harmony with and
appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity.
(4) In conformance with all other applicable requirements of this
chapter and other Township ordinances.
(5) Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety with
adequate access arrangements to protect streets from undue
congestion and hazard.
(6) In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land
development practice where applicable.
(7) Suitable in terms of impact on surrounding residential properties
and compatible with adjacent uses.
C. Life of decision. A special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with this section shall expire one year from the
date of the decision, unless the applicant or owner or successor in
interest has commenced construction within that time. Construction
will be deemed commenced upon the issuance of a building and/or
zoning permit for the approved use.
A. Appeals from any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator
concerning the administration of the provisions of the Warwick
Township Floodplain Ordinance.228 [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-5]
B. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinions under Section
916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
C. Appeals from determinations by the Township Engineer or Zoning
Officer for erosion or stormwater management not involving a
subdivision or planned residential development.
228. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-118 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-119
187:939

ARTICLE XXIV
Conditional Uses; Amendments
§ 195-120. Granting of conditional uses by Board of Supervisors.
A conditional use may be granted by the Board of Supervisors, provided that
the express standards and criteria set forth in this chapter are followed.
Requests for such uses will be heard by the Board of Supervisors upon the
filing of a conditional use application, which shall be reviewed under the
following general conditions:
A. Conditional use applications shall be governed by the following:
(1) The landowner shall make a written request to the Board of
Supervisors that it hold a hearing on his application. The request
shall contain a statement reasonably informing the Board of
Supervisors of the matters that are in issue. All applications shall
be made on forms specified by the Board, and no application form
shall be accepted unless the same shall be fully and legibly
completed and unless all exhibits and supplemental material
required by the application shall be attached and until all fees
required under this chapter shall have been paid.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by plans and other material
describing the use or development proposed. Such plans and other
materials shall provide a sufficient basis for evaluating the
applicant's request. Information required by this chapter shall
accompany the application.
(3) The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing pursuant to public
notice upon the request, commencing not later than 60 days after
the request is filed, unless the applicant requests or consents, in
writing, to an extension of time. Hearings shall be conducted in
accordance with the time limits and requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.229
B. The Board of Supervisors shall conduct hearings and make decisions
where this chapter has provided for stated conditional use approval to
be granted or denied by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to express
standards and criteria.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision, or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional
use application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Board. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision
shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based
thereon, together with any reasons therefor. Conclusions based on
any provisions of state or federal law or any ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-120 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-120
187:941
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found.
(2) Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render the decision within
the period required by this subsection or fails to hold the required
hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for
a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or
on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
governing body to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the governing body shall give public notice of the
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as required by the public
notice requirements of this act. If the governing body shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no
decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day
following its date.
C. The applicant for any hearing on a conditional use request before the
governing body shall, at the time, make application and pay a fee in
accordance with the Township Fee Schedule230 adopted by the Board of
Supervisors or as such schedule may be amended from time to time.
D. In considering a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors shall make
findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The Board
shall not approve a conditional use except in conformance with the
conditions and standards outlined in this chapter.
E. The Board of Supervisors shall grant a conditional use only if it finds
adequate evidence that any proposed development submitted will meet
all of the following requirements and standards listed herein for the
proposed use. The Board shall, among other things, require that any
proposed use and location be:
(1) In accordance with the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(2) In the best interests of Warwick Township, the convenience of the
community and the public welfare.
(3) Suitable for the property in question and designed, constructed,
operated and maintained so as to be in harmony with and
appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity.
230. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Township office. See also Ch. 81, Fees.
§ 195-120 WARWICK CODE § 195-120
187:942
§ 195-121. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend this chapter,
including the Zoning Map,231 as provided by law.
§ 195-122. Preparation of amendments.
The Board of Supervisors or, at its request, Township Planning Commission
shall prepare ordinances and amendments to this chapter and the Zoning
Map. In the case of an ordinance or amendment other than one prepared by
the Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit
each such ordinance or amendment to the Township Planning Commission
and provide it an opportunity to submit recommendations.
§ 195-123. Submission to County Planning Commission.
Upon completion and review of ordinances and amendments, the Board of
Supervisors or Township Planning Commission shall submit the proposal to
the County Planning Commission. However, the Board of Supervisors may
(4) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter
and all other Township ordinances.
(5) Suitable in terms of effect on highway traffic and safety, with
adequate access arrangements to protect streets from undue
congestion and hazard.
(6) In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land
development practice, where applicable.
F. The Board of Supervisors may impose reasonable conditions as it deems
appropriate to ensure that any proposed development will secure
substantially the objectives of this chapter.
G. Review by the Planning Commission. The Board of Supervisors will
request an advisory opinion from the Planning Commission on any
application for a conditional use, and the Planning Commission will
submit a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of the public
hearing held by the Board. The Planning Commission may request a
report from the Township Engineer.
H. Life of a decision. A conditional use granted by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with this section shall expire at the end of one year from
the date of the decision, unless the applicant or owner or successor in
interest has commenced construction within that time. Construction
will be deemed commenced upon the issuance of a building and/or
zoning permit for the approved use. Upon a showing by the applicant of
due diligence in proceeding toward land development approval, the
Board of Supervisors may renew the conditional use for an additional
one-year period.
231. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-120 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-123
187:943
not conduct a public hearing on the proposal unless the County Planning
Commission has been given 30 days prior to the hearing to review and
comment on the proposed ordinance or amendment.
§ 195-124. Public hearings.
Before voting on the enactment of any amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the public notice. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing and the full text of the
amendment, or a brief summary setting forth the principal provisions in
reasonable detail shall be included, together with notice of a place in the
Township where a copy of the ordinance or amendment may be examined.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days or less than 14 days
from the date of the hearing. If, after any public hearing held upon an
amendment, the proposed amendment is revised to include land previously
not affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
§ 195-125. Notice of amendment.
A notice of the proposed amendment to the Zoning Map shall be
conspicuously posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the
municipality along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested
citizens. The affected tract shall be posted at least one week prior to the
date of the hearing.
§ 195-126. Copy to be sent to County Planning Commission after
adoption.
A copy of the adopted ordinance or amendment to this chapter or the
Zoning Map shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission within
30 days of adoption.
§ 195-127. Procedure for curative amendments.
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity
of this chapter or any part hereof which prohibits the use or development
of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to
the Board of Supervisors, with a written request for hearing. The Board
of Supervisors shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the
submission of a properly completed request following procedures outlined
in Article VI, Section 609.1, and Article IX, Section 916.1, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 195-123 WARWICK CODE § 195-127
187:944
ARTICLE XXV
Administration
§ 195-128. Duties and powers of Zoning Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he or she is hereby given
the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter by the
issuance of notices of violation. Permits for construction and uses which
are a special exception to the requirements of this chapter shall be
issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits for
construction and uses which require conditional use approval as stated
by the requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon written
order of the Board of Supervisors.
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce this
chapter and he/she shall have the power to:
(1) Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits.
(2) Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, with other Township ordinances and with the laws of
the commonwealth. Permits for construction or uses requiring a
special exception or variance shall be issued only upon order of the
Zoning Hearing Board. Permits requiring approval by the Township
Supervisors shall be issued only after receipt of approval from the
Township Supervisors.
(3) Receive applications for conditional uses, curative amendments
and zoning changes, forwarding requests to the governing body,
Planning Commission and appropriate agencies.
(4) Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and
appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board and to forward these
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action.
(5) Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
(6) Issue enforcement notices pursuant to Section 616.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and order in writing
correction of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
such order issued lawfully by the Zoning Officer, and any person
violating any such order shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(7) Revoke any order or any zoning permit issued under a mistake of
fact, or contrary to the law, or the provisions of this chapter.
(8) Record and file all applications for zoning permits with
accompanying plans and documents.
(9) Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification
of all land in the Township.
§ 195-128 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-128
187:945
§ 195-129. Permit requirements.
A zoning permit and building permit shall be required prior to the erection,
alteration, renovation or demolition of any building, structure or portion
thereof. A zoning permit and a use and occupancy certificate shall be
required prior to the use or change in use and occupancy of a building
or land and prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use. All
permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance; provided, however,
that if work is not commenced within 90 days from the date of the permit,
the permit shall automatically expire and a new permit shall be required
before such work commences. Zoning permits shall also be required for
any disturbance or removal of any natural resource protected in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 195-60, 195-61, and 195-64 of this Code. In
addition to the fines authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code232 for violation of the ordinance, persons failing to obtain a permit for
disturbance or removal of any natural resource shall be required to replace
or restore the resource disturbed or removed. In the event woodlands are
disturbed or trees removed beyond what is permitted under §§ 195-60,
195-61, and 195-64 of this chapter, the person found responsible for the
disturbance of woodlands or removal of trees shall replace the trees in
accordance with the standards of § 195-64 of this chapter. If the required
replacement trees cannot be planted on the property from which they were
removed, the trees shall be planted on public grounds at the direction of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-130. Permit applications.
Applications for permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer on such forms
as may be furnished by the Township. Each application shall contain all
information necessary for such official to ascertain whether the proposed
construction, erection, alteration, use or change of use complies with the
provisions of this chapter. The application shall consist of two parts:
(10) Register nonconforming structures, uses and lots in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXI.
A. A written statement, including:
(1) An identification of the proposed activity or use of the building or
land.
(2) A description of any proposed nonresidential operations in
sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in producing
noise, heat, vibration, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazards, traffic congestion or other safety hazards.
(3) A description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess
noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or
other safety hazards.
232. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-128 WARWICK CODE § 195-130
187:946
(4) Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning
Commission or Board of Supervisors to enable them to determine
the compliance of the proposed development with the terms of this
chapter.
B. Plot plans.
(1) All plot plans for residential additions, residential and
nonresidential accessory uses and accessory structures shall
contain the following criteria:
(a) A plot plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet, 30 feet,
40 feet or 50 feet.
(b) A depiction of the size and location of all proposed additions or
uses.
(c) A depiction of the location of all existing structures.
(d) The North arrow, date, and the signature of the individual
responsible for the plan.
(e) Setback distances between building and property lines and
streets must be shown from all sides of the proposed structure
and/or accessory use.
(f) The location of all drainage and utility easements and street
rights-of-way.
(g) The location, site arrangement and capacity of areas to be used
for motor vehicle access, off-street parking and provisions to
be made for lighting such areas, if applicable.
(h) The location, dimensions and arrangement of open spaces,
yards and buffer yards, including methods to be employed for
screening, where applicable.
(i) For construction or additions or changes in use which will
involve an increased volume of sewage or waste to be disposed
of on site, a certificate of approval from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection shall accompany this
request.
(j) The sketch should indicate any other information that could be
considered pertinent to the application.
(2) All plot plans for new residential construction, new nonresidential
construction and new nonresidential additions shall contain the
following criteria:
(a) A plot plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet, 30 feet,
40 feet or 50 feet, with all elevations established by the builder
or owner's engineer or land survey drawn in accordance with
an accurate boundary line survey.
§ 195-130 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-130
187:947
(b) A depiction of the size and location of all new construction.
(c) A depiction of the location of all existing structures.
(d) Setback distances between buildings, property lines and the
established street rights-of-way and grades from all sides of
the proposed new construction.
(e) The location of property showing the nearest intersecting
street and distance in feet and decimal parts thereof of
property therefrom, together with a North point.
(f) Dimensions, bearings and lot numbers as delineated on the
final recorded subdivision and land development plan or
record.
(g) The plot plan shall indicate whether property is monumented
and the composition of the monuments.
(h) The lot area, in square feet, is to be shown on the plot plan.
(i) The building area, in square feet, is to be shown on the plot
plan.
(j) The location, site arrangement and capacity of areas to be used
for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, and provisions are
to be made for lighting such areas, if applicable.
(k) All drainage and utility easements, restrictions, deedrestricted
open space, utility structures, existing structures,
natural land features and surrounding properties shall be
identified on the plot plan.
(l) Topographical site information, at a contour interval of no less
than two feet, shall be provided.
(m) The location, dimensions and arrangements of open spaces,
yards and buffer yards, including methods to be employed for
screening, where applicable.
(n) The type of zoning is to be marked on the plot plan such as
indicated by the applicable zoning ordinance or map or any
other Township zoning regulation now or hereafter
established.
(o) Proper zoning restriction lines are to be marked on the plan
indicating the front yard, side yards, and rear yard. On a
corner lot, the property front yard setback shall be shown as
provided by this chapter.
(p) Streets, rights-of-way, etc., shall be properly marked with
dimensions according to plans of record.
§ 195-130 WARWICK CODE § 195-130
187:948
(q) Plot plans shall have indicated thereon the proposed method
for discharge of stormwater runoff and surface waters from the
premises, including proposed grading, whether generated by
the improvements themselves or by water passing through the
property from other sources, as referenced in Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, § 163-48A(2).
(r) Plot plans shall show proposed basement, garage and firstfloor
elevations. Additionally, certification must be presented
by the surveyor attesting to the fact that the first-floor
elevation of the structure will be constructed equal to or higher
than the contour shown on the grading plan for the individual
development or individual building lot. The first-floor elevation
shall be set in a proper relationship to the existing elevations
on the surrounding lots.
(s) Plot plans shall be drawn to scale, dated, signed and sealed by
the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the plot
plan. Plot plans should show the name of the person for whom
the same is being prepared. For purposes of identification of
the plot plan, the registered engineer or land surveyor should
show his own method of numbering.
(3) Other circumstances.
(a) In the case of a plot plan being prepared for a Zoning Hearing
Board hearing, the square-foot area shall be shown of all
existing buildings, indicating area on each floor.
(b) In the case of a plot plan prepared for a Zoning Hearing Board
showing a building encroaching in a restricted area, the plot
plan shall show the distance between front, side, or rear
property lines and the encroaching building. All plans should
also delineate all natural features, existing parking, and
accessways, street rights-of-way, other accessory structures or
uses, North arrow, date, and person responsible for the plan.
(c) In the case of a plot plan prepared for a well permit, the plan
shall show all existing buildings, the location of the old and
proposed well, the location of the septic system and drainage
fields and the distance between the proposed well and the
septic system and drain fields.
(d) In the case of a plot plan prepared for an in-ground pool, the
plan shall show all existing buildings, easements, property
lines, the proposed location of the in-ground pool and setbacks
measured from the edge of the coping, existing and proposed
contours, regrading and direction of stormwater runoff.
(e) In the case of a demolition permit, the plot plan need only show
all construction to be demolished and the location and size of
all existing buildings that are to remain on the property.
§ 195-130 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-130
187:949
§ 195-131. Issuance of permit.
No zoning permit, building permit or use and occupancy certificate shall
be issued until the Building Inspector and Zoning Officer have certified
that the proposed building or alteration and the proposed use or activity
of the property comply with all the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, and any other applicable ordinances or
acts of assembly. A zoning permit, building permit or use and occupancy
certificate shall be granted or refused within 30 days after the Zoning
Officer has been notified of the completion of the authorized construction
or alteration or, where no construction or alteration is involved, within 30
days after receipt of written application therefor. Pending completion of
a building or of alterations thereto, a temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued by the Zoning Officer for the use of a part or all of the
building, provided that such temporary occupancy or use would not tend to
in any way jeopardize life or property. No zoning permit for any new use
or construction which will involve the on-site disposal of sewage or waste
and no zoning permit for a change in use or an alteration which will result
in an increased volume of sewage or waste to be disposed of on the site
shall be issued until a certificate of approval has been issued by the Bucks
County Department of Health. No zoning permit or use and occupancy
permit which will change the volume or velocity of stormwater leaving the
site, or which alters the points of discharge of stormwater from the site will
be issued unless and until the applicant demonstrates compliance with the
stormwater management regulations set forth in Chapters 157 and 163 of
this Code.
§ 195-132. Fees.
Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with the Township Fee
Schedule as adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors, and all
such fees shall be paid into the Township Treasury. Each applicant for
an appeal, special exception, variance, conditional use or other requested
relief shall, at the time of making application, pay a fee, in accordance
with the aforementioned Fee Schedule, for the cost of advertising, mailing
notices and postage as required by this chapter and the rules of the Zoning
Hearing Board. The cost for a stenographer for a hearing shall be shared
equally between the applicant and the Board. Transcription costs are paid
Additional information may be requested by the Building
Inspector depending on the nature of the application, such as
the methods for shoring the structure during demolition.
(4) All plot plans for new residential construction, new nonresidential
construction and new nonresidential additions shall indicate all
existing trees which are to be saved, the tree protection zone
boundary and the method by which protection will occur. In
addition, tree protection techniques, in accordance with § 163-50.1
of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be
indicated on the plan and shall be adhered to during construction.
§ 195-130 WARWICK CODE § 195-132
187:950
by the party wanting a copy, but in an appeal, the party appealing the
decision shall pay for the cost of the transcript.
§ 195-133. Confirmation plans.
After the zoning and building permits are issued for all new residential and
nonresidential construction as required by the Zoning Officer subsequent
to the placement of the foundation or slab but prior to the commencement
of framing, a second survey to be known as a "confirmation plan" shall
be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer or his or her designee for
purposes of attesting to the proper transfer of the elevations established
on the plot plan for the actual basement and/or foundation area, garage
and first-floor elevation, and to verify proper location of the basement and/
or foundation area within the building setback lines. The plan shall include
locations, elevation, reference points or benchmarks and be dated, signed
and sealed by the registered engineer or land surveyor. The confirmation
plan shall be submitted for certification as acceptable by the Township prior
to the initiation of framing. This requirement shall be listed by the Zoning
Officer on a zoning permit as a condition of approval.
§ 195-134. As-built plans.
Prior to the issuance of a certification of use and occupancy and as a
condition for all new residential and nonresidential construction (except for
additions and accessory buildings on residential lots), an as-built survey,
with all details established in the plot plan, shall be filed with the Township
Zoning Officer or designated official. The requirement shall be listed by the
Zoning Officer on a zoning permit as a condition of approval.
§ 195-135. Fees and escrow deposits.
All applicants for zoning permits, special exceptions, conditional uses and
interpretations or variance appeals shall, at the time of making application,
pay to the Zoning Officer for use of the municipality a fee in accordance
with the Fee Schedule adopted by resolution of the governing body upon
the enactment of this chapter or such schedule as may be amended by
resolution of the governing body. In addition, an escrow deposit may be
required. The escrow deposit requirements shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-132 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-135
187:951

ARTICLE XXVI
(Reserved)233
§ 195-136. through § 195-143. (Reserved)
233. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XXVI, Floodplain Districts, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-5. See now Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-136 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-136
187:953

ARTICLE XXVII
Historical District
§ 195-144. Legislative intent.
A. Certain structures within the Township of Warwick have a distinctive
character recalling the rich architectural and historical heritage of this
part of Pennsylvania in which we live. These relics of bygone days can
and should be a source of inspiration to residents and visitors alike,
awakening interest and pride in our historic past and, in a broader
sense, promoting the general welfare, education and culture of the
Township of Warwick in which these historical objects are located. It is
the sense and purpose of this article to help perpetuate these
irreplaceable legacies of past generations and preserve their unique
character for those who come after us to enjoy. The primary and direct
beneficiaries of the protective measures enumerated hereinafter are
the owners of these historic sites. The special status given to these
structures is in itself a high honor. In addition, it permits the owner to
display the official Warwick Township Historic Marker authorized for
this use. Also, certain protections are provided under specified
conditions, and the assistance and advice of the Board of Historical
Architecture Review hereinafter provided is hereby made available
whenever needed, without charge.
B. Specifically these areas are hereby designated as historic districts:
(1) The Graveyard of Neshaminy Warwick Presbyterian Church,
located on the north side of Bristol Road, west of Meetinghouse
Road, Warwick Township, and shown on the Tax Map of Bucks
County as Parcel 51-3-72, containing 10 acres, more or less, and
further identified by metes and bounds in Deed Book No. 172 Page
28, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County. The
entire parcel is hereby designated as an historic site.
(2) The Neshaminy Warwick Presbyterian Church, located on the
northeast corner of Bristol and Meetinghouse Roads, Warwick
Township, County of Bucks, and shown on the Tax Map of Bucks
County as Parcel 51-3-120, containing 14 acres, more or less, and
further identified by metes and bounds in Deed Book No. 174 Page
57, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County. The
building and approximately 1/2 acre surrounding the same,
measured as equally as possible from the sides of the building, shall
be considered as designated as an historic site and is on file with
the Board of Supervisors of Warwick Township and incorporated
herein by reference as if attached hereto.
(3) Moland House, located on the east side of York Road, north of the
West Branch of Neshaminy Creek, Warwick Township, County of
Bucks, and shown on the Tax Map of Bucks County as Parcel
51-3-137-1, containing 12 acres, more or less, and further
identified by metes and bounds in Deed Book No. 1826 Page 929, in
§ 195-144 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-144
187:955
§ 195-145. When effective.
This Article XXVII of this chapter shall become effective when the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, having been informed by
the Supervisors of the Township of Warwick of this adoption of this chapter,
has certified by resolution to the historical significance of the historic sites
within the Township of Warwick.
§ 195-146. District use regulations.
In order to preserve the cultural, economic and general welfare through
the preservation and protection of historic places, properties of unique
and historic architectural interest and areas of unique and historic interest
in the Township of Warwick, no building or structure shall hereafter be
erected, altered or restored, razed or demolished within said historic
districts unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be approved by the Board of Historical Architectural Review,
hereinafter created, as to exterior architectural features including signs,
but excluding memorial grave stones and/or markers. Evidence of such
required approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the
Warwick Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-147. Permitted uses.
Property in the historic districts may be used for any use listed as a
permissive use in the districts in this chapter in which said property is
situated.
§ 195-148. Approval of building permits.
the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County. The building
and approximately two acres surrounding the same, measured as
equally as possible from the sides of the building, shall be
considered and designated as an historic site. A plot plan of said
historic site is on file with the Board of Supervisors of Warwick
Township and incorporated herein by reference as if attached
hereto.
(4) Others to be established by ordinance as they are specified.
A. Each applicant for a building permit which would authorize new
construction, alterations or modifications affecting the exterior
structural appearance of existing or proposed structures shall first
obtain approval of the plans and specifications from the Board of
Historical Architectural Review. The applicant shall furnish complete
elevation details and specifications, a plot plan and such other
information as the Board of Historical Architectural Review may
require. So that the unique character and value of the historic districts
as a place of special charm and interest shall not be impaired, the Board
of Historical Architectural Review shall authorize the issuance of a
building permit only if it finds that the architectural style, general
§ 195-144 WARWICK CODE § 195-148
187:956
§ 195-149. Notice of meetings.
Any person applying for a building permit within an historic district shall be
given notice of the meeting of the Board of Historical Architectural Review,
which is to counsel the Supervisors of the Township of Warwick, and the
meeting of the Supervisors, which is to consider the granting of a certificate
of appropriateness for said permit, and may appear before said meetings
to explain his reasons therefor. In the event of a failure to recommend,
the Board and, in the event of its disapproval, the Supervisors shall also
indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet conditions
for protecting the distinctive historical character of the historic district.
§ 195-150. Sign permits.
Applications for permits to erect, alter or modify signs shall be processed
in the same manner as applications for permits to erect, alter or modify a
building or structure.
§ 195-151. Creation and membership of Board of Historical
Architectural Review.
For the purpose of making effective the provisions of this chapter, the
Warwick Township Supervisors shall create a board to be known as the
"Board of Historical Architectural Review," to be composed of five members,
all appointed by the Warwick Township Supervisors, one of whom shall be
designated to serve until the first day of January following the adoption of
this chapter, one until the first day of the second January thereafter, one
until the first day of the third January thereafter, one until the first day of the
fourth January thereafter and one until the fifth January thereafter. Their
successors shall be appointed by the Warwick Township Supervisors on the
expiration of their respective terms to serve five years. Vacancies shall be
filled by the Warwick Township Supervisors for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant.
design, arrangement, location and materials meet the following
standards:
(1) They must be harmonious with the exterior architectural features
of the existing structure.
(2) They must be complementary to the traditional architectural
character of the historic site and/or structure.
B. If these standards are not met and the application for a building permit
is disapproved, disapproval shall be in writing, giving reasons therefor,
and a copy thereof shall be given to the applicant, to the agency issuing
permits and to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
The applicant may appeal from the disapproval as provided by law and
the ordinances of the Township of Warwick.
§ 195-148 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-152
187:957
§ 195-152. Composition of Board.
The Board of Historical Architectural Review shall consist of the Building
Inspector of Warwick Township, a registered architect, a licensed real
estate broker, a member of the Warwick Township Historical Commission
and one additional person with a knowledge of and interest in the
preservation of the historic districts.
§ 195-153. Responsibilities of Board.
The Board of Historical and Architectural Review shall give counsel to the
Township Supervisors of the Township of Warwick regarding the advisability
of issuing any certificates required to be issued pursuant to this chapter and
the enabling legislation pursuant to which it was adopted. For this purpose,
the Board may make and alter rules and regulations for its organization
and procedures, consistent with ordinances of the Township and the laws of
the commonwealth. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and
action taken at any Board meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a
majority of the entire Board. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation and shall make an annual report of their transactions to the
Township Supervisors. The Board shall not incur any expense whatever
without a prior resolution of the Township Supervisors authorizing such
action.
§ 195-154. Enforcement by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall have the power to institute any proceedings at
law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this article.
§ 195-152 WARWICK CODE § 195-154
187:958
ARTICLE XXVIII
Enforcement; Repealer; When Effective
§ 195-155. Enforcement notice.
An notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail by the Zoning Officer
to any landowner, person, partnership or corporation of such lands where a
violation of the provisions of this chapter exists. Such notice shall include:
§ 195-156. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, graded,
maintained or used in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Board of
Supervisors or, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of
the Township or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows
that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building,
structure, landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such premises,
any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such
action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be
served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action
is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the governing body of the
municipality. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
§ 195-157. Violations and penalties.
Any landowner, person, partnership or corporation who or which shall
violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a civil
judgment, be sentenced to pay a judgment of not less than $200, nor more
than $500, plus all court costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the Township. In default of payment of the fine(s) or to appeal the judgment
in a timely manner, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
action is intended.
B. The location of the property in violation and the zoning district in which
the property is located.
C. The specific violation, a description of the requirements which have not
been met and citation of applicable provisions of this chapter.
D. The specific time for compliance.
E. Notice of the recipient's right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board
and the time period for appeal.
F. Notice that failure to comply or failure to appeal will result in clearly
described sanctions.
§ 195-155 WATER CONSERVATION § 195-157
187:959
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless it is determined that a good faith
basis existed for the violation, in which case there shall be deemed only one
violation until the fifth day following the violation; thereafter, each day shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 195-158. Additional remedies.
In addition to the civil enforcement proceeding set forth in the
Municipalities Planning Code234 and § 195-157 of this chapter, the Township
may enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of an action in equity
commenced in the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County, or in
Commonwealth Court when original jurisdiction is vested with that court.
This remedy shall be cumulative with all other remedies available to the
Township in law or equity.
§ 195-159. Jurisdiction.
The District Justice shall have initial jurisdiction for all proceedings brought
for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-160. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-157 WARWICK CODE § 195-160
187:960
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-7 9-16-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 174
2002-8 12-2-2002 Parks and recreation
areas rules and
regulations
Ch. 131, Art. I
2002-9 12-16-2002 General obligation note NCM
2003-1 3-3-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2003-2 3-3-2003 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2003-3 4-10-2003 General obligation note
amendment
NCM
2003-4 7-7-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-3
2003-5 7-7-2003 Sidewalk maintenance;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 159; 177
2003-6 8-4-2003 General obligation note
amendment
NCM
2003-7 9-15-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-3
2003-8 9-15-2003 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2004-1 1-20-2004 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2004-2 Fire tax millage NCM
2004-3 6-7-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 62
2004-4 6-7-2004 Property maintenance Ch. 145
2005-1 5-2-2005 Mutual aid agreement Ch. 7, Art. II
2005-2 6-6-2005 Stormwater management Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-4
2005-3 8-29-2005 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
§ 195-160 WATER CONSERVATION § DL-1
187:961
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-4 6-6-2005 Cable television services
agreement
Ch. 7, Art. III
2005-5 6-6-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 62
2005-6 8-8-2005 Use of public rights-ofway
Ch. 159, Art. IV
2005-7 10-17-2005 Littering Ch. 111
2005-8 11-21-2005 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. II
2005-9 12-5-2005 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2006-1 6-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 177
2006-2 9-5-2006 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 62
2006-3 9-18-2006 Verizon cable franchise
agreement
NCM
2006-4 9-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-5 10-2-2006 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 171, Art. III
2006-6 10-2-2006 Prohibition of
compensation to
Supervisors under Act
101 of 2005
NCM
2006-7 11-6-2006 Participation in Delaware
Valley Insurance Trust
NCM
2006-8 11-6-2006 Participation in Delaware
Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust
NCM
2007-1 8-6-2007 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse
Ch. 95
2007-2 8-21-2007 Bank loan NCM
2007-3 9-4-2007 Zoning reenactment;
Zoning Map reenactment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2007-4 9-4-2007 Subdivision and land
development
reenactment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-3
2008-1 3-17-2008 Cable franchise renewal
agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 WARWICK CODE § DL-1
187:962
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-2 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2008-3 9-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 177
2008-4 11-17-2008 Local services tax Ch. 171, Art. VI
2009-1 11-16-2009 Real estate registry Ch. 147
2009-2 11-16-2009 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2010-1 2-1-2010 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2010-2 2-16-2010 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 63
2010-3 Bond NCM
2010-4 6-21-2010 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
2010-5 8-2-2010 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2010-6 8-2-2010 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-8
2010-7 9-7-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement for purchase
of utility services
Ch. 7, Art. IV
2010-8
(formerly
2010-31)
12-20-2010 Zoning Ch. 195
2010-9
(formerly
2010-32)
12-20-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2011-1 3-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2011-2 5-16-2011 Curbs and sidewalks Ch. 159, Art. III
2011-3 8-1-2011 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 163
2011-4 8-1-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 157
2011-5 9-6-2011 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
2011-6 9-19-2011 Bond NCM
2011-7 10-3-2011 On-lot sewage disposal
facilities
Ch. 153, Art. II
2011-8 Number not used
§ DL-1 WATER CONSERVATION § DL-1
187:963
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-9 10-17-2011 Certificates of use and
occupancy
Ch. 61
2011-10 10-17-2011 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 157
2011-11 11-7-2011 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
2011-12 11-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-1 3-5-2012 Fire insurance proceeds Ch. 102, Art. I
2012-2 3-5-2012 Emergencies: fees for
emergency response
services
Ch. 73, Art. II
2012-3 4-2-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-4 7-2-2012 Sewage disposal: sewer
connections
Ch. 153, Art. III
2012-5 8-6-2012 Property maintenance Ch. 145
2012-6 8-6-2012 Fire Prevention Code Ch. 89, Art. II
2012-7 8-6-2012 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 41
2012-8 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 177
2013-1 6-3-2013 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. II
2013-2 9-3-2013 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
2013-3 12-2-2013 General obligation note NCM
2014-1 1-20-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-2 2-18-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
curbs and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 159, Art. III
2014-3 2-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2015-1 1-19-2015 Firearms repealer Ch. 85, reference
only
2015-2 2-16-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 92
2015-3 3-16-2015 PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group
Trust
Ch. 7, Art. V
2015-4 3-16-2015 Licensing of commercial
solicitation and transient
retail businesses
Ch. 135
§ DL-1 WARWICK CODE § DL-1
187:964
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-5 3-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2015-6 3-16-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
2015-7 3-16-2015 General obligation note NCM
2015-8 4-20-2015 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 62
2015-9 9-21-2015 Public health: massage
parlors
Ch. 146, Art. I
2015-10 11-16-2015 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2016-1 1-18-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. II
2016-2 2-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 177
2017-1 7-17-2017 Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
2017-2 8-21-2017 Agreement for collection
of residential and
commercial recycling
data
NCM
2017-3 9-18-2017 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 157
2018-1 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2018-2 6-18-2018 Pension Plans:
Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
2019-1 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2019-2 6-17-2019 Pawnbrokers and Dealers
in Precious Metals,
Antiques and
Secondhand Goods
Ch. 136
§ DL-1 WATER CONSERVATION § DL-1
187:965