Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1055]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) of the Second Class Township Code [53 P.S.
§ 66601(d)], the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of White, County of Indiana, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 311, together with an
Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Township of White, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the Township of White," hereinafter referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of White, and it is the intention of
said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Township of White which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of White has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(1) Ordinance No. 880, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks,
adopted April 27, 1983.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 13, 2013.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
§ 1-3 WHITE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
T. Ordinance No. 16, regarding junked vehicles, adopted November 14,
1968.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.1
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following terms are updated
as indicated:
(1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" is changed to
"Department of Community and Economic Development" or
"DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" or "District Justice" is
changed to "Magisterial District Judge."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 9-11-2013 by Ord. No.
1055." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-6 WHITE CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial
District Judge and/or court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 16, 2013.
§ 1-12 WHITE CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 12
CODE ENFORCEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 44. Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
§ 12-1. Establishment.
A Department of Code Enforcement is hereby established.
§ 12-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Department shall be for the protection of persons and
property within the municipality through the enforcement of the various
parking, traffic, nuisance and land use regulations that are currently in
effect and that may be adopted in the future.
Chapter 23
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 23-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Associations.
§ 23-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Board of Supervisors shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Township. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
A. The following associations are hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township of
White:
(1) Indiana Volunteer Fire Company.
(2) Creekside Volunteer Fire Company.
B. The above-named associations have been formed for the benefit of their
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named associations of the Township of White are designated
the proper associations to receive such funds as are due and payable to
the Township treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania
from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:9
§ 23-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Township treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township treasury by the
Treasurer for the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act
of December 18, 1984, No. 205, § 705 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Township Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s)
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 44
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63. Department of Code Enforcement — See Ch.
12.
§ 23-3 WHITE CODE § 23-3
1:10
ARTICLE I
Township Manager
[Adopted 7-26-1983 by Ord. No. 884]
§ 44-1. Creation of office.
The Office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of
White.
§ 44-2. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of
all members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of Supervisors, and he may be removed at any time
by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days before such removal
is to become effective, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the Manager
with a written statement setting forth its intention to remove him, or in
lieu thereof, the Board of Supervisors may remove him immediately, upon
tendering to the Manager the pay due him up to and including 30 days after
the effective date of the removal.
§ 44-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Township or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but
during the tenure of his office he may reside outside the Township only
with the approval of the Board of Supervisors. If the Board of Supervisors
fails within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days after the appointment,
to approve the Manager's residence outside the Township, he must
immediately become, and during his tenure remain, a resident of the
Township.
§ 44-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Township with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board
of Supervisors, in the sum of $5,000, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the
Township.
§ 44-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and may be changed by resolution from time to time
at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 44-6. Powers and duties.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:11
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township.
The powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall
be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, the powers
and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
Township departments.
(2) He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision,
provided that:
(a) Prior approval of the Board of Supervisors shall be obtained
before enlarging staff either by the creation of a new position
or increasing the number of employees in the then present
categories.
(b) The Manager shall notify, at once and in writing, each of the
Supervisors of any action taken by authority of this subsection.
(c) The Manager shall report, at the next meeting thereafter of the
Board of Supervisors, any action taken by the authority of this
subsection.
(3) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors, before the
close of each fiscal year, a recommended budget for the next fiscal
year and an explanatory message.
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussions, and he
shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and its committees.
(6) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(7) He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct
of Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
Township finances and such other reports as the Board of
Supervisors request; and make such recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors as he deems advisable.
(8) He shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances
and the activities of the Township for the preceding year.
§ 44-6 WHITE CODE § 44-6
1:12
§ 44-7. Procedural limitations on Board of Supervisors.
Other than for the purposes of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors or any of
its members or any of the Board of Supervisor's committees or its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Township
Manager, and neither the Board of Supervisors nor any of its members,
nor any of the Board of Supervisor's committees or its members, shall give
orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the Manager.
(9) He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits,
and privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(10)He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
(11)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except in so far as such duties are expressly imposed by statute
upon some other Township officer.
(12)He shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Township's claims.
(13)He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Second Class
Township Code, all supplies and equipment for the agencies,
boards, departments, and other offices of the Township, provided
that all capital expenditures shall be subject to prior approval of
the Board of Supervisors. He shall keep an account of all purchases
and shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board of
Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue
rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, governing the procurement of all municipal supplies
and equipment.2
(14) All complaints regarding Township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall
report thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
(15)He shall make research and investigation into the administrative
and governmental functions of various townships and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors of appropriate
ordinances affecting the health, safety, welfare, and administration
of this Township. He shall establish and maintain appropriate filing
systems and efficient administrative procedures for the conduct of
the business of the Township.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-8
1:13
§ 44-8. Disability or absence.
During any absence of the Manager, the normal operating functions of
the Township shall be delegated to the appropriate department heads in
accordance with such table of organization as established by the Board
of Supervisors and in force at the time of the disability or absence of
the Manager. Duties of the Manager not so specifically delegated shall be
performed by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 44-8 WHITE CODE § 44-8
1:14
Chapter 46
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 46-1. Adoption.
The Township hereby adopts the Official Map of the Township of White all
that certain Map thereto designated as the "White Township Official Map,"
dated May 25, 2016.
§ 46-2. Reservation of proposed Township property.
The property depicted as proposed Township property, including roadway
improvement and transportation corridors, may be reserved for future
taking or acquisition for public use.
§ 46-3. Acquisition of lands.
For acquisition of lands and/or rights-of-way pursuant to the Official Map,
boundary descriptions by metes and bounds descriptions shall be made and
sealed by a licensed surveyor.
§ 46-4. Recording with county.
The Township directs that upon adoption of this chapter, a copy of the
Official Map, verified by the Board of Supervisors, shall be submitted to the
Recorder of Deeds of the County of Indiana to be recorded within 60 days
of the effective date hereof.
§ 46-5. Effect of adoption.
The adoption of the Official Map shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be
deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street nor the
taking or acceptance of any land, nor shall it obligate White Township to
improve or maintain any such street or land.
§ 46-6. Amendment.
After adoption of the Official Map, or part thereof, all streets, watercourses,
and public grounds and the elements listed in § 401 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code3 on final, recorded plats which have been
approved as provided by this chapter shall be deemed amendments to the
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401.
§ 44-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-6
1:15
Official Map. Notwithstanding any of the other terms of this chapter, no
public hearing needs to be held or public notice given if the amendment
of the Official Map is the result of the addition of a plat which has been
approved as provided by this chapter.
§ 46-7. Buildings or improvements included on Official Map.
For the purposes of preserving the integrity of the White Township Official
Map, no permit shall be issued for any building within the lines of any
street or public ground shown or laid out on the Official Map. No person
shall recover any damages for the taking for public use of any building or
improvements constructed within the lines of any street or public ground
after the same shall have been included in the Official Map, and any such
building or improvement shall be removed at the expense of the owner.
§ 46-8. Special encroachment permit.
When the property of which the reserved location forms a part cannot yield
a reasonable return to the owner unless a permit shall be granted, the
owner may apply to the Board of Supervisors for the grant of a special
encroachment permit to so build. Before granting any special encroachment
permit authorized in this section, the Board of Supervisors may submit
the application for a special encroachment permit to the White Township
Planning Commission and allow the Planning Commission 30 days to review
and comment on the special encroachment permit and shall give public
notice and hold a public hearing at which all parties in interest shall have an
opportunity to be heard. A refusal by the Board of Supervisors to grant the
special encroachment permit may be appealed by the applicant in the same
manner, and within the same time limitations as is provided in the Article IX
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.4
§ 46-9. Reservation of public grounds.
The Board of Supervisors may fix the time for which streets, watercourses
and public grounds on the Official Map shall be deemed reserved for
future taking or acquisition for public use. However, the reservation for
public grounds shall lapse and become void one year after an owner of
such property has submitted a written notice to the Board of Supervisors
announcing his intentions to build, subdivide or otherwise develop the land
covered by the reservation, or has made formal application for an official
permit to build a structure for private use, unless the Board of Supervisors
shall have acquired the property or begun condemnation proceedings to
acquire such property before the end of the year.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 46-6 WHITE CODE § 46-9
1:16
Chapter 49
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 44. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 49-1. Creation.
A White Township Planning Commission, to be composed of five members,
appointed as provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is here created in and for
the White Township. The Planning Commission shall perform all duties and
may exercise all powers conferred by law upon White Township planning
agencies; provided, the Planning Commission previously created in and for
the said White Township shall constitute the tenure of any of the member
thereof, but any and all vacancies in the said Commission, hereafter
occurring, shall be filled in the manner and for the term provided in the
law governing municipal planning commissions in effect at the time of the
happening of the said vacancy.
Chapter 56
RECORDS, OPEN
§ 56-1. Requests.
§ 56-2. Fees.
Paper copies will be $0.20 per page after five or more copies. If mailing is
requested, the cost of postage will be charged. If a disk is requested, it will
be provided by the Township at the cost of $1 per disk. A new disk will be
necessary each time records are provided. Fax copies will be available at
the cost of $0.50 per page. If true and correct certification is requested,
an additional charge of $2 will be added. Beginning with the second hour
of research, time spent by employee(s) in researching records shall be
charged at the hourly rate of the employee(s) conducting the research and
A. Public records will be available for inspection and copying at the White
Township Municipal Building during normal business hours, Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with the exception of holidays.
B. Requests shall be in writing and directed to the Township Secretary at
the White Township Municipal Building, 950 Indian Springs Road,
Indiana, PA 15701. Written requests shall be on a form provided by the
Township and shall include the date of the request, the name and
address of the requester, and a clear description of the records sought.
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-2
1:17
shall be charged in one-quarter-hour increments. The Township will require
prepayment if the total fees are estimated to exceed $100.
§ 56-3. Response.
§ 56-4. Appeals process.
Chapter 63
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 44.
A. The Township will make a good faith effort to provide the requested
public records as promptly as feasible. Township employees shall
cooperate with those requesting to review and/or duplicate original
Township documents while taking reasonable measures to protect
Township documents from the possibility of theft, damage and/or
modification.
B. The Township Secretary shall review all written requests for access to
public records. As soon as possible, but no later than five business days
after receiving a written request to access public records, the Township
Secretary shall respond to all such requests in a manner consistent with
Act 100 of 2002, the Open Records Law.
A. If a written request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file
exceptions with the Board of Supervisors within 15 business days of the
mailing date of the Township's denial. The exceptions shall state
grounds on which the requester asserts that the record is a public
record and shall address any grounds stated by the Township for
denying the request.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall make a final determination on the
exceptions within 30 days of the mailing date of the exceptions. The
Board of Supervisors may hold a hearing on the issue during the 30
days. If the Board determines that the denial was correct, it must
provide a written explanation to the requester.
C. The requester may appeal a final determination to the Common Pleas
Court or Magisterial District Judge within 30 days of denial or final
determination.
§ 56-2 WHITE CODE § 56-4
1:18
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-13-1995 by Ord. No. 932]
§ 63-1. Compensation based on attendance.
A. Any newly elected or re-elected Supervisor, effective January 1, 2016,
shall receive compensation not to exceed $4,125 annually and will be
paid $150 per meeting attended. [Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No.
1072]
B. Such compensation shall be paid in monthly or quarterly installments.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-1
1:19
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 75
ADULT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pornography — See Ch. 203. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 75-1. Title; purpose; findings.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "White Township Adult
Business Ordinance."
B. Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class
Township Code to promote and secure the health, cleanliness, comfort
and safety of the citizens of White Township, to regulate and inspect the
use and occupancy of public buildings, to regulate places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation and to prevent and prohibit
public nuisances due to adverse secondary effects, White Township
(hereafter "Township") enacts this chapter to minimize and control the
adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby
protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, protect the citizens
property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods and deter
the spread of blight.
(1) The Board of Supervisors has determined that licensing is a
legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that
operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable
regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(2) The Board of Supervisors does not intend this chapter to suppress
any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to
enact a content neutral ordinance that addresses the secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses. It is not the intent of the
Board of Supervisors in enacting this chapter to deny any person
rights of speech protected by the Constitution of the United States
or the Constitution of Pennsylvania, or both, nor is it the intent of
the Board of Supervisors to impose by this chapter any additional
limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and
other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the Board of
Supervisors does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any
adult to obtain or view, or both, any sexually oriented materials or
conduct protected by the Constitution of the United States or the
§ 63-1 WHITE CODE § 75-1
1:20
Constitution of Pennsylvania, or both, nor does it intend to restrict
or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or
exhibitors of sexually oriented materials may have to sell,
distribute or exhibit these materials.
C. Legislative findings. The Board of Supervisors finds:
(1) Law enforcement personnel have determined and statistics and
studies performed in a substantial number of communities in this
commonwealth and in the United States indicate that sexually
oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects, including
those specified and recognized at 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501(a), which
secondary effects should be regulated to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. These secondary effects include, but are not
limited to, the spread of communicable diseases, performance of
sexual acts in public places, presence of discarded sexually
oriented materials on public and private property, sexual
harassment, obscenity, prostitution and other illegal sexual
activities, crime, decreased property values and neighborhood
deterioration.
(2) Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in depositions and hearings
conducted by the United States District Court for the Middle
District of Pennsylvania, Case No. 3CV99-1801 (Judge Munley), and
by the United States District Court for the Western District of
Pennsylvania, Case No. 98-1140 (Judge Lancaster) and in reports
made available to the Township and on findings incorporated in the
cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976) and
Barnes V. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991) and on studies in
other communities, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona;
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Biloxi, Mississippi; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio and Beaumont, Texas and also on
findings from the report of the Attorney General's Working Group
on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989,
State of Minnesota), the Township finds:
(a) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently
uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further,
there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
(b) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than
employees of other establishments.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:21
(c) Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those that
provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing
films, videos or live sex shows. Furthermore, adult bookstores
tend to attract homosexual men who engage in unprotected,
high-risk sexual activities.
(d) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions.
(e) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and
other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging
in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented
businesses.
(f) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B
amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
(g) The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of
October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS
and HIV infections may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood
components and from an infected mother to her newborn.
(h) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea are principally
transmitted by sexual acts.
(i) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of
the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of
the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
(j) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where
persons view "adult" oriented films.
(k) Numerous studies have indicated that sexually oriented
businesses have a substantial negative impact on property
values and cause neighborhood blight.
(l) The findings noted in Subsection C(2)(a) through (k) raise
substantial governmental concerns.
(3) Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects in the
nature of a public nuisance, which secondary effects should be
regulated to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 75-1 WHITE CODE § 75-1
1:22
(4) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.
(5) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented business. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in
a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Township. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(6) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters and bookstores.
(7) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(8) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(9) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct that this chapter
is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such
activity.
(10) The fact that an applicant for an adult or sexually oriented use
license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the
rational assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in that
conduct in contravention of this chapter.
(11) The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and
prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:23
§ 75-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguishable or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(12) The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
Township will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(13) The limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses
from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays, and
closure of such businesses on Sundays and holidays reduces the
adverse secondary effects of such businesses, including,
particularly, but not limited to, late night noise levels, crime and
sexually offensive materials and activities in public areas and
promotes the public health, safety and welfare.
(14) The reasonable regulation and supervision of sexually oriented
businesses tends to discourage sexual acts and prostitution and
thereby promote the health, safety and welfare of patrons, clients
and customers of these businesses.
(15) The continued unregulated operation of such sexually oriented
businesses would be detrimental to the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of White Township.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or
other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity.
§ 75-1 WHITE CODE § 75-2
1:24
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, tavern, concert hall, banquet hall, party
room, conference center, restaurant, nightclub, club, bar, recreation center,
indoor amusement center, dance hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features person who appear in a state of
nudity or seminudity or performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, lessee, lessee of a dance floor or space or otherwise and
whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or compensation by the
operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on
the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escort as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISH — Any of the following:
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures which are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a significant
or substantial portion of the performance, any actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition in viewing of
specified anatomical areas or persons in a state of nudity or seminudity.
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:25
KNOWINGLY — Having a general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief that warrants further inspection or inquiry of
both:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license, and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. Nude model studios shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania, where a college, junior college
or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation, a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs
in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation, or in a structure:
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented use
to any other existing sexually oriented business or sexually oriented
use.
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or
persons.
A.
The age of a minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or person
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such
minor.
B.
That no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing.
A.
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class.
B.
Where no more than one seminude model is on the premises at one
time.
C.
§ 75-2 WHITE CODE § 75-2
1:26
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a full
opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or in a SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter
center or other commercial establishment where adult entertainment is
presented for money or other forms of consideration.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex.
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution, dissemination of obscenity,
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual
performance by a child, possession or distribution of child pornography,
public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child, engaging
in organized criminal activity, sexual assault, molestation of a child,
gambling or distribution of a controlled substance or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
other states or countries.
A.
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense.
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
(2)
B.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:27
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — Of a sexually oriented business means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor areas exist on the date of licensing.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Of an adult entertainment
business means and includes any of the following:
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms
or other enclosures which are available for viewing:
§ 75-3. License required.
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
C.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsection A or B above.
C.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
Films, movies, videos or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or who offer
performances or presentations characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to establish and operate a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter without a valid
§ 75-2 WHITE CODE § 75-3
1:28
sexually oriented business license issued by the Township pursuant
to this chapter.
(2) For any person who establishes and operates a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter to employ a person
to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the Township pursuant to
this chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter.
(4) Beginning on the 180th day after enactment of this chapter, for any
person to continue to operate a sexually oriented business already
in operation on the effective date of this chapter without a valid
sexually oriented business license pursuant to this chapter.
(5) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter,
for any person operating a sexually oriented business in operation
at the time of the enactment of this chapter to employ a person to
work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the Township pursuant to
this chapter.
(6) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter,
for any person working as a employee of a sexually oriented
business on the effective date of this chapter to continue such
employment without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
B. Application for a business or employee license must be made on a form
provided by the Township. For purposes of this chapter, the
responsibility for conducting any investigation, receiving and
processing any application and issuing or denying any license required
under this chapter shall be the Township Code Enforcement Officer
and/or his assistant.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as to enable the Township to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twentypercent
or greater interest in the business must sign the application for
a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the
following subsection, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee
if a license is granted.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:29
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age.
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any.
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, the type of classification of the
corporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation and qualified and
authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders
and the name of the registered corporate agent and address of
the registered office for service of process.
(d) Any entity other than a partnership or corporation shall submit
the information required in Subsection E(3), (4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (9) and (10) of this section for each person exercising
control over the entity.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state
the sexually oriented business' fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, county or
jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or
an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
§ 75-3 WHITE CODE § 75-3
1:30
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, county or
jurisdiction and, if so, the names and locations of such licensed
businesses.
(6) The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the
applicant is filing, along with a detailed description of each and
every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented use,
which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or
intended compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number
and/or his/her state and federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes,
other video reproductions or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the
applicant shall also comply with the application requirements set
forth in § 75-12 of this chapter.
(13) A statement of intended operating hours in compliance with
§ 75-18 of this chapter.
(14) An infectious plan to protect employees and the public from bodily
fluids of infectious contamination. A copy of this plan shall be
attached to the application and shall be OSHA (Occupational Safety
and Health Act) compliant.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the Township the following information:
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:31
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including stage names) or
aliases used by the individual.
(2) Age, date and place of birth.
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number.
(5) Present business address and telephone number.
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information.
(7) Social security number.
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
(1) At the time the application if filed, the Township will take a color
photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face,
which photograph shall be used to complete the criminal
background check required by this chapter.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality,
state or county any business or has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension
shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
(4) A statement acknowledging that the employee has reviewed the
infections control plan adopted by the sexually oriented business.
H. Any and all sexually oriented businesses in operation within the
Township, as of the effective date of this chapter, must apply for the
required licenses and pay any applicable license fees under this chapter
and, furthermore, must come into full compliance with this chapter
within six months after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 75-3 WHITE CODE § 75-3
1:32
§ 75-4. Issuance of licenses.
I. To the extent permitted by law, all applicants for licenses required by
this chapter and materials submitted therewith, shall be maintained by
the Township in a confidential file which shall not be made available to
the public, except that all sexually oriented business licenses shall be
available for public inspection.
A. Upon the filing of a fully completed application form for a sexually
oriented business license or employee license, the Township shall issue
a temporary license to said applicant which shall entitle the applicant to
operate the sexually oriented business or work as an employee. The
application shall then be referred to the Township Code Enforcement
Officer and/or his assistant as the licensing administrator for purposes
of this chapter for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application. The processing and investigation of the
application shall be completed within 30 days of the date that the fully
completed application is filed with the Township. Any incomplete
application shall be returned to the applicant and the thirty-day period
for processing and investigation shall not commence until a fully
completed application has been filed. After the processing and
investigation, the Township shall issue a permanent license, unless it is
determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter.
(4) The license is to be used for operation of a business or employment
in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter.
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or
sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the
Township within one year of the date of the current application.
(6) The required application, investigation and license fees have not
been paid.
(7) An applicant's license to operate a sexually oriented business
issued by any jurisdiction, has been revoked within the proceeding
12 months.
(8) The application demonstrates that the proposed sexually oriented
business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:33
§ 75-5. Fees.5
(9) A licensee is delinquent in payment of the Township, county or
state for any taxes or fees past due.
B. If the sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued
shall remain in effect during all appeals. Denial, no-renewal, suspension
or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 75-9.
C. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant pursuant to § 75-3
of this chapter and a finding by the Township that the applicant has not
been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application.
The renewal of this license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as
set forth in § 75-5.
D. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business or employee and the specific classification of
sexually oriented use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
E. Applications for licenses required by the Township under this chapter
shall be processed and either denied or approved within 30 days after a
complete application is filed with the Township. A letter notifying the
applicant of such denial or approval shall be mailed to the applicant
within 30 days of the submittal of a complete application. If the
Township fails to render a decision granting, denying or renewing a
license required by this chapter within 30 days after a complete
application is filed with the Township, the permanent license required
by this chapter shall be deemed to have been approved. The deemed
approval rule shall apply to both applications for sexually oriented
business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses.
F. A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for the specific
classification for a sexually oriented use permitted by this chapter and
applied for.
G. Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension, nonrenewal or
revocation of a license may appeal, in writing, within 10 days from the
date of such denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation to the
Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 75-9.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-4 WHITE CODE § 75-5
1:34
§ 75-6. Inspection and certification.
Subject to the consent of an applicant or licensee, the Township Code
Enforcement Officer and/or his assistance may inspect the premises of
sexually oriented businesses for purposes of ensuring compliance with
this chapter, during any time it is open for business. In the event that
the Township Code Enforcement Officer and/or his assistant has probable
cause to believe that a sexually oriented business is operating in violation
of this chapter, he and/or his assistant may inspect the premises of the
sexually oriented business for purposes of ensuring compliance with this
chapter during any time it is open for business. In addition to the foregoing,
each applicant of a licensed sexually oriented business shall file with the
Township on January 1, May 1, October 1 of each year a notarized
certification, on a form provided by the Township, that the business and all
of its employees are operating in compliance with this chapter.
§ 75-7. Expiration of license.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in an
amount to be established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
B. Every application for renewal of an existing sexually oriented business
license shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable renewal
license fee in an amount to be established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors within 30 days of license
renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation and
license fee in an amount to be established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the office of the
Township Secretary/Treasurer and, thereafter, the application shall be
forwarded to the Township Code Enforcement Officer and/or his
assistant designated as licensing administrator for review, investigation
and approval or denial.
E. The schedule of fees set forth in this section may be amended by
resolution of the Township.
A. Each license issued under this chapter shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
provided if §§ 75-3 and 75-4B. Application for renewal shall be made at
least 30 days before the expiration date and when made less than 30
days before the expiration date, the date of expiration of the license will
not be extended.
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-7
1:35
§ 75-8. Suspension and revocation.
B. When the Township Code Enforcement Officer denies renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the
date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Township Code Enforcement
Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been
corrected and abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least
90 days have elapsed since the date of denial became final.
A. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an
employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter.
(2) A business licensee fails to file with the Township Secretary the
certification required by § 75-6 hereof on the dates indicated or
files a false certification on the dates indicated.
B. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if a
cause of suspension in Subsection A occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
C. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if he
determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process.
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises.
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the licensed premises.
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Township, county or
state for any taxes or fees past due.
(7) A licensee had failed to develop and follow an infectious control
plan to protect employees and the public.
D. When the Township Code Enforcement Officer revokes the license, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date
the revocation became effective. If, however, subsequent to revocation,
the Township Code Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted
§ 75-7 WHITE CODE § 75-8
1:36
§ 75-9. Appeals.
a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of the
revocation became effective.
A. All license application denial, renewal, suspension or revocation
decisions shall be sent, in writing, to the applicant or licensee. All such
decisions which deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a license shall
state specifically the chapter requirement not met and any other basis
for the decision. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of
an application, or after suspension or revocation of any license, the
applicant or licensee may appeal pursuant to the procedures of the
Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) to the Township Board of
Supervisors, except as modified herein. Any such appeal must be filed,
in writing, with the Township Secretary within 10 days from the date of
mailing of the decision appealed from and shall specify, in detail, the
basis for the appeal. Failure or refusal to file said appeal or specify the
basis of said appeal with the Township Secretary shall be deemed a
conclusive determination as to the issues or matters addressed by the
written decision. If an appeal is timely filed, the Township Board of
Supervisors will then hold a Local Agency Law hearing, pursuant to 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., within 20 days from the date the appeal is filed
and will render a written decision within 10 days from the date such
hearing concludes. In the case of a denial of a license or license
renewal, or in the case of a license suspension or revocation, the
licensee may continue to operate to the same extent and in the same
manner as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the
earlier of the expiration of the ten-day appeal period without filing of an
appeal or the date of a final decision dismissing any appeal.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to
the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) and 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 933(a)(2). The Township shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to
any request by a license applicant or licensee to the court to give
expedited review of such appeal. The Township shall certify any record
to the court within 20 days after the appeal is filed. In the case of a
denial of a license or license renewal, or in the case of a license
suspension or revocation, the licensee may continue to operate to the
same extent and in the same manner as immediately prior to the
suspension or revocation until the earlier of:
(1) The expiration of the thirty-day appeal period without filing an
appeal.
(2) The date of a decision dismissing an appeal by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 75-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:37
§ 75-10. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 75-11. Enlargement of sexually oriented businesses.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if that person causes or permits
the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same buildings, structure, or portion thereof, or
causes a substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented
business.
§ 75-12. Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or booth of
less than 150 square feet of floor space a film, video cassette, live
entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas or interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Township may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without prior approval of the Township.
§ 75-10 WHITE CODE § 75-12
1:38
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose excluding the restroom. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or
more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make any opening of any kind
between the viewing booths or rooms.
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
§ 75-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-12
1:39
§ 75-13. Prevention of physical contact with patrons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appear in a seminude or nude
condition, unless the person is an employee, who while nude or seminude,
shall be at least two feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at
least two feet from the floor.
§ 75-14. Escort agencies.
§ 75-15. Nude model studios.
§ 75-16. Additional regulations.
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
(15) A licensee shall brief all employees as to the approved infectious
control plan and OSHA regulations before and during employment
at intervals of at least six months.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (15) of this
section commits a violation of this chapter if he/she knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.
A. As escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years
old.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years old.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this chapter if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity and/or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open
to public view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly and
intentionally in a public place:
§ 75-12 WHITE CODE § 75-16
1:40
§ 75-17. Children prohibited in adult entertainment business.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
§ 75-18. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. A
sexually oriented business shall be closed at all times on Sundays and legal
federal or state recognized holidays.
§ 75-19. Violations and penalties.
The Township shall enforce any violation of this chapter through a civil
enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge. The civil
enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by complaint or by such other
means as may be provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provision of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of
not more than $500 for each violation, plus all court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement proceedings.
In any case where a penalty for a violation of this chapter has not been
timely paid and the person upon whom the penalty was imposed is found
(1) Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
(2) Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
B. For purposes of this chapter, "public place" includes all outdoor areas
owned by or open to the general public and all buildings and enclosed
places owned by or open to the general public, including, but not
limited to, places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to
specific members and party rooms or halls restricted to adults or to
patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.
This section shall not apply to:
(1) Any child under 10 years of age.
(2) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant under two years of age.
(3) The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form of artistic
and theatrical performances. It is the intention of the Township that
this section be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a
manner as will cause the least possible infringement of the
constitutional rights of free speech, free expression, due process,
equal protection or other fundamental rights.
§ 75-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-19
1:41
to have been liable therefor in civil proceedings, the violator shall be liable
for the penalty imposed, including additional daily penalties for continuing
violations, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township in the enforcement proceedings. A separate violation shall arise
for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to exist or
for each section of this chapter which is found to have been violated.
Additionally, the Township shall be exempt from the payment of costs in any
civil case brought to enforce an ordinance in according with this section.
Further, the Township may enforce any violation of this chapter through
an equity action brought in the Court of Commons Pleas of the County of
Indiana.
Chapter 81
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 120.
§ 75-19 WHITE CODE § 75-19
1:42
ARTICLE I
False Fire Alarms
[Adopted 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 950]
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES — Any electrical or sensory operated
instrument or apparatus which automatically transmits or causes to be
transmitted a fire alarm to the Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM — Any fire alarm transmitted to the Fire Department as
a result of an automatic protection device and upon response by the Fire
Department it is determined that no fire had occurred, excepting false
alarms caused by an act of God. A false alarm shall be considered to have
been caused by an act of God when it happens by a direct, immediate, and
exclusive operation of the forces of nature, uncontrolled or uninfluenced by
the power of man and without human intervention, and shall include, but
not be limited to, false alarms caused by wind, storm, lightening, flood and
power failure.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Indiana Volunteer Fire Department or any other
fire department serving White Township.
§ 81-2. False alarm responsibility.
The owner, lessee or user of an automatic protection device shall be
permitted three false alarms within a calendar year for whatever reason
at no penalty. The exemption from penalty for three false alarms within a
calendar year shall be in addition to any false alarms caused by an act of
God as defined in § 81-1, "false alarm." After three false alarms, the owner,
lessee or user of an automatic protection device shall be notified, in writing,
to take the necessary action to correct the cause of the false alarm.
§ 81-3. Enforcement procedure.
After three false alarms have occurred within a calendar year, it shall be the
responsibility of the Fire Department to file a complaint with the Township,
in writing, to include the dates, times and locations of the false alarms
and the name and address of the owner, lessee or user of the automatic
protection devices in question. Upon receipt of the complaint, the Township
shall notify, in writing, the owner, lessee or user of the automatic protection
device to take the necessary action to correct the cause of the false alarm.
Upon notification by the Fire Department, presented to the Township in
the same manner as outlined above, that subsequent false alarms have
occurred, the Township shall impose penalties as set forth in § 81-4 below.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:43
§ 81-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No.
1055]
In the event that there are more than three false alarms within a calendar
year, the owner, lessee or user of an automatic protection device who fails to
comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in an
action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 81-4 WHITE CODE § 81-4
1:44
ARTICLE II
Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 1081]
§ 81-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect and promote health, safety, and
welfare of the residents and businesses of the Township.
§ 81-6. Key lock box required; contents.
A. Knox-Box® required for new commercial buildings. All new commercial
buildings shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of an Underwriters
Laboratory (UL) type and size approved by the Code Official, in a
location specified by the Code Official prior to the issuance of the
permit to occupy.
B. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings with
improvements. All existing commercial buildings constructing
improvements that require Planning Commission approval shall have
installed a Knox-Box®, of a UL type and size approved by the Code
Official, prior to the issuance of the building permit.
C. Knox-Box® required for new multifamily residential structures. All new
multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units
shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of a UL type and size approved by the
Code Official.
D. Knox-Box® contents. All Knox-Boxes® shall contain labeled keys, easily
identified in the field to provide access into the property and/or
building, and to any locked areas within the said buildings or as
directed by White Township or the Fire Chief.
E. Locked gates or driveways. Any locked gates or driveways which allow
access to a multifamily residential development or commercial business
are required to place a Fire Department access lock on the said access
point to allow immediate emergency access to the multifamily
residential or commercial property. All locks are to be approved by the
Code Official and Fire Chief.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:45
Chapter 88
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 189.
§ 81-6 WHITE CODE § 81-6
1:46
ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
[Adopted 11-30-1976 by Ord. No. 851; amended in is entirety
8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1068]
§ 88-1. Unlawful to allow pets to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to allow
such animal to run at large unattended at any time either upon any of the
street right-of-ways, or public grounds in the Township of White, or upon the
property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such unless
accompanied by and under the immediate control of such owner, custodian
or keeper and with permission or consent of the property owner.
§ 88-2. (Reserved)
§ 88-3. Leash required.
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper or attendant of
any animal, while traveling on the streets, alleys or public grounds in the
Township of White, to have such on a leash at all times and to prevent such
from entering upon the property of any person or persons in the Township
of White without the owner's permission or consent.
§ 88-4. Human injury prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other animal to permit
said animal to injure any human being by biting, jumping on, knocking down
or by attacking said human being.
§ 88-5. Personal property injury prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to
permit such animal to damage or injure personal property, real estate,
shrubs, hedges, flowers or any growing thing by running over or running
across the said property, or by urinating thereof or defiling the same, or by
causing excrement to be placed thereon.
§ 88-6. Extended animal noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to
permit such animal to remain in the open and to howl, yelp or bark for
extended periods of time.
§ 88-7. Unseemly noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the, owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to
permit said animal to cause annoyance to the citizens, residents or other
persons lawfully in the Township of White, by barking, yelping, howling or
causing any other unseemly noise.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:47
§ 88-8. Exceptions.
There is excluded from the provisions of this article hunting with dogs,
training dogs and field trials while such activities are actually in progress;
service animals; animals involved in emergency, fire or police activities;
livestock and farm animals used for agriculture and farming practices.
§ 88-9. Animal catcher.
Any police officer, constable, peace officer or dog catcher is hereby
authorized to seize and impound any animal found running at large and
unattended at any time in the Township of White at a place to be designated
by the Township Supervisors as a pound. Notice of such seizure shall be
sent to the owners of a licensed dog in the manner prescribed by law; and,
such dog may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified
by law upon the payment of the reasonable expenses incurred by reason of
such detention. Unlicensed dogs shall be turned over to the humane league
for further disposition according to law. As to animals other than dogs, the
seizing officer shall make reasonable efforts to locate and notify the owner
and such animal may be redeemed at a reasonable time upon payment of
reasonable expenses incurred by reason of such detention. In the event the
owner cannot be hosted or does not redeem such animal, such animal shall
be turned over to the appropriate agency.
§ 88-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 88-8 WHITE CODE § 88-10
1:48
ARTICLE II
Harboring and Attracting Nuisance Animals
[Adopted 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1068]
§ 88-11. Unlawful to harbor and/or attract animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, attract, provide shelter or
harbor animals that cause an increased and unreasonable risk to the public
health and safety, cause unreasonable disturbances to abutting and nearby
properties and/or contaminate nearby properties with urine and/or
excrement.
§ 88-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-11
1:49
Chapter 92
ASSESSMENT PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 120. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any enlargement of any building, or any work of repair,
rearrangement, removal or replacement of any interior or exterior wall,
roof, floor or support, or of any part thereof, of any building; provided,
however, that the following shall not be deemed to be an alteration and may
be done and made without first obtaining a permit therefor, as hereinafter
provided: the painting of any building or part thereof; the alteration of any
building, including labor and material, aggregating $1,000 or less in value
annually; and the normal, regular repairs to any building, including labor
and materials, aggregating $1,000 or less in value annually.
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
§ 92-2. Permit for change required. [Amended 4-27-1983 by Ord.
8826]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall cause or permit any
building to be erected, altered or raised upon any ground owned or rented
by with or without first having obtained a permit therefor. Such permit shall
be issued by the Township Supervisors, or their designated agent, upon the
filing of an application with them, submission of plans and specifications
in the case of erection or alteration of any building, payment of a fee, in
an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, and furnishing of evidence of intended compliance with
the requirements of the law and of all other ordinances of the Township
affecting building construction and use therein, such evidence to be given
by such specific information as may be prescribed by the application form,
the aforesaid permit to be conspicuously posted on the premises.
§ 92-3. Inspection of completed work.
Upon completing of the work or erection, alteration or raising of any
building under a permit granted as hereinabove provided, the holder of
such permit shall report such completion to the Township Supervisors or to
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-11 WHITE CODE § 92-3
1:50
their designated agent. The Township Supervisors may, after completion or
at any time during the course of the work for which the permit shall have
been granted, cause and inspection of such building to be made. If there
is evidence that any requirement of the law or of any applicable ordinance
has not been complied with, a prosecution may be commenced under such
law or ordinance, or necessary steps may be taken to secure compliance
otherwise. The fact of completion of such work shall be note upon the
original application of the permit, which shall be kept on file.
§ 92-4. Invalidation of permit.
If any work authorized by any permit issued under this chapter shall not
have been commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit,
the Township Supervisors shall require the permit holder to relinquish
such unused permit which shall thereupon become invalid. Under such
conditions, neither the permit fee, nor any part thereof, shall be returned to
such permit holder, and, if at any future time such permit holder shall make
application for another permit for the same work, he shall follow the same
procedure and pay the same fee as if no previous permit had been issued.
§ 92-5. Violations and penalties.7
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section
of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 92-6. Compliance with additional alteration regulations.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve any person who
makes alterations from complying with such regulations relating to
alterations as may from time to time be made by the Chief Assessor of
Indiana County.
Chapter 94
ASSESSMENTS, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:51

ARTICLE I
Street Light and Fire Hydrant Assessments
[Adopted 4-23-2003 by Res. No. R-4-03]
§ 94-1. Street light assessment policy.
§ 94-2. Fire hydrant assessment policy.
A. It should be understood that the purpose of a street light is to illuminate
the roadway and not an individual's property.
B. All property owners whose front and/or side property boundary lines, or
portions thereof, are located within 250 feet radius of a public street
light are considered to benefit from the street light, and such property
owners shall be assessed by the Township for the cost of providing
street light service.
C. The Township shall assess benefiting property owners on a foot-front
basis. The assessment shall be by equal assessment on all properties
within the subject lighting district in proportion to the number of feet
the property fronts on the street, or portion thereof, being lighted.
D. The assessment for each foot front against vacant lots shall be only 25%
of the assessment for each foot-front against property with
improvements.
E. Where a property is located at an intersection of two streets, a full footfront
assessment as well as 25% of the side yard will be assessed,
provided the side yard fronting the street is within the two-hundredfifty-
foot distance.
F. Regarding irregularly shaped lots, only the portion of the lot that is
within the two-hundred-fifty-foot distance will be assessed.
G. Where, for taxing purposes, property owners have had two or more
adjoining properties in common ownership "tied" together in order to
facilitate real estate tax billing procedures, the Township shall consider
the properties individual and separate until such time that the
properties are legally joined through the land subdivision procedure.
A. All property owners having buildings located within 780 feet, radius, of
a public fire hydrant are considered to benefit from the fire hydrant and
shall be assessed by the Township for the cost of providing fire hydrant
service.
B. The Township shall assess benefiting property owners on a flat-rate,
per-lot basis. The assessment shall be by equal assessment on all
properties containing buildings within the subject hydrant district.
Where multiple buildings are located on one property (for example, two
or more multifamily or commercial buildings on one property), the
Township, at their sole discretion, may assign an equal assessment to
each individual building on the property.
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:53
C. There shall be no assessment against vacant lots. Where, for taxing
purposes, property owners have had two or more adjoining properties
in common ownership "tied" together in order to facilitate real estate
tax billing procedures, the Township shall consider the properties
individual and separate until such time that the properties are legally
joined through the land subdivision procedure.
D. Property owner(s) may elect to install hydrants for their benefit without
seeking a petition from neighboring property owners provided they
agree to pay the full cost of the hydrant(s) being requested and
provided the hydrant is situated within a public road right-of-way. In
this case, neighboring property owners will not be assessed for the
benefit of the hydrant, although the installed hydrant will be available
for their emergency use if needed. The location of the hydrant within
the public road right-of-way shall be at the sole discretion of the
Township, the Fire Chief, and the water utility.
E. An assessment on a property may be removed where a property owner
has obtained a building permit to remove all buildings on the property
and has, in fact, completed the removal of the buildings.
§ 94-2 WHITE CODE § 94-2
1:54
Chapter 105
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 189.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 257.
§ 105-1. Statutory authority; declaration.
§ 105-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein:
CONTAINED FIRES — Any fire contained in an incinerator, fireplace or a
fireproof container.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and
similar material, but not including grass clippings.[Added 12-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 1043]
NONCONTAINED FIRE — Any fire not included in the definition of a
"contained fire."
OUTDOOR COOKING FIRE — Any fire intended for cooking that is
contained in a cooking grill, or a cooking pit having an adequate fire ring
and a coverage area of less than two square yards.
OUTDOOR FIRES — Any fire set or maintained outside of a building, except
outdoor cooking fire as herein defined.
PERSONS — Any individual, partnership, organization, association, agency,
firm, estate, or corporation and any legal or commercial entity.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
WOOD and WOOD PRODUCTS — Trees and tree branches greater than
five inches in diameter, untreated lumber, untreated wood products, and
paper products, except that any items defined in the definition of "leaf
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to §§ 1527 and 1801 of the Second
Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §§ 66527 and 66801.
B. It is hereby declared to be a matter of public safety to regulate fires and
open burning in the Township of White for the purposes of:
(1) Prevention of injury to plant and animal life and to property.
(2) Protection of the comfort and convenience of the public.
§ 94-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:55
waste" herein and/or any items required to be recycled in accordance with
§ 257-2, Mandatory recycling, as amended, shall not be burned.[Amended
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1043]
§ 105-3. Limitations on burning.
A. General standards.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or feed any outdoor fire
for the burning of any materials whatsoever, except for the burning
of wood and wood products.
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent fire-fighting training
by Township-designated fire-fighting organizations.
(3) Fires set by property owners or farm tenants in conjunction with
legitimate farming operations shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter except as their burning activities
relate to Subsections A(5) and B herein, and provided the fire does
not include the burning of hazardous materials.
(4) Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit outdoor cooking fires,
providing that reasonable safeguards are maintained.
(5) No fire shall be permitted to burn that produces smoke or odor
which:
(a) Interferes with the navigation of aircraft in the vicinity of the
Indiana County Airport.
(b) Interferes with travel on any public roadway.
(c) Creates a nuisance or hardship for other property owners or
tenants in the vicinity of the offending fire.
B. Public roads and public properties. No person shall set, start, feed,
permit to burn or maintain any fire upon any of the public streets,
sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in White Township, except where a
designated area has been set aside or reserved for this purpose and an
appropriate container has been provided to contain such fire.
C. Safe distance.
(1) Contained fires and noncontained fires shall comply with the
following safe distance requirements:
(a) Contained fires shall be located at least 20 feet from any
property line or public road line, and at least 40 feet from any
neighboring house or building.
(b) Noncontained fires with a coverage area of less than two
square yards shall be located at least 20 feet from any property
line or public road line, and at least 40 feet from any
neighboring house or building.
§ 105-2 WHITE CODE § 105-3
1:56
(c) Noncontained fires with a coverage area of more than two
square yards shall be located at least 50 feet from any property
line or public road line, and at least 100 feet from any
neighboring house or building.
(d) Noncontained fires with a coverage area of more than 20
square yards shall be allowed only by special permission in
accordance with Subsection F herein.
(2) Not withstanding the above, no fire shall be set, started, fed,
permitted to burn or maintained where such fire may endanger any
building or property, except where such building or property is
used by the Fire Department for training purposes.
D. Control of burning and unattended fires.
(1) No outdoor fire shall be allowed to burn unattended without a
responsible adult being present at all times and without readily
available fire-extinguishing apparatus/supplies.
(2) No outdoor fire shall be permitted to burn whenever drought or
extreme weather conditions exist or when a ban on burning has
been placed into effect by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
other competent governmental body. The Board of Supervisors may
prohibit any and all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or
local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
(3) No outdoor fire shall be set that results in uncontrolled burning of
vegetation (field fire).
(4) Contained fires shall be confined in a noncombustible container
with a capacity of not more than a fifty-five gallon drum, covered
with a wire screen of one-half-inch or smaller mesh to prevent the
discharge of sparks. Contained fires may exceed the capacity of a
fifty-five gallon drum, provided the container is noncombustible,
fully enclosed, and equipped with a flue that prevents the discharge
of sparks.
(5) Noncontained fires shall be situated on a level, noncombustible
surface and shall be provided with a fire ring of noncombustible
material.
(6) All outdoor fires shall be conducted only on the premises owned or
rented or under the control of the person responsible for the fire.
E. Extinguishing unsafe fires. It is a violation of this chapter for any person
to allow any fire to burn under adverse weather conditions or
unsupervised, or otherwise in an unsafe manner. Any such fire shall be
extinguished by the property owner or tenant immediately upon
request by an official of the Township or an official of the Township
designated fire company. Said Township or fire company official may
extinguish the unsafe fire in the absence of the property owner or
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:57
§ 105-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
tenant, or where the property owner or tenant refuses to comply with
the request to extinguish the unsafe fire.
F. Hours. Outdoor fires shall not be permitted to burn or smolder between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
G. Special circumstances.
(1) In the event that it is necessary to have a noncontained fire
covering an area of 20 square yards of more, or to have a
noncontained fire at times other than permitted under this chapter,
special permission must be obtained in advance from the White
Township Manager or his designee.
(2) In the event any fire company is required to respond to a fire which
violates the provisions of this chapter, a service fee may be levied
by the responding fire company.
A. Any person, whether as principal or agent, firm or corporation, who
shall violate this chapter, or assist or abet its violation, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or
each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.8
B. Equitable and other remedies. No penalty herein shall prevent the
Township from enforcing this chapter by equitable, injunctive and other
remedies.
C. Liability. The Township of White and its agents, officials, and
representatives, shall not, under any circumstances, be liable or
responsible for damages caused to any person or property by reason of
the provisions of this chapter, or by reason of the conduct of any
burning activity in compliance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter. The individual person or party responsible for any such fire
shall bear sole liability for any damages caused as a result thereof.
D. Access to private property. The Township of White and its agents,
officials, employees, and representatives are hereby authorized to enter
upon private property for the purpose of conducting inspections and
investigations to assure compliance with this chapter.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-3 WHITE CODE § 105-4
1:58
Chapter 111
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
E. Citizen action. Nothing herein prohibits neighboring property owners
who witness violations of this chapter from themselves filing charges
with the Magisterial District Judge for enforcement of this chapter.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:59

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 111-1. Intent.
§ 111-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the
present tense, include the future, words in the plural number, include
the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. All
capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their
meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words "shall" and "will"
are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning:
ACCESS CHANNELS — Those channels which, by the terms of this chapter
or the franchise agreement, are required to be kept available by the
franchisee for partial or total dedication to public access, educational
access or local government access.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — That service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any PEG Access
Channels, This definition will be deemed to have changed consistent with
any changes in the definition of this term by federal law or regulations of
the FCC.
BOARD — The governing body or Board of Supervisors of the Township of
White, Pennsylvania.
A. The Township of White, pursuant to the applicable federal and state law,
is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the
Township limits.9
B. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White finds that the
development of cable television systems has the potential of having
great benefit and impact upon the residents of White Township.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable television, the Township Board further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Township
or such persons the Township shall designate. It is the intent of this
chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to obtain the best possible cable television service to the public
and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to
include this finding as an integral part thereof.
C. This chapter shall be known as the "Cable Television Ordinance."
9. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1040, adopted 1-12-2011, granting a renewal of the
franchise with Comcast, along with the franchise agreement, is on file and available for
inspection in the Township office.
§ 111-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-2
1:61
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, P.L. No.
98-549, 98 Stat. 2279 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 and
Sup. V. 1987), as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, P.L. No. 102-385 and the Telecommunications Act
of 1966, P.L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat, 56 and as may, from time to time, be
amended.
CABLE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A
facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include
a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations, a facility that serves subscribers without
using any public right-of-way, a facility of a common carrier which is subject,
in whole or in part, to the provisions of Subchapter II of the Cable Act,
except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for
purposes of § 541(c) of the Cable Act), to the extent such facility is used
in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers or any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, a
number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of
such signals.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any
successor thereof.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by the
Township, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which
authorizes the construction or operation of the cable system. Franchise
shall include both the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and the
franchise agreement, or granting ordinance, and all rights, powers and
privileges thereunder.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate agreement or granting
ordinance by which the franchise is granted to the franchisee as required
by this chapter.
FRANCHISEE — All persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties,
liabilities or obligations under this chapter and the franchise agreement
(herein collectively the "franchise").
FRANCHISER — The Township of White, as represented by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of White or any delegate acting within the
scope of its jurisdiction.
§ 111-2 WHITE CODE § 111-2
1:62
GROSS REVENUES — All revenues received by the franchisee from or
attributable to the sale of cable service, including, but not limited to,
subscriber revenues (including pay-per-view), advertising income and any
and all other gross revenues received by the franchisee from the operation
of its cable system in the Township of White, to the extent such revenues
may be subject to franchise fees under federal or state law or regulation.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA — The area of the Township which will receive
cable service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION — The act of connecting the system from the feeder cable
to the subscriber terminal so that the cable service may be received by the
subscriber.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases,
"normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night
per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the franchisee. Those conditions which are not
within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages
and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited
to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the system.
PAY-PER-VIEW — An arrangement under which a separate charge is made
to a subscriber for receiving a particular television program, such as a
movie or an event.
PERSON — Any natural person or any association, firm, individual,
partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or other legally
recognized entity, public or private, whether for profit or not for profit.
SERVICE AREA — The entire geographic area within this Township as it
is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise
specified in the franchise agreement.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels.
SUBSCRIBER — A person or organization whose premises are physically
wired to receive any transmission from the system.
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — The extension wiring from the franchisee's
distribution lines to a subscriber's building.
SYSTEM UPGRADE — The process by which the system shall be upgraded
initially and additionally, any changes or modifications subsequently
accomplished by franchisee due to technological change.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of White, Pennsylvania, and all territory within
its existing and future territorial corporate limits.
§ 111-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-2
1:63

ARTICLE II
Franchise
§ 111-3. Franchise required.
No person shall own or operate a cable system in the Township, except by
franchise granted by the Township, in the form of a franchise agreement
between the Township and the franchisee, which shall comply with all the
specifications of this chapter.10
§ 111-4. Selection of franchisee.
A. In granting an initial franchise pursuant to this chapter, the Township
shall prepare a request for proposals to seek bids for a cable system to
be established under franchise by the Township. This request for
proposals will contain information and instructions relating to the
preparation and filing of proposals, conditions regarding the
installation, operation and maintenance of a cable system under
Township franchise and the criteria to be used in evaluating applicant
proposals.
B. Applicants for an initial franchise may be evaluated according to the
following criteria, among others:
(1) Installation plan. Consideration may be given to an installation plan
that would provide flexibility needed to adjust to new
developments, maintenance practices and services that would be
available to the subscriber and the community immediately and in
the future.
(2) Rate schedule. Consideration may be given to applicants with the
most reasonable installation and subscriber rate schedule.
(3) Financial soundness and capability. The evidence of financial ability
required in the applicant's proposal shall be such as to assure
ability to complete the entire system within a maximum of three
years from the date the franchise is granted. The Township will also
consider the applicant's ability to operate the system and provide
the necessary services.
(4) Demonstrated experience in operating a cable system under
Township franchise. Consideration may be given to evidence of the
applicant's experience in operating a cable system under municipal
franchise, where such evidence would show or tend to show or
confirm the ability of the applicant to furnish sufficient and
dependable service to the potential public and private users.
10.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1040, adopted 1-12-2011, granting a renewal of the
franchise with Comcast, along with the franchise agreement, is on file and available for
inspection in the Township office.
§ 111-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-4
1:65
§ 111-5. Franchise fees.
(5) Technical capability. The Township may consider the quality of
service offered, including signal quality, response to consumer
complaints and billing practices, without regard to the mix, quality
or level of cable services or other services provided over the
system.
(6) Future needs. Consideration may be given to the franchisee's
ability to meet the future cable-related community needs and
interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and
interests.
(7) Additional considerations. The Township may consider any
additional information that it deems applicable.
C. Initial application fee. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee
established by the Township in its request for proposals shall
accompany the application for a franchise within the Township. Such
application fee shall not be deemed to be "franchise fees" within the
meaning of § 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542), and such payments
shall not be deemed to be "payments in kind" or any involuntary
payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid by the
franchisee to the Township. The application fee shall be limited to an
amount necessary to reimburse the Township for incidental costs
incurred in connection with processing and publicizing the franchise
requests, but in no event shall such fee be less than $500.
A. During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the
franchisee shall pay to the Township for the use of its streets, public
places and other facilities, not including poles or underground conduits,
as well as the maintenance, improvements and supervision for
administrative costs thereof, an annual franchise fee in an amount
equal to 5% of its annual gross revenues, as defined herein. This
payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the
Township by the franchisee and does not include rental of poles or
underground conduits.
B. Sales tax or other taxes levied directly on a per subscription basis and
collected by franchisee shall be deducted from the gross revenues
before computation of sums due the Township is made. Payments due
the Township under the terms of this chapter shall be computed
semiannually as of December 31 and June 30 for the preceding sixmonth
period and shall be paid on or before the 60th calendar day from
each said computation date at the office of the Township Manger. The
Township shall be furnished a statement with each payment, certified
as correct by the franchisee, reflecting the total amount of gross
revenues and the above charges, deductions and computations for the
six-month payment period covered by the payment. With the payment
each year for the semiannual period ending on December 31, a
statement prepared by the appropriate company representative shall
§ 111-4 WHITE CODE § 111-5
1:66
§ 111-6. Term and termination of franchise.
be submitted certifying that the statements filed and payments made by
the franchisee for the preceding year were correct. Upon reasonable,
but in no event less than 15 days, prior written notice, the Township
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of franchisee's
records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of 5% or more,
the franchisee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. Any
additional amount due to the Township as a result of such audit shall
be paid within 30 days following written notice by the Township to the
franchisee, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
C. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an
accord and satisfaction of any claim the Township may have for further
or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for
the performance of any other obligation hereunder.
D. Failure to pay any undisputed fee required by this section, within 10
days of receipt of written notice of such failure from the Township, shall
be grounds for termination of the franchise as set out in § 111-6 below.
A. No franchise granted hereunder, nor any renewal thereof, shall be for a
term of more than 15 years.
B. In addition to all other rights and powers of the Township by virtue of
the franchise or by this chapter, the Township may terminate and cancel
the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise thereunder in
the event that the franchisee either:
(1) Substantially violates any material provision of the franchise
agreement or this chapter.
(2) Attempts to dispose of any of the facilities or property of its cable
system to prevent the Township from purchasing same, as provided
for herein.
(3) Attempts to evade any of the material provisions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the
Township.
C. In such event, the Township may initiate procedures to terminate and
cancel the franchise held by the franchisee. Such procedures shall be as
set out in § 111-47.
D. Any such termination and cancellation shall be made by resolution of
the Township Board of Supervisors duly adopted after not less than 30
days' notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the
Township's rights under this franchisee or any provisions of law;
provided, however, that before the franchise may be terminated and
canceled under this section, the franchisee shall be provided with an
opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the Township Board
§ 111-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-6
1:67
of Supervisors, upon 20 days' written notice to the franchisee of the
time and place of the public hearing. Said notice shall affirmatively
cite the reasons alleged to constitute cause for revocation and shall be
published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days
before the date of the hearing.
§ 111-6 WHITE CODE § 111-6
1:68
ARTICLE III
Franchise Provisions and Restrictions
§ 111-7. Franchise provisions.
A. All franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the
Township to revoke the franchise pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained herein, any franchise granted
hereunder shall be subject to the right of the Township:
(a) To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or the failure to
substantially comply with the material provisions of this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
(b) To require proper and adequate extension of the plant and
service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable
standard of efficiency and to require extension of service to all
residents of the Township, as specified in the franchise
agreement.
(c) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or
rates.
(d) To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public
in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the
entire period thereof.
(e) To adopt such other regulations of general applicability as it
shall find necessary in the exercise of its police powers.
(f) To control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges
and public places and the space above and beneath them. The
franchisee may be required by the Township to permit joint use
of its poles and trenches located in the streets, alleys and
public places of the Township, by the Township and other
utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable
and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. The Township
shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge,
upon the poles, pipes and conduits of franchisee, any wire and
fixtures desired by the Township to the extent that such
installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing
and future operations of franchisee; provided, however, that
this subsection does not grant the Township the authority to
utilize the franchisee's fiber or cable transmission capacity.
(g) Through its appropriately designated representatives, to
inspect all construction or installation work performed subject
§ 111-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-7
1:69
to the provisions of the franchise and this chapter and make
such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of the franchise, this chapter and
other pertinent provisions of law.
(h) Through its appropriately designated representatives, to
inspect the books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns
and other like materials of the franchisee to the extent
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and the
franchise agreement upon reasonable, but in no event less
than 15 days' notice and at any time during normal business
hours.
(i) At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted
or after its termination and cancellation, as provided for
herein, subject to applicable law, to have the right, subject to
the provisions of federal law, to determine whether the
franchisee shall continue to operate and maintain the cable
system pending the decision of the Township as to the future
maintenance and operation of such system.
(j) At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted
or upon the termination and cancellation as provided herein, to
require the franchisee to remove, at its own expense, any and
all portions of the cable system from the public ways within the
Township.
B. Federal, state and Township jurisdiction.
(1) This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state laws.
(2) In the event that the state or federal government discontinue
preemption in any area of cable television over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such a manner as to expand rather than
limit municipal regulatory authority, the Township may, if is so
elects, adopt rules and regulations in these areas to the extent
permitted by law and consistent with the Township's police powers,
provided such expansion of municipal regulatory authority involves
the Township's police powers. To the extent such expansion of
municipal regulatory authority does not involve the Township's
police powers, the Township must obtain the franchisee's consent
to any amendments to the terms and conditions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement.
(3) This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed at or
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
(4) Franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter or any franchise agreement
granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the
Township to enforce prompt compliance.
§ 111-7 WHITE CODE § 111-7
1:70
§ 111-8. Franchise agreement.
§ 111-9. Standards for cable system.
Each franchisee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system
in accordance with the highest standards of cable communications, taking
into account the size and needs of the community as well as the costs
and benefits to the residents. Each franchisee shall maintain it system
facilities in an manner which will continue to enable it to add new services
and associated equipment as they are developed, available and proven
marketable to subscribers. The new services and associated equipment will
(5) This chapter and any franchise agreement granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
substantive laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The applicant awarded a franchise by the Township Board of
Supervisors shall execute a franchise agreement, agreeing to the terms
and provisions of the franchise as negotiated between the Township and
the applicant. Failure of the selected applicant to execute such an
agreement within 45 days of the Township's final approval of the
negotiated agreement may be grounds for immediate revocation of any
rights the applicant may have in the franchise.
B. In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this chapter to be
included in the franchise agreement, it must contain the following
express representations by the franchisee that:
(1) It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter and any
supplementary specification as to construction, operation or
maintenance of the system, which the Township may include in the
franchise agreement.
(2) It has examined all of the provisions of this chapter and agrees to
the terms and conditions herein.
(3) It recognizes the right of the Township to adopt such additional
regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power.
C. No franchise shall be exclusive.
D. Every franchise shall specifically delineate the territorial extent of the
Township in which the franchise is authorized to operate.
E. The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be included in the request for proposal and
negotiated between the Township and the franchisee, except that no
such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any
provisions of this chapter or other law. In case of such conflict or
ambiguity between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement
and this chapter, the words of this chapter shall control.
§ 111-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-9
1:71
be added to the system facilities when they are determined by franchisee
and the Township to be technically reliable, economically feasible and
adaptable to the system at a cost to the subscriber that is acceptable
in areas of similar size and demographic. In the event the Township
determines, in its sole discretion and based upon reasonable information,
that the franchisee is not in compliance with this section, the Township may,
at any time during the franchise, invoke the procedure in § 111-28G of this
chapter.
§ 111-10. Number of channels.
A franchisee must provide access channels. If there is more than one
franchisee under this chapter, any new franchisee must provide, at a
minimum, the same number of access channels as the initial franchisee is
required to provide under the terms of its franchise agreement.
§ 111-11. Public service installation.
The franchisee shall, without charge for installation, maintenance or
monthly service, provide one outlet of its basic cable service at the
Township Hall. Upon request, the franchisee shall install basic cable service
without charge for maintenance or monthly service to the Township
Recreation Center at a cost that is equal to the amount by which the actual
cost of such installation exceeds the cost the franchisee would incur if
installation were within 200 feet of the franchisee's activated distribution
plant. Upon the request of the Township, franchisee shall also provide
such service to other public buildings in the Township, provided such other
locations are within 125 feet of the franchisee's activated distribution plant
and serviceable through a standard aerial drop. Such installations shall be
made at such reasonable locations as shall be requested by the respective
units of government or educational institutions. Any charge for relocation of
such installations shall be in accordance with FCC regulations. No monthly
service charges shall be made for distribution of the franchisee's signals
within such publicly owned building, except as negotiated and agreed upon
by the Township and the franchisee. The Township shall be prohibited from
reselling, in any manner, the service provided by the franchisee pursuant to
this section.
§ 111-12. Interconnections.
Upon mutual agreement of the Township and franchisee, the franchisee
shall interconnect its cable system in the Township with any or all other
adjacent cable systems in the Township, surrounding townships or county,
as set out in the franchise agreement. Interconnection of cable systems
may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other
appropriate method. Upon reaching a mutual agreement to interconnect,
franchisee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected
cable system or systems in order that all costs may be shared equally among
cable systems for both construction and operation of the interconnection
link. Franchisee shall be granted reasonable extensions of time to
§ 111-9 WHITE CODE § 111-12
1:72
interconnect. Franchisee shall cooperate with any interconnection
corporation, interconnection authority or other county, state or federal
regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of
regulating financing as providing for the interconnection of cable systems
beyond the boundaries of the Township.
§ 111-13. Construction standards and requirements.
A. Franchisee shall not construct any cable system facilities until
franchisee has secured the necessary permits from the Township or
other cognizant public agencies.
B. All of the franchisee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited
to, the antenna site, headend and distribution system, towers, house
connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fiber optics,
fixtures and appurtenances which serve the Township shall be installed,
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed,
repaired and maintained and operated in accordance with good
engineering practices, performed by experienced pole line construction
crews and so as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of any
person or property or to interfere with improvements the Township may
deem proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the right of
any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic on Township properties. Further, all such plant and
equipment and all construction shall meet all relevant specifications of
the Federal Communications Commission and other applicable federal,
state and local regulations.
C. Any opening or obstruction in or disturbance of the streets, public ways
or other Township properties made by the franchisee in the exercise of
its rights under a franchise agreement shall be done in compliance with
Township ordinances which regulate work in the public ways of the
Township, except that any bond requirements may be waived in
cognizance of the bond requirements of this chapter.
D. The Township shall require the franchisee to relocate its existing cable
line underground where both the telephone and electric utilities have
been or are scheduled to be installed underground. In constructing and
installing new plant where either telephone or electric utilities have
been or are scheduled to be installed underground, franchisee must
install the cable system underground. In the event that funding is
available for the reimbursement of expenses incurred for such
relocation, franchisee shall be reimbursed on the same terms and
conditions as utilities.
E. The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place or
municipal property, or remove from the street or other public place or
municipal property, any property of franchisee when required by the
Township Board of Supervisors or its designee by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street excavation, freeway and street
§ 111-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-13
1:73
§ 111-14. Technical standards.
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or
any other type of structures of improvements by public agencies. In
the event that funding is available for the reimbursement of expenses
incurred for such relocation or removal, franchisee shall be reimbursed
on the same terms and conditions as utilities.
F. The franchisee shall, on the request of any private party holding an
appropriate permit issued by the Township, temporarily raise or lower
its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure and the
actual expense of the same shall be paid in advance by the party
requesting the same.
G. The franchisee shall have the right, with the prior approval of the
Township, to remove, trim, cut or keep clear of its poles, wires or
cables, the trees in and along the streets, alleys, lanes and other public
places of the Township, but in the exercise of such right, the franchisee
shall not cut or otherwise injure said trees to any greater extent than is
reasonably necessary for the continued integrity of its poles, wires or
cables.
H. The franchisee, in exercise of any right granted to it by the franchise,
shall reconstruct, replace, restore or repair any street, alley, lane or
public place and any sewer, gas or water main, pipe, electric, fire alarm
or police communications, off or on Township property or right-of-way
or traffic control facility of the Township which may be damaged or
destroyed by the exercise of any such right, to a condition as good as
that prevailing before such damage or destruction. The Township shall
reserve the right to determine whether the franchisee has properly
complied with the provisions of this subsection, and in the event it is
determined in the Township's reasonable judgment that the franchisee
has failed to do so, the Township shall have the right to carry out such
provisions and the franchisee shall, after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to cure, reimburse the Township in full for all reasonable
costs incurred by the Township in carrying out all or part of such
provisions.
I. Upon failure of the franchisee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in
any street or other public place or municipal property, within the time
prescribed and to the satisfaction of the Township Board of Supervisors
or its designee may, at its option, following reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure to the franchisee, cause such work to be done and
the franchisee shall pay to the Township the reasonable cost thereof in
the itemized amounts reported by the Township Board of Supervisors or
its designee to the franchisee within 30 days after receipt of such
itemized report.
§ 111-13 WHITE CODE § 111-14
1:74
§ 111-15. Repair.
Any damage caused to the property of building owners or users or any
other person by the franchisee's negligence shall be repaired fully by the
franchisee to a condition as good as that prevailing before said damage.
§ 111-16. Removal of facilities upon request.
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly
remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber
upon his or her request.
§ 111-17. Transfer of ownership.
A. All construction practices will be in accordance with all applicable
sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as
amended, as well as all other applicable local, state and federal laws
and regulations.
B. Antennae and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
local, state and federal laws and regulations.
C. The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install,
maintain and use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injuries or nuisances to the public.
D. The franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National
Electrical Safety code of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection
Association, the Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction and
applicable federal, state and local regulations.
A. Unless provided otherwise in the franchise agreement, any franchise
awarded under this chapter shall not be sold, transferred or assigned,
either by forced or involuntary sale or by voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Township
Board of Supervisors expressed by resolution, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld and then only under such reasonable
conditions as may therein be prescribed. In addition, the successor as
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors shall comply with the
terms of this chapter with respect to filing acceptance bonds and
insurance and shall show that it is financially responsible. Any such
sale, transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in
writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the
Township Manager or Clerk within 30 days; provided, however, the
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a transfer of assets or
stock in trust, controlled by or under the same common control as the
§ 111-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-17
1:75
franchisee. The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
this section:
(1) The sale, assignment or other transfer of this franchise.
(2) The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership membership or other equity interest in franchise by
one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or
other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in
franchise.
(3) The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by franchisee so as to create a
new controlling interest in franchisee.
(4) The transfer of management or control of the franchisee to an
unrelated third party.
(5) The term "controlling interest" as used herein means majority
equity ownership of the franchisee.
B. The franchisee and the Township must comply with applicable
provisions of the Cable Act regarding transfer of ownership and any
other state, federal or local laws which are applicable.
C. The franchisee shall notify the Township, in writing, of any foreclosure
or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchisee's
property, where such property is critical to the operation of the cable
system serving the Township. Such notification shall be considered by
the Township as notice that a change in control or ownership of the
franchise has taken place and the provisions of this section governing
the consent of the Township to such change in control or ownership
shall apply.
D. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such a sale,
assignment or transfer, the Township may inquire into the qualifications
of the prospective transferee or controlling party and the franchisee
shall assist the Township in any such inquiry. In seeking the Township's
consent to any change in ownership or control, the franchisee shall
have the responsibility of ensuring that the transferee completes an
application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
Township, which application shall include the information required
under state and federal law. The transferee shall be required to
establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial
qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all
franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise.
If, after considering the legal, financial, character and technical
qualities of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the
Township finds such transfer acceptable, the Township shall transfer
and assign the rights and obligations of said franchise.
§ 111-17 WHITE CODE § 111-17
1:76
§ 111-18. Purchase by Township.
§ 111-19. Geographical coverage.
§ 111-20. Nonexclusive franchise.
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The Township specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a
cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate,
E. Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchisee or its assets
for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of
the franchise shall have the right to notify the Township that it or its
designee, satisfactory to the Township, shall take control of and operate
the cable television system, in the event of a franchisee default in its
financial obligations. Further said financial institution shall also submit
a plan for such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that
will assure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control
over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over
the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the
Township in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have
the right to petition the Township to transfer the franchise to another
franchise.
A. If subject to the provisions of the Cable Act a renewal of a franchise is
denied and the Township acquires ownership of the cable system such
acquisition shall be to the extent permitted by local, federal and state
law, upon payment to the franchisee of the cable system's fair market
value as a going-concern, exclusive of any value allocated to the
franchise itself.
B. Subject to the provisions of the Cable Act, if a franchise is revoked for
cause and the Township acquires ownership of the cable system, such
acquisition shall be, to the extent permitted by local, federal and State
law, upon payment of a equitable price.
A. Franchisee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television
system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the service
area, subject to any line extension requirements of the franchise
agreement.
B. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or
distribution cables for any part of the service area, franchisee shall
provide cable service to any requesting subscriber within that service
area within 30 days from the date of request, provided that the
franchisee is able to secure all private easements necessary to extend
service to such subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable
terms and conditions. Franchisee shall negotiate for such easements in
good faith and notify the Township within 20 days after the request if
franchisee is unable to secure necessary easements.
§ 111-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-20
1:77
subject to applicable state and federal law; provided, however, that the
terms and conditions of any such additional franchises shall be no less
burdensome nor more favorable than those contained in any franchise
previously granted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 111-21. Multiple franchises.
§ 111-22. Franchise renewal.
Franchise renewal shall be in accordance with applicable law, including,
but not limited to, the Cable Act. The Township and the franchisee, by
mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during
the term of the franchise. The Township reserves any rights it may have
to be compensated for funds expended as a result of the franchise renewal
process, as allowed by local, state and federal laws. The preceding
statement does not constitute any agreement by an applicant to reimburse
the Township for such costs. Franchisee reserves any rights it may have
under local, state and federal laws. Neither adoption of this franchise by the
Township nor acceptance by the franchisee shall be construed as a waiver,
modification, termination or discharge of any right that either the Township
or franchisee may now or hereafter have.
A. The Township may grant one or more franchises for a service area. The
Township may, in its sole discretion, limit the number of franchises
granted based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of
applicable laws and specific considerations, such as:
(1) The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple
coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the
utility systems, such as electrical, power, telephone, gas and
sewerage.
(2) The impact on the community of having multiple franchises.
(3) The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents
property and a disruption arising from numerous excavations of the
rights-of-way.
(4) The legal, technical and financial capabilities of the applicant and
its guaranteed commitment to make the necessary investment to
erect, maintain and operate the proposed system for the duration
of the franchise term.
B. Each franchisee awarded a franchise to serve the entire Township shall
offer service to all residences in the Township, in accordance with the
line extension requirements set forth in Article 3, § 1, of the franchise
agreement, construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon
between the Township and the franchisee and consistent with
applicable law.
§ 111-20 WHITE CODE § 111-23
1:78
§ 111-23. Township's right of intervention.
The franchisee shall not oppose intervention by the Township in any suit or
proceeding to which the franchisee is a party that may affect franchisee's
operations in the Township pursuant to the franchise agreement.
§ 111-24. Discriminatory or preferential practice.
The franchisee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general services on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. The franchisee shall
comply at all times with applicable equal employment opportunity
requirements and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.
§ 111-25. Subscriber privacy.
A. Notice to subscriber.
(1) At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable
service or other service to a subscriber and at least once a year
thereafter, franchisee shall provide notice in the form of a separate,
written statement to such subscriber which clearly and
conspicuously informs the subscriber of:
(a) The nature of personally identifiable information collected or
to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of
the use of such information.
(b) The nature, frequency and purpose of any disclosure which
may be made of such information, including an identification of
the types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made.
(c) The period during which such information will be maintained
by franchisee.
(d) The times and place at which the subscriber may have access
to such information in accordance with Subsection D.
(e) The limitations provided by this section with respect to the
collection and disclosure of information by franchisee and the
right of the subscriber to enforce such limitations.
(2) For purposes of this section:
(a) The term "personally identifiable information" does not include
any record of aggregate data which does not identify particular
persons.
(b) The term "other service" includes any wire or radio
communications service provided using any of the facilities of
franchisee that are used in the provision of cable service.
§ 111-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-25
1:79
B. Written or electronic consent.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) below, franchisee shall not
use the cable system to collect personally identifiable information
concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic
consent of the subscriber concerned.
(2) Franchisee may use the cable system to collect such information in
order to:
(a) Obtain information necessary to render a cable service or
other service provided by franchisee to the subscriber.
(b) Detect unauthorized reception of cable communications.
C. Disclosure of personally identifiable information.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection C(2) below, franchisee shall not
disclose personally identifiable information concerning any
subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the
subscriber concerned and shall take such actions as are necessary
to prevent unauthorized access to such information by a person
other than the subscriber or franchisee.
(2) Franchisee may disclose such information if the disclosure is:
(a) Necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity
related to a cable service or other service provided by the
franchisee to the subscriber.
(b) Made pursuant to a court order authorizing such disclosure, if
the subscriber is notified of such order by the person to whom
the order is directed.
(c) A disclosure of the names and addresses of subscribers to any
cable service or other service, if:
[1] The franchisee has provided the subscriber the
opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure.
[2] The disclosure does not reveal, directly or indirectly, the:
[a] Extent of any viewing or other use by the subscriber of
a cable service or other service provided by the
franchisee.
[b] The nature of any transaction made by the subscriber
over the cable system of the franchisee.
D. A cable subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable
information regarding that subscriber which is collected and
maintained by franchisee. Such information shall be made available to
the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place
§ 111-25 WHITE CODE § 111-25
1:80
§ 111-26. Permits and authorizations.
The franchisee or applicant for franchise shall diligently apply for all
necessary permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business
and shall diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary
pole attachment contracts and necessary authorizations from the Federal
Aviation Administration to construct such receiving antenna towers as may
be required and any necessary authorizations or waivers from the Federal
Communications Commission, and when any such permit, authorization,
contract or waiver is obtained pertaining to this franchise a copy thereof
shall be promptly filed by the franchisee with the Township Board of
Supervisors. After the franchisee has diligently pursued the acquisition
of necessary pole attachment contracts, or other necessary easements,
and where such necessary contracts have not been entered or easements
obtained after a reasonable period of time, the franchisee may submit the
matter to the Township Board of Supervisors and the Township Board of
Supervisors will thereupon provide assistance that may be necessary to
arrive at a solution so that scheduled construction of the system will not be
impaired.
§ 111-27. Reports.
designated by franchisee. A cable subscriber shall be provided
reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such information.
E. Franchisee shall destroy personally identifiable information if the
information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was
collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to
such information under Subsection D or pursuant to a court order.
A. Each franchisee shall file with the Township Board of Supervisors
semiannual report of gross revenues certified as correct by the
franchisee and prepared in a form acceptable to the Township. Each
franchisee shall also allow the Township Board of Supervisors to audit
all of its accounting and financial records applicable to its system
serving the Township as necessary to verify the accuracy of franchise
fee payments made to the Township, upon reasonable, but in no event
less than 15 days, written notice, and at all times maintain complete
and accurate books of account, records of its business and operations
and all other records required by this chapter or the franchise. Such
books and records shall be made available to the Township as set out in
§ 111-37 of this chapter.
B. Each franchise shall file an annual report. Such report shall be filed
with the Township within 90 days of the end of each calendar year and
shall include:
(1) An ownership report indicating all persons who at any time during
the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the
franchise of 5% or more. This requirement may be met by providing
§ 111-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-27
1:81
§ 111-28. Periodic evaluation, review and modification.
The field of cable communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing
one which may see many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and
legal changes during the term of this franchise. Therefore, to provide for
a maximum degree of flexibility in this franchise and to help achieve a
continued advanced and modern system, the following evaluation provisions
will apply:
a copy of the most recent SEC Form 10-K, filed by grantee, if such
filing is required to be made by grantee.
(2) A copy of the annual notification to subscribers provided under
§ 111-36C(1)(a), if such notification is required by the FCC.
(3) A summary of any customer surveys that are intended to provide
statistical information regarding all subscribers in the Township
conducted that year, including surveys conducted pursuant to
§ 111-35.
A. The Township reserves the right to adopt rules and regulations
controlling the procedures set forth below and the subjects for
evaluation sessions, provided that such rules and regulations do not
conflict with the terms and conditions contained in this chapter and/or
the franchise agreement. In the absence of any Township action taken
to exercise these rights, franchisee shall be subject to at least the
procedures and subjects described in this section.
B. The Township may require, at its sole discretion, evaluation sessions at
any time during the term of the franchise; provided, however, there
shall not be more than one evaluation every three years. The Township
must provide prior written notice to the franchisee within 90 days prior
to such evaluation sessions.
C. Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session include, but
are not limited to, regulated rates, channel capacity, system
performance, access, municipal uses of cable, subscriber complaints,
judicial rulings and/or FCC ruling which may affect franchisee's service
within the Township and any other topics the Township or franchisee
deem relevant related to the franchisee's operations within the
Township.
D. The Township may require franchisee to provide information on new
and innovative services and technologies which are offered on other
cable systems with 10,000 subscribers or less, which are owned or
operated by franchisee, its parent company or its affiliates and are a
part of the same operating division and in the same geographic region
as franchisee's cable system serving the Township.
E. During an evaluation session, franchisee shall fully cooperate with the
Township and shall provide without cost such information and
documents as the Township may reasonable request to perform the
§ 111-27 WHITE CODE § 111-28
1:82
§ 111-29. Termination.
In the event the franchisee shall be adjudicated, bankrupt or placed in
receivership or any foreclosure of any mortgage or deed of trust upon
its property shall be commenced, or any other insolvency proceedings,
either voluntary or involuntary, against the franchisee shall be commenced,
the Township Board of Supervisors may terminate and in that event, all
the rights, privileges and authority of the franchisee shall immediately
cease and terminate in accordance with applicable law. In no event shall
this franchise grant be considered an asset of the bankrupt estate or
receivership without the express formal approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors in advance.
§ 111-30. Emergency alert system.
Franchisee will comply with FCC regulations as they pertain to emergency
alert systems.
evaluation. To the extent such information or documents contain
confidential information, the franchisee shall not be required to
disclose such confidential information.
F. Should an evaluation session reveal inadequacies which result in a
violation of a provision of this chapter, the franchise agreement or the
FCC's technical standards, at the direction of the Township, the
franchisee shall perform tests on the system and submit to the
Township a plan for implementing any changes or improvements
necessary to comply with FCC standards, this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
G. As a result of an evaluation session, the Township and franchisee may
determine that a change in the terms of the franchise should be
required to meet the needs of the community, that the system or
franchise requirements should be updated, changed, revised or that
additional services should be provided and that to provide same would
be economically feasible. If the change is consistent with the terms of
this chapter, the needs of the Township, and is economically feasible as
determined by franchisee and the Township following an evaluation of
franchisee's financial condition, length of term remaining on the
franchise, economic waste, if any, that would occur should the terms be
changed and rate of return on the investment within the community, the
parties will in good faith, review the terms of the change and any
amendment to this chapter. In the event of disagreement, franchisee
shall present evidence that establishes that there is no reasonable need
for said services or technology in the community or it is not
economically feasible to provide the services or technology. Based on
this review and upon adoption of such a change or new requirement
through a mutually acceptable ordinance amendment, the change will
become effective.
§ 111-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-31
1:83
§ 111-31. Amendments for new developments.
Upon franchisee request, the Township Board of Supervisors may amend
this chapter or the franchise whenever necessary to enable the franchisee
to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of
communication signals and upgrade the system which will afford it an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its
customers, provided that this section shall not be construed to require the
Township to make any such amendment.
§ 111-32. Indemnification; bonds; insurance.
A. Liability and indemnification. The franchisee shall indemnify and hold
harmless the Township at all times during the term of the franchise
granted hereby and specifically agrees that it shall pay all damages and
penalties which the Township may be legally required to pay as a result
of granting the franchise. Such damages and penalties shall include,
but are not limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements
and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or
maintenance of the cable system authorized herein, whether or not any
act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by
the franchise, except that a franchisee shall not be liable for payment of
damages and penalties arising from any acts of omissions by the
Township, its agents or employees. In case suit shall be filed against the
Township either independently or jointly with the franchisee to recover
for any claim or damages, the franchisee upon notice to it by the
Township shall defend the Township against the action and, in the event
of a final judgment being obtained against the Township, either
independently or jointly with the franchisee solely by reason of the acts
of the franchisee, the franchisee shall pay said judgment and all costs
and hold the Township harmless therefrom.
B. Bonds. The Township may require the franchisee to file with the
Township Clerk, concurrently with its acceptance of the franchise and
at franchisee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond or construction
bond. Such bond shall be in an amount specified in the franchise
agreement, issued by a responsible company licensed to do business in
Pennsylvania and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
franchisee to meet its construction obligations under this chapter and
the franchise. Upon successful completion of such construction the
bond shall be canceled.
C. Insurance.
(1) During the course of the franchise, the franchise shall be required
to maintain liability insurance with a company licensed to do
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with a rating by
Best of not less than "B+" to protect the Township and the
franchisee from and against any and all claims, injury or damage to
persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the
construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any aspect of
§ 111-31 WHITE CODE § 111-32
1:84
§ 111-33. Operational standards.
§ 111-34. Continuity of service.
the system. The amount of insurance shall be specified in the
franchise agreement.
(2) Worker's compensation insurance shall also be provided as
required by the laws of the state.
(3) All such insurance coverage shall provide, at a minimum, a ten-day
notice to the Township Manager in the event of material alteration
or cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies prior to the
date said material alteration or cancellation shall become effective.
(4) Nonwaiver. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bonds
accepted by the Township pursuant thereto, nor any damages
recovered by the Township thereunder shall be construed to excuse
unfaithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the
franchisee under this chapter or the franchise for damages, either
to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
A. The technical standards for operation of the system shall, in addition to
meeting the requirements specified in this chapter, conform to all
further requirements specified in the franchise agreement and any
other standards or codes therefor as may be adopted by the Township
Board of Supervisors.
B. The franchisee shall:
(1) Operate its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable
technical standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(2) Limit failures to a minimum by locating and begin correcting
service malfunctions properly, but in no event longer than 24
business hours after notification. For the purpose of this
subsection, service malfunctions shall not include acts of God or
minor malfunctions that are not related to franchisees operations
of the cable system.
(3) Notify subscribers affected 24 hours prior to any planned
interruption of service which may result in loss of service for a
period of one hour or greater.
(4) Demonstrate upon request, by instruments and otherwise, to
subscribers that a signal of adequate strength and quality is being
delivered.
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving services
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are
honored. In the event that the franchisee elects to rebuild, modify or
§ 111-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-34
1:85
§ 111-35. Customer complaint procedures.
sell the system, or the Township give notice of intent to terminate or
fails to renew this franchise, the franchisee shall act so as to ensure
that all subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted service.
B. In the event of a change of the franchisee, or in the event a new
operator acquires the system, the franchisee shall cooperate with the
Township's new franchise or operator in maintaining continuity of
service to all subscribers. During such period, franchisee shall be
entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the
system and shall be entitled to reasonable cost for its services when it
no longer operates the system.
C. In the event the franchisee fails to operate the system for seven
consecutive days without approval of the Township and without just
cause, the Township may, at its option, operate the system or designate
an operator until such time as the franchisee restores service under
conditions acceptable to operator is selected. If the Township is
required to fulfill this obligation for the franchisee, the franchisee shall
reimburse the Township for all reasonable cost or damages in excess of
revenue from the system received by the Township that are a result of
the franchisee's failure to perform.
D. Franchisee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
the television reception of persons not served by franchisee, nor shall
the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the Township,
as the facilities of such utilities exist at the time of construction or
extension of franchisee's system.
A. The Township Manager is specified by the Township as having primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and
implementation of complaint procedures.
B. The franchisee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon
and resolving subscriber complaints. The franchisee shall furnish a
notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to the system.
C. In the event that a customer complaint is not resolved to the mutual
satisfaction of the customer and the franchisee, the customer of the
franchisee may request that the matter be presented to the Township
Board of Supervisors for a hearing and resolution.
D. Upon request, the franchisee shall provide to the Township reports
summarizing service calls, indicating the nature of complaints by
category.
E. Every three years after the effective date of a franchisee's franchise
agreement, the Township may request franchisee to conduct and
administer a random survey of Township subscribers at the expense of
§ 111-34 WHITE CODE § 111-35
1:86
the franchisee. Each questionnaire shall be prepared by the franchisee
and shall be conducted in good faith so as to provide reasonably reliable
measures of subscriber satisfaction with:
(1) Audio and signal quality.
(2) Response to subscriber complaints.
(3) Billing practices.
(4) Regulated programming services.
(5) Installation practices.
F. The survey shall be conducted in conformity with such requirements,
including supervision and review of returned surveys, as the Township
and franchisee agree. Franchisee, at its option, may satisfy this
requirement through a telephone survey conducted by an independent
person in the business of regularly conducting telephone surveys or by
inserting the survey instrument in the regular monthly subscriber
invoices. Any written survey shall be printed on a postcard provided by
the Township at its expense. The survey postcard shall be an
appropriate size or weight to allow insertion on monthly invoice without
requiring additional postage expense.
G. Franchisee shall provide the Township with the results of the survey
and shall report, in writing, any steps franchisee plans to take in
response to the findings of the survey, such as correcting problems and
expanding services.
H. At such time as a franchisee is determined to be subject to effective
competition as defined by then applicable federal law, the requirements
of Subsections E, F and G of this section shall no longer apply to such
franchisee.
I. In addition to its normal business hours, the franchisee shall provide a
drop box in order to receive customer payments outside normal
business hours.
J. Reports and tests required by FCC.
(1) The franchisee shall submit to the Township all reports and the
results of all tests required by the FCC and certification that the
system is in compliance with FCC technical standards at the time
that any such reports and/or tests results are submitted to the FCC.
In the event that the franchisee's system is not in compliance with
FCC standards, the Board of Supervisors shall have the right and
authority to compel the franchisee to test, analyze and report on
the performance of the system. Such report shall be delivered to
the Board of Supervisors no later than 45 days after the Board of
Supervisors formally notifies franchisee and shall include the
following information:
§ 111-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-35
1:87
§ 111-36. Customer service.
(a) The nature of the noncompliance which precipitated this
special test.
(b) What system components were tested.
(c) The equipment used and the procedures used in said testing.
(d) Result of such test.
(e) The method in which said noncompliance was resolved.
(2) Said test and analysis shall be supervised by an engineer having
proper training and experience. The aforesaid engineer shall sign
all records of the special test and forward to the Board of
Supervisors such records with a report interpreting results of the
test and recommending actions to be taken by the franchisee. The
franchisee shall pay all costs that the Township incurs with respect
to such tests, to the extent the franchisee is not in compliance, has
not certified compliance or is not diligently pursuing such
compliance within 45 days of the Board of Supervisor's notice.
A. Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
(1) Franchisee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
(a) Trained franchisee representatives will be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
(b) After normal business hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained franchisee
representative on the next business day.
(2) Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These
standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal
operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
(3) The franchisee will not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards above unless an historical record of
complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
(4) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
§ 111-35 WHITE CODE § 111-36
1:88
(5) Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours and will be conveniently
located.
B. Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than
95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(1) Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard installations" are
those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution
system.
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of franchisee, franchisee's
representatives will be available to begin working on service
interruptions within 24 hours, upon telephone request.
(3) The appointment window for installations, service calls and other
installation activities will be within a four-hour time block during
normal business hours. The franchisee may schedule service calls
and other installation activities outside of normal business hours
for the express convenience of the customer.
(4) Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
(5) If franchisee's representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the
customer.
C. Communications between franchisee and cable subscriber.
(1) Notification to subscribers.
(a) The franchisee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers and at any time upon request:
[1] Products and services offered.
[2] Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other
services.
[3] Installation and service maintenance policies.
[4] Instruction on how to use the cable service.
[5] Channel positions programming carried on the system.
§ 111-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-36
1:89
§ 111-37. Records required and Township's right to inspect.
[6] Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the Township's cable office.
(b) Customers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions consistent with the
requirements of federal law or regulation.
(2) Billing.
(a) Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations, including, but not limited to,
basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
(b) In case of a billing dispute, the franchisee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
(3) Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
(a) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or 30 days, whichever is earlier.
(b) The return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee if
service is terminated.
(4) Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
A. Franchisee shall at all times maintain a full and complete set of plans,
records and as-built maps showing the location of the cable television
system installed or in use in the Township, exclusive of subscriber
service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes.
B. Upon reasonable, but not less than 15 days, written notice, and during
normal business hours, franchisee shall permit examination by any duly
authorized representative of the Township, of all system property and
facilities and all records relating to the franchise, provided they are
necessary to ascertain the franchisee's compliance with this chapter
and the franchise agreement. Such records include all books, records,
maps, plans, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance
test results, records of request for service and other like materials of
franchisee. Franchisee shall have the right to be present at any such
examination.
C. If any of the records described in the previous subsection are
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by state, federal or
local law, upon proper request by franchisee, such information obtained
during such an inspection shall be treated as confidential, making it
available only to those persons who must have access to perform their
§ 111-36 WHITE CODE § 111-37
1:90
§ 111-38. Abandonment or removal of franchise property.
duties on behalf of the Township, including, but not limited to, the
Division of Finances, the Law Department and Council members. To the
extent any federal requirement for privacy applies to the information to
be submitted, said law shall control.
D. The Township shall have the right to request copies of any petitions,
applications, communications and reports submitted by franchisee or
on its behalf to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters
affecting the cable system authorized pursuant to this chapter and any
franchise, as such documents relate to franchisee's operation of its
system under the franchise. Copies of responses from the regulatory
agencies to franchisee shall likewise be furnished to the Township upon
request.
A. In the event that the use of any property of franchisee within the
franchise area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous
period of 12 months, franchisee shall be deemed to have abandoned
that franchise property, unless such discontinuation is due to an act of
God or unless Township agrees to such discontinuation.
B. The Township, upon such terms as the Township may impose, may give
franchisee permission to abandon, without removing, any system
facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, the franchisee shall remove all
abandoned aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of
written notice from Township and shall restore any affected street to its
former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so
as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without
materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other
utility wires, poles or attachments. The Township shall have the right to
inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places,
cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The
liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the
security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by franchisee
with the terms and conditions of this section.
C. Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the franchisee, if
required by the Township, shall submit to the Township an instrument,
satisfactory in form to the Township, transferring to the Township the
ownership of the franchise property abandoned.
§ 111-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-38
1:91
§ 111-39. Rights reserved to Township.
§ 111-40. Conflicts with federal or state law.
If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or
state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with
any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect or
is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such
provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of
this chapter and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability
of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulations
is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so
that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulations, said provision shall
thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on the Township and franchisee, provided that the Township shall give
D. At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon
its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such
case without renewal, extension or transfer, the Township shall have
the right to require franchisee to remove, at its own expense, all
aboveground portions of the cable television system from all streets and
public ways within the Township within a reasonable time, which shall
not be less than 180 days.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the
franchisee may abandon any underground franchise property in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or
public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use
thereof by any public utility or other cable franchisee.
A. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the Township by this
chapter, the Township reserves to itself every right and power which is
required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the
franchise.
B. The Township shall have the right to waive any provision of the
franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the
Township determines that it is in the public interest to do so and that
the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the
franchisee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be
evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized
representative of the Township. Waiver of any provision in one instance
shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such
instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise
unless that statement so recites. In the event the Township has granted
multiple franchises and waives any provision of this chapter with
regard to one franchisee, the other franchisees can seek waiver of the
same provision and such waiver will be granted.
§ 111-38 WHITE CODE § 111-40
1:92
franchisee 30 days' written notice of such change before requiring
compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be
reasonably required for franchisee to comply with such provision.
§ 111-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-40
1:93

ARTICLE IV
Subscriber Rates, Charges and Refunds
§ 111-41. Regulation by Township.
All rates and charges for basic cable service shall, to the extent allowed
by federal law or regulation, be subject to regulation by the Township in a
manner consistent with such law or regulation. The Township reserves the
right to regulate rates to the extent not expressly preempted by federal or
state law.
§ 111-42. Use of rate consultant.
The Township may utilize a rate consultant to advise it on proposed rate
changes and to assist it in the procedures and the standards for review
adopted by the FCC. A rate consultant may be any person who has sufficient
background and experience, in the sole opinion of the Township, to properly
evaluate and analyze rates and charges.
§ 111-43. Reimbursement of Township review costs.
The Township reserves its right to seek reimbursement of costs for the
review of initial rates or rate changes by franchisee as allowed by applicable
state or federal law. The preceding statement does not constitute any
agreement by any applicant to reimburse the Township for such costs.
Franchisee reserves any rights it may have under local, state and federal
laws. Neither adoption of this franchise by the Township nor acceptance by
the franchisee shall be construed as a waiver, modification, termination or
discharge of any right that either the Township or franchisee may now or
hereafter have.
§ 111-44. Applicability of rates.
The requirements described in this chapter are applicable to franchisee
subject to rate regulations according to the 1992 Cable Act and applicable
FCC rules.
§ 111-45. Reductions in price; current rates on file with Township.
Unregulated prices, adjustments in prices permitted under the federal law
or FCC rules and reductions in price shall become effective as permitted
under federal law or the FCC rules. Franchisee shall maintain on file with
the Township at all times a current schedule of all rates and charges for
subscribers.
§ 111-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-45
1:95

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 111-46. Performance bond.
Each franchisee shall provide a performance bond as specified in the
franchise agreement.
§ 111-47. Procedure for remedying franchise violation.
If franchisee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation
required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following notice
from the Township and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance,
Township may act to remedy such violation in accordance with the following
procedures:
A. The Township, by action of the Board of Supervisors, shall first notify
franchisee of the violation, in writing, by personal delivery or registered
or certified mail and demand correction within a reasonable time,
which shall not be less than 15 days in the case of the failure of the
franchisee to pay any sum or other amount due the Township under this
chapter or a franchise agreement hereunder and 30 days in all other
cases. If franchisee falls to correct the violation within the time
prescribed or if franchisee fails to commence corrective action within
the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the
franchisee shall then be given a written notice of not less than 20 days
of a public hearing to be held before the Board of Supervisors. Said
notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred.
B. At the public hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall hear and consider
all relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and its decision.
C. In the event the Board of Supervisors finds that franchisee has
corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such
violation after notice thereof from the Township and is diligently
proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no material violation
has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other
sanction shall be imposed. In determining whether a violation is
material, the Township shall take into consideration the reliability of the
evidence of the violation, the nature of the violation and the damage, if
any, caused to the Township or the Township's residents thereby,
whether the violation was chronic and any justifying or mitigating
circumstances and such other matters as the Township may deem
appropriate.
D. In the event the Board of Supervisors finds that a material violation
exists and that franchisee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory
manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation,
the Board of Supervisors may terminate and cancel the franchise held
by the franchisee as provided in § 111-6 hereof, or impose liquidated
damages, payable from the performance bond, of up to $150 per day,
§ 111-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-47
1:97
§ 111-48. Force majeure, franchisee's inability to perform.
§ 111-49. Nonenforcement not estoppel.
The franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of the franchise by any failure of the Township to enforce
prompt compliance.
§ 111-50. No recourse against Township.
Franchisee's recourse against the Township shall be limited as provided in
§ 635A of the Cable Act.
for failure to meet its upgrade or construction schedule as set out in the
franchise agreement and up to $100 per day or per incident for all other
violations of a material nature, provided that all violations of a similar
nature occurring at the same time shall be considered one violation.
A. In the event franchisee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or
obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is
prevented by a cause or event not within franchisee's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or
sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof.
B. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control
of franchisee shall include, but not be limited to, acts of God, strikes,
sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a
governmental agency or court, failure or loss of utilities, explosion, acts
of public enemies and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides and fires.
§ 111-47 WHITE CODE § 111-50
1:98
Chapter 120
CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Code Enforcement — See Ch.
12.
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 149.
Furnaces, outdoor — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Rental property — See Ch. 221.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Water — See Ch. 311.
§ 111-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-50
1:99

ARTICLE I
Multifamily and Commercial Structures
[Adopted 4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 984]
§ 120-1. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted under authority of § 1517 of the Second Class
Township Code, as amended.
§ 120-2. Adoption of codes.
The White Township Board of Supervisors do hereby adopt as the White
Township Multifamily and Commercial Construction Code the 2000
International Residential Code, the 2000 International Building Code, the
2000 International Plumbing Code, the 2000 International Mechanical
Code, and the 2002 National Electrical Code (including codes incorporated
by reference therein), as amended from time to time.
§ 120-3. Applicability. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 984A]
A. This article shall apply to the construction, erection, fabrication,
enlargement, alteration, maintenance, repair, and electrical and
plumbing installations of all multifamily and commercial structures,
and structures accessory thereto, that are undertaken after the
effective date of this article.
B. This article shall exclude and shall not apply to:
(1) New multifamily and commercial buildings or renovations to
existing multifamily and commercial buildings for which an
application for a building permit was made to White Township
before June 1, 2003;
(2) New multifamily and commercial buildings or renovations to
existing multifamily and commercial buildings on which a contract
for design or construction was signed before June 1, 2003, provided
that a building permit has been issued and construction of the same
shall commence before June 1, 2004; and
(3) Any agricultural buildings.
C. Building permits issued prior to June 1, 2003, shall remain valid and the
construction of the building or structure may be completed in
accordance with the approved permit, provided the construction
commences within six months of the issuance date and is completed
within two years of the issuance date. The permit holder shall acquire a
new permit complying with the terms of this article if the permit is not
actively prosecuted during this time period. Further, the legal
occupancy of a structure existing on June 1, 2003, may continue
without change except where the codes provide otherwise.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:101
§ 120-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING — A structure utilized to store farm
implements, hay, feed, grain, or other agricultural or horticultural products
or to house poultry, livestock or other farm animals. The term shall not
include habitable space, spaces in which agricultural products are
processed, treated or packaged and shall not be construed to mean a place
of occupancy by the general public.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — An individual or agency employed by the White
Township Board of Supervisors who manages, supervises and/or
administers building enforcement activities.
CODES — The 2000 International Residential Code, the 2000 International
Building Code, the 2000 International Plumbing Code, the 2000
International Mechanical Code, and the 2002 National Electrical Code; or
the most current edition of the above-referenced code.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE — A building, structure or facility that is not a
residential building.
MULTIFAMILY STRUCTURE — A building or group of buildings containing
three or more living units, to include multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) with separate means of egress, regardless of building's height
or number of stories, but it shall not include detached one- and two-family
dwellings.
STOP-WORK ORDER — A directive by the Township or the Building
Inspector to cease construction activity of a construction project.
§ 120-5. Building Inspector.
The Township Supervisors may, by motion, appoint a Building Inspector
and Deputy Building Inspector(s), to administer this article. Said Building
Inspector(s) shall be empowered with the authority to enforce all provisions
of this article and the codes being herein adopted by the Township.
§ 120-6. Code modifications.
The Township Supervisors may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt,
change, alter or amend various articles or sections or chapters of the
2000 International Residential Code, the 2000 International Building Code,
the 2000 International Plumbing Code, the 2000 International Mechanical
Code, and the 2002 National Electrical Code, as the Township Supervisors
deem appropriate or necessary for the administration of this article and the
health, safety and welfare of its residents.
§ 120-7. Fees.
The Township Supervisors may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt,
change alter, or amend fees for any permits, services, certificates, or
§ 120-4 WHITE CODE § 120-7
1:102
inspections authorized by this article. The owner of any property for which
a permit is required, along with the applicant for said permit, shall both be
liable to the Township for any such fees for permits and inspections.
§ 120-8. Certificate of occupancy.
No multifamily or commercial structure shall be occupied until a certificate
of occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector. No such certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until all inspections as required by this article, or
the codes adopted herein, have been completed and all associated fees have
been paid to the Township.
§ 120-9. Plan submittal.
The property owner or permit applicant shall be required to submit a plan,
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the herein adopted codes,
showing the improvements requested. Said plans shall be for information
purposes only for the Township, and the issuance of any permit after such
submission does not constitute approval of any plan so submitted, which
plans are deemed to be solely for the purpose of assisting the Township
during inspections, and review of the application.
§ 120-10. Conflict with other regulations.
In the event that any other law or ordinance of the Township, state or
federal governments provides for a stricter standard than provided in this
article or the codes adopted herein, the stricter standard shall apply.
§ 120-11. Access for inspections and investigations.
The Building Inspector, or his authorized representative, is hereby
authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable times for the
purpose of conducting inspections and investigations to assure compliance
with this article or the codes adopted herein.
§ 120-12. Construction Code Appeals Board.
The White Township Supervisors hereby create the White Township
Construction Code Appeals Board. Said appeals board shall be established
in accordance with the 2000 International Building Code, "Chapter 1,
Section 112 — Board of Appeals." The Board of Appeals shall have five
members and two alternate members. Further, the White Township
Supervisors hereby adopt Appendix B of the 2000 International Building
Code by reference, except that "Section B101.2.2 — Qualifications," shall
not be adopted. Qualifications of the appeals board membership shall
comply with "Chapter 1, Section 112.3 — Qualifications," of the 2000
International Building Code.
§ 120-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Township shall respond to violations of this article as follows:
§ 120-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13
1:103
A. If at any time the Building Inspector determines that a property owner,
contractor, permit applicant, or any other person connected with the
construction, installation, or renovation has violated any provision of
this article, or standards established by the codes or any amendments
thereto, the said Building Inspector shall have the right to suspend any
permit issued, issue a stop-work order, deny an occupancy permit, and/
or refuse to permit any further construction or installation. The
Building Inspector shall have all the rights provided for in the codes
adopted hereunder.
B. In the event of a violation of any provisions of this article, no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for any such structure determined to be in
violation by the Building Inspector, and no such structure shall be
occupied by any person until such violation is abated.
C. The Township may proceed with an action at law and/or in equity to
enforce the provisions of this article, and the proceeding with legal
action shall not prohibit the Township from seeking to impose other
penalties prescribed by this ordinance nor from suspending
construction or issuing a stop-work order as provided for in this article.
D. In addition to or separate from the actions set forth in Subsections A
through C above, any person violating this article, or any part thereof,
may be charged with a summary offense and shall, upon conviction
before a Magisterial District Judge or other Court of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, pay a fine of not more than $1,000, and in default of
the payment of such fine, shall be imprisoned as permitted or provided
for in the enforcement of summary offenses. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense and shall be subject,
in all respects, to the same penalties as the first offense, and separate
proceedings may be instituted and separate penalties imposed for each
day's offense.
§ 120-13 WHITE CODE § 120-13
1:104
ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Codes
[Adopted 3-24-2004 by Ord. No. 993]
§ 120-14. Election to administer and enforce.
White Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 120-15. Adoption and incorporation.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of White
Township.
§ 120-16. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within White Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the White
Township Board of Supervisors from time to time by resolution:
§ 120-17. Board of Appeals.
The White Township Construction Code Appeals Board, created by § 120-12
on April 23, 2003, as amended, is hereby recognized and reestablished
as the White Township Construction Code Board of Appeals which shall
continue its duties uninterrupted and in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities,
A. By the designation of an employee of White Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of White Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of White Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipality for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of White
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 120-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17
1:105
said Construction Code Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities.
§ 120-18. Effect on other ordinances.
With regard to any previously established ordinances, regulations, or
policies relating to construction codes:
§ 120-19. Fees.
Fees for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this
article and the code shall be established by White Township by resolution
from time to time. The owner of any property from which a permit is
required, along with the applicant for said permit, shall both be liable to
White Township for any such fees for permits and inspections.
§ 120-20. Right of entry for inspections and investigations.
Building code officials of White Township are herein authorized to enter
upon private property at all reasonable times for the purpose of conducting
inspections and investigations to assure compliance with this article and the
codes adopted herein.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by White Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portion of ordinances which are in effect
as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are less
than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of White Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 120-17 WHITE CODE § 120-20
1:106
Chapter 144
FIREWORKS
§ 144-1. Rules and regulations.
All proposed fireworks displays shall comply with the following rules and
regulations:
§ 144-2. Violations and penalties.11
Any person, firm or corporation conducting a fireworks display in violation
of this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
A. Any individual, corporation or business, collectively referred to as
"applicant," proposing to conduct a fireworks display, whether for the
general public or for private events wherein the display may be
observed by the general public, shall first request permission from the
White Township Board of Supervisors. Said request shall be submitted
to White Township at least 30 days prior to the display date.
B. Prior to granting approval to the applicant, the White Township
Supervisors shall insure that a certificate of insurance listing White
Township as an additional insured shall be provided.
C. Prior to applying to the Township, the applicant shall notify the Indiana
Fire Association Chief and the Indiana County 911 Center of the
proposed fireworks display and obtain any comments regarding the
proposed display. Said comments, if negative, shall be provided, in
writing, and forwarded to the Township by the Fire Department.
Negative comments may cause the White Township Board of
Supervisors to reject the applicant's request.
D. Fireworks displays shall not be conducted during any time that the
Township or a higher jurisdiction has declared a ban or restriction on
burning.
E. At the sole discretion of the Indiana Fire Association (IFA), the IFA may
elect to post appropriate apparatus at the site of the display as a
precaution and may collect from the applicant any fees deemed
reasonable for this service.
F. All fireworks displays shall be in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. No illegal fireworks
displays shall be permitted.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 120-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-2
1:107
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. The Township
of White and its agents, officials and representatives shall not, under any
circumstances, be liable or responsible for damages caused by any person
or property by reason of the provisions of this chapter, or by reason of
the conduct of any display of fireworks in compliance with the terms and
provisions of this chapter. The individual, corporation or business
responsible for any such fireworks shall bear sole liability for any damages
caused as a result thereof.
Chapter 149
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 263.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 149-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,12 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the White Township Supervisors do hereby order as
follows.
§ 149-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
12.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 144-2 WHITE CODE § 149-3
1:108
§ 149-3. Applicability.
§ 149-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 149-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 149-6. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer within White Township is hereby appointed
to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
"floodplain administrator."
§ 149-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development within
any identified floodplain area of White Township.
§ 149-8. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development within any identified floodplain area of White Township
unless a permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of White Township or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-8
1:109
§ 149-9. Application procedures and requirements.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall show that all
other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the
U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the White Township Planning
Commission for whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The floodplain administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of Title 34
of the Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions
thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator and shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
§ 149-8 WHITE CODE § 149-9
1:110
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
(6) A site plan showing the exact size and location of the proposed
construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials are flood resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
§ 149-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-9
1:111
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under Title 34
of the Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 149-18B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 149-23F, Storage, and § 149-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 149-23F and 149-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
§ 149-9 WHITE CODE § 149-9
1:112
§ 149-10. Review by County Conservation District.
Applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any
identified floodplain area may be submitted by the floodplain administrator
to the County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the
issuance of a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District
shall be considered by the floodplain administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 149-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and
comment.
§ 149-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 149-13. Placards.
The building permit placard shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction. The placard shall show the number of the permit, the
date of its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 149-14. Start of construction.
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 149-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, based upon the current fee schedules adopted by
the Township.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
§ 149-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-14
1:113
§ 149-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain
administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
§ 149-14 WHITE CODE § 149-15
1:114
§ 149-16. Appeals.
§ 149-17. Identification of floodplain area.
§ 149-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
to White Township of not less than $25 nor more than $500 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse
the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the White Township Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the White Township Board of Supervisors. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the White Township Supervisors shall set a
time and place, within not less than 10 days or not more than 30 days,
for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place
at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the White Township
Supervisors may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided
by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of White Township,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated April 3, 2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by White Township and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
A. Floodway area.
§ 149-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-18
1:115
(1) Description: the area identified as floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the base flood
elevation by more than one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
§ 149-18 WHITE CODE § 149-18
1:116
§ 149-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Planning
Commission where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 149-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by White Township Planning
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the White Township Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
§ 149-21. General technical provisions.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE,
as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using
a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which
is nearest the construction site in question.
(c) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by White Township.
D. Shallow flooding area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS.
These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one
and three feet.
(2) Special requirements: establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
§ 149-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-21
1:117
§ 149-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction,
development, or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, use or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 149-18C(2)(b)
of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and Title 34 of the Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
§ 149-21 WHITE CODE § 149-22
1:118
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations are specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation in accordance with § 149-18C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and Title 34 of the Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
§ 149-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-22
1:119
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low-damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 149-22 WHITE CODE § 149-23
1:120
§ 149-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the floodplain administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall not be set below
the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 149-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-23
1:121
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 149-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
§ 149-23 WHITE CODE § 149-23
1:122
§ 149-24. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained Title 34 of the Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through
405, as amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply
to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the
extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the
requirements of this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: §§ 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix
G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: §§ R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
§ 149-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-24
1:123
§ 149-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 149-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
§ 149-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
§ 149-24 WHITE CODE § 149-27
1:124
§ 149-28. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
§ 149-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 149-30 shall apply.
§ 149-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Are prohibited from locating within any identified floodplain area.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 149-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-30
1:125
§ 149-31. Modifications.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
White Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 149-32. Modification procedures and conditions.
Requests for modifications shall be considered by White Township in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 149-16 and the following:
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. The above activity shall also address the requirements of Title 34 of the
Pa. Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
A. No modification shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase
in the BFE.
B. No modification shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
C. No modifications shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to development regulated by § 149-28,
Prohibited activities, or to § 149-24, Development which may endanger
human life, § 149-26, Special requirements for manufactured homes,
and § 149-27, Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
D. If granted, a modification shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
E. In granting any modification, White Township shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a modification is granted, White Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the modification may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such modification may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a modification, White Township shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
§ 149-30 WHITE CODE § 149-32
1:126
§ 149-33. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 149-34. Definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the modification would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the modification will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
H. A complete record of all modification requests and related actions shall
be maintained by White Township. In addition, a report of all
modifications granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 149-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-34
1:127
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 149-34 WHITE CODE § 149-34
1:128
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after May 19, 1987, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 149-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-34
1:129
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 149-34 WHITE CODE § 149-34
1:130
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 149-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-34
1:131
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Chapter 152
FURNACES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 120. Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 152-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to §§ 1601, 1529 and 1534(4) of the
Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §§ 66601, 66529 and 66534(4).
§ 152-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein:
EXISTING OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — An outdoor wood-fired
burner/furnace that was purchased and installed prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — Also known as "outdoor wood-fired
furnaces," "outdoor wood-burning appliances," or "outdoor hydronic
heaters," "water stoves," etc. A fuel-burning device:
§ 152-3. Existing outdoor wood-fired boilers.
Any outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces in existence on the effective date
of this chapter shall be permitted to remain.
§ 152-4. Installation requirements.
Any person desiring to install an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace within
the municipality shall meet the following requirements:
A. Designed to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels;
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or for
installation in structures not normally intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals, including structures such as garages and
sheds; and
B.
Which heats building space and/or water through the distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water
or a mixture of water and antifreeze.
C.
§ 149-34 WHITE CODE § 152-4
1:132
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties; remedies; liability.
Chapter 175
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235. Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 257.
A. Present a plan showing all property lines, the locations and distances of
all adjoining properties, and the proposed location of the outdoor woodfired
burner/furnace.
B. Locate the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace at least 150 feet from all
property lines and public streets or road rights-of-way.
C. Outdoor wood burners may not be located in any front yard area when
it would be placed between the principle structure being heated and
any street or road right-of-way.
A. Sanctions. Any person, whether as principal or agent, who violates this
chapter or assists or abets its violation, shall, upon conviction thereof,
before any Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $500, together with the costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of said fine and costs, shall
be committed to the Indiana County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense for which a
summary conviction may be sought.
B. Equitable and other remedies. No penalty herein shall prevent the
Township from enforcing this chapter by equitable, injunctive and other
remedies.
C. Liability. The Township of White and its agents, officials, and
representatives shall not, under any circumstances, be liable or
responsible for damages caused to any person or property by reason of
the provisions of this chapter, or by reason of the conduct of any
burning activity in compliance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter. The individual person or party responsible for any such fire
shall bear sole liability for any damages caused as a result thereof.
D. Access to private property. The Township of White and its agents,
officials, employees, and representatives are hereby authorized to enter
upon private property for the purpose of conducting inspections and
investigations to assure compliance with this chapter.
E. Citizen action. Nothing herein prohibits neighboring property owners
who witness violations of this chapter from themselves filing charges
with the Magisterial District Judge for enforcement of this chapter.
§ 152-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:133
§ 175-1. Dumps and landfills prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to use or
occupy any premises as or for a rubbish disposal dump, garbage disposal
dump, sanitary landfill, incineration plant or other similar use within the
Township of White whereby any noxious or offensive odors, putrid, or
polluted water or other discharge, smoke, soot, ash, refuse, rubbish or filth
of any nature whatever is blown, carried or discharged in any manner unto
the public roads or upon the premises of other persons, copartnerships or
corporations. The use or occupation of any premises within White Township
in a manner so as to violate the provisions of this section is hereby declared
to constitute a nuisance per se.
§ 175-2. Storage of refuse near roads, water or premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to dispose,
keep, place or store or permit to be disposed, kept, placed or stored, except
in appropriate containers on any premises whatever, any rubbish, garbage,
ashes, manure or refuse of any kind whatever within 100 feet of the cartway
of any public road, or within 100 feet of any creek or stream, or within
100 feet of any premises of any other person, copartnership or corporation.
The provisions of this section shall in no way be interpreted to prohibit the
use and/or spreading of manure, fertilizer, lime and/or related materials for
agricultural purposes. The use or occupation of any premises within White
Township in a manner so as to violate the provisions of this section is hereby
declared to constitute a nuisance per se.
§ 175-3. Dangerous structures prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to maintain
or permit to be maintained on any premises whatever any building or
structure within the Township of White, which are or become dangerous
to the health, safety and welfare of the public due to destruction by fire,
deterioration, age, depreciation or any other reasons which would endanger
the general health, welfare and safety of the community. The maintenance,
use or occupation of any premises within White Township in a manner so
as to violate the provisions of this section is hereby declared to constitute a
nuisance per se.
§ 175-4. Removal or abatement of nuisance.
Any nuisance prohibited by the terms of this chapter shall be abated and
removed by the occupant and/or by the owner of the premises on which
such nuisance exists and/or by the person or persons who are responsible
for such nuisance or nuisances within 15 days after receipt by him, her
or them of written notice so to do from the Board of Supervisors of White
Township, and on his, her or their default and/or failure or neglect to abate
or remove such nuisance within such time the Township shall have the right
§ 152-5 WHITE CODE § 175-4
1:134
and power to remove or cause the removal of or abatement of such nuisance
and to pay for the cost or costs thereof and collect the cost of such removal
from the owner and/or occupant and/or the person or persons responsible
for such nuisance or nuisances or any of them.
§ 175-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, copartnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of § 175-1, 175-2 or 175-3 of this chapter shall upon summary proceeding
brought in the name of the Township before any justice of the peace be fined
upon conviction in any amount not less than $25 nor more than $300 or in
default thereof be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 176
NUISANCE GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 175.
§ 176-1. Purpose and findings.
The Township intends to preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of
the residents and neighborhoods in the municipality by reducing gatherings
and events that become a public nuisance. The Township finds that:
§ 176-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
EVENT or GATHERING — Any group of 10 or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social function or other activity on
public or private property whether indoors or outdoors.
HOST(S) — To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control,
or overtly permit a gathering or event.
LIQUOR — As defined by Title 18, Pennsylvania Crimes Code § 6310.6.13
A. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where persons
gather and where neighborhood disturbances, destruction and defacing
of property, violence and hazardous conditions result constitute a threat
to peace, health, safety and welfare of the community that require
prevention, response to, and/or abatement.
B. The hosts or other organizers of a gathering or event are deemed to be
responsible for the activities of their guests and visitors on the site of
the gathering event.
§ 175-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-2
1:135
MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGES — As defined by Title 18, Pennsylvania
Crimes Code § 6310.6.14
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
PREMISES — Any home, yard, fraternity house, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as
a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
Premises licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board are excluded
from the definition of "premises" for purposes of this chapter.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any individual under 21 years of age.
§ 176-3. Declaration of nuisance gathering.
An event or gathering that results in three or more of the following illegal
activities at a premises, is hereby declared to be an unlawful public
nuisance as defined herein:
A. Excessive, unnecessary, or unreasonably loud noise which does or is
likely to disturb the comfort, quiet, or repose of the neighborhood
(Section 5503 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title 18);15 or
B. Public disturbances, brawls, fights, or quarrels or indecent or obscene
conduct (Section 5503 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title 18); or
C. Purchase, consumption, possession, or transportation of liquor or malt
or brewed beverages (Section 6308 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code,
Title 18);16 or
D. Public drunkenness (Section 5505 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code,
Title 18);17 or
E. Public urination or defecation (Section 5503 of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code, Title 18); or
F. Unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of intoxicating beverages
(Section 6310.1 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title 18);18 or
G. Unlawful deposit of trash or litter (Section 6501 of the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code, Title 18);19 or
13.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 6310.6.
14.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 6310.6.
15.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 5503.
16.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 6308.
17.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 5505.
18.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 6310.1.
19.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 6501.
§ 176-2 WHITE CODE § 176-3
1:136
§ 176-4. Exclusions.
The within chapter shall not apply to any event or gathering held for
political or religious purposes, regardless of size, whether held indoors or
outdoors and whether held on public or private property.
§ 176-5. Prohibited acts.
§ 176-6. Violations and penalties.
H. Criminal mischief (Section 3304 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title
18);20 or
I. Sale, manufacture, possession of any controlled substances as defined
in the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, Act of
1972, P.L. 233 No. 64;21 or
J. Open lewdness or indecent exposure (Section 5901 or Section 3127 of
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code - Title 18).22
A. Any premises owner, occupant, tenant, or other person having any
possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any premises
who sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites, or overtly permits an event or
gathering that at any time of the event or gathering becomes an
unlawful public nuisance as defined in § 176-3 is hereby deemed to have
committed a violation of this section.
B. Assistance request exemption. Any premises owner, occupant, tenant,
or other person having any possessory control, individually or jointly
with others, of any premises who requests assistance from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania State Police to prevent a gathering
from becoming a nuisance gathering as set forth herein shall not be
considered to have violated this chapter. This exemption may only be
obtained one time in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to fine, any person or entity who violates § 176-5 may be
assessed the cost of reimbursing local law enforcement, fire services,
20.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. § 3304.
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 18 P.S. §§ 5901 and 3127.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-6
1:137
§ 176-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, which remaining
portions shall continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 178
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS; NAMING OF ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 295.
§ 178-1. Purpose; authority to assign addresses.
EMS, ambulance or other provider who responds to calls or renders
assistance at the nuisance gathering .
C. A penalty provided for under Subsection A of this section may be
imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other
criminal offense arising for the same conduct.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide orderly assignment of street
addresses to every inhabitable structure in White Township which does
not currently have a valid municipal style street address in order to
protect the safety and welfare of the general public by facilitating the
location of individual dwellings and businesses by emergency response
personnel.
B. White Township shall have the sole authority to verify, modify or assign
new street addresses and to enforce the requirements of this chapter.
C. During the conduct of addressing operations White Township or its
designated representatives shall have the right to enter upon, travel,
measure and inspect all roadways and driveways to visit and record
information about all inhabitable structures within the Township for the
purposes of determining, assigning, and notifying the inhabitants
thereof of such assigned addresses.
D. Requests for review of assigned addresses may be submitted to White
Township. Each review request shall be in writing and addressed to the
White Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 176-6 WHITE CODE § 178-2
1:138
§ 178-2. Posting of addresses.
§ 178-3. Procedures.
§ 178-4. Addressing system.
A. Within 30 days of receipt of written notification, in accordance with this
chapter, by White Township or its designated representatives, of the
assignment of or change of a structure address number, the owner of
said structure shall post the assigned structure address number in
compliance with the requirements herein.
B. All address numbers shall be constructed of durable material with a
color which shall contrast with the color scheme of the surface on which
it is posted. The minimum size for all such posted address numbers
shall be three inches in height. In every case the posted numbers shall
be clear and readable from the street or roadway along which the
structure is addressed.
C. The numbers shall be posted upon the structure within three feet of the
main entrance thereto unless the structure is more than 75 feet from
the road right-of-way or not visible from the roadway. In such cases, the
address numbers shall be posted on the property within 10 feet of the
road right-of-way line and within 15 feet of either side of the driveway
to the structure; or on the mail box serving the property, provided the
location of the mail box is in compliance with current postal
regulations.
D. Following the posting of the assigned address numbers, as required
herein, the owner shall maintain the posted address number at all times
in compliance with this chapter. Posted address numbers, as viewed
from the public roadway, shall not be obstructed from view by
landscaping, shrubs, vegetation, screen doors, canopies, ornaments, or
any other plant or structure.
A. When an owner or resident of any structure in White Township receives
notification of a new or changed address, that owner or resident shall
promptly provide all information requested by completing the questions
on the notification; sign the appropriate place on the form to
acknowledge receipt of the notification; and return the completed and
signed return portion of the notification form to the address listed on
the notification form.
B. No building permit will be issued for any new or remodeled building or
structure in White Township until the owner or developer has been
issued a street address.
A. One-hundred-block-style addressing. White Township shall have the
sole authority to verify the validity of the addressing system in areas of
the Township which are currently addressed with a one-hundred-blockstyle
addressing system, and to determine which areas of the Township
§ 178-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4
1:139
will use the one-hundered-block-style system. New structures in these
areas of White Township will be assigned an address which complies
with the existing valid system. White Township shall have the sole
authority to modify or assign new street addresses in these areas.
B. Distance-based addressing system. White Township shall have the sole
authority to determine which areas of the Township will use the
distance-based addressing system. The distance-based addressing
system is based on a calculated street address which uses:
(1) The measured distance along the roadway from an intersection to
the property to be addressed.
(2) The orientation of the roadway in relation to the intersection of
Philadelphia Street and 1st Street, and north along Martin Road,
south along Wayne Avenue, east along East Pike and west along
West Pike/Old Route 422.
(3) The side of the roadway on which the property is situated.
C. Philadelphia Street and 1st Street in Indiana Borough are considered
the baselines for the distance-based addressing system. The
intersection of Philadelphia Street and 1st Street in Indiana Borough is
considered the point of origin for these baselines. All assigned
addresses on each roadway will start with the lowest assigned
numerical address at that end of the roadway which is the closest to the
point of origin of the baselines. In the case of dead-end roads the
numbers will begin at the end of the road which intersects another
named roadway.
D. The numbering of all roads which cross either of the baseline roads will
begin at the baseline and progress upward away from the baseline.
Such roads will then also be designated with an east, west, north, or
south prefix. For those roads which cross more than two baselines, the
directional prefix will be based solely upon the north-south baseline,
6th Street north to Marion Road and south to Wayne Avenue in Indiana
Borough.
E. Individual addresses will be the product of the division of the measured
distance along the roadway by the number 5.28 so that every address
will reflect the mileage along the roadway. For example, an address of
1600 will be located 1.6 miles along the roadway. Numbers will be
assigned with even numbers on the right side of the roadway, odd
numbers on the left side of the roadway, as one would stand with their
back towards the beginning point. All inhabitable structures will be
addressed. Structures which are obviously facing a named road will be
addressed with respect to that roadway. Addresses will be assigned
based upon the measured distance to the front door of the structure.
Buildings which are more than 75 feet from the roadway will be
addressed based upon the measured distance to the center of the
driveway to the structure.
§ 178-4 WHITE CODE § 178-4
1:140
§ 178-5. Road names.
Chapter 189
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 295.
F. No letter characters will be used in assigning new addresses except in
the case of individual units situated within a multifamily structure. In
such cases, the entire multifamily structure shall have an individual
numeric address assigned in accordance with this chapter.
A. White Township shall have the sole authority to name all roadways
within its boundaries.
B. Road names currently on file with White Township are hereby declared
the official names of these roads, unless changed by action of White
Township. White Township shall have the sole authority to determine
the need for road name changes.
C. "Private roadways" shall be defined as roads not maintained by White
Township or the state, owned by a private citizen, and with more than
two inhabitable structures located on it. White Township shall have the
authority to assign a temporary name to unnamed private roads.
Property owners wishing to have a permanent name assigned to a
private road may submit a written request to White Township for review
and approval.
§ 178-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-5
1:141

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-26-1976 by Ord. No. 847]
§ 189-1. Vehicle use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle upon
any of the lands owned by the Township of White and maintained and
operated for recreational purposes except as operated by personnel
engaged in the maintenance work on the said premises.
§ 189-2. Firearms.
No person shall discharge any firearms upon any land owned by the
Township of White and held and operated for recreational purposes.
§ 189-3. Alcohol and/or illegal drug use.
No person shall have in their possession or consume alcoholic beverages
or habit-forming drugs upon any land owned by the Township of White and
held and operated for recreational purposes.
§ 189-4. Violations and penalties.23
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:143

ARTICLE II
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 981]
§ 189-5. Hours for general public.
All park properties owned by White Township shall be closed to the general
public during the hours of dusk to dawn daily, except where authorized by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 189-6. Signage.
All park properties shall be posted with signage that informs that general
public of the hours of operation of the public parks.
§ 189-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before any Magisterial
District Judge, be fined upon conviction in an amount of not less than $50
nor more than $500, or in default thereof be sentenced and committed to
the Indiana County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days and directed to
pay the costs of prosecution.
§ 189-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-7
1:145
Chapter 196
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
§ 196-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery, which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling, or has in
his possession or control, upon any of the streets or sidewalks, from
house to house, by visitation to private residences, or by entering in or
upon private property within the Township. The words "soliciting" and
"peddling" shall not apply to:
Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own
product(s).
(1)
The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products.
(2)
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose.
(3)
The seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers,
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for insurance.
(4)
Persons, corporations, partnerships and associates, their agents
or employees, who have complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et
seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
(5)
Representatives and members of Boy Scouts of America, Girl
Scouts of America, Lions, Kiwanis, American Association of Retired
Persons, Disabled American Veterans, YWCA and YMCA, YWHA
and YMHA, Red Cross, Salvation Army and other national and
international service organizations and associations existing for
the benefit of young, aged, handicapped or stricken persons and
(6)
§ 189-7 WHITE CODE § 196-1
1:146
§ 196-2. License required.
§ 196-3. Application for license.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for
subscriptions or contributions, upon any of the streets or sidewalks,
from house to house, by visitation to private residences, or be entering
in or upon private property, within the Township.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as herein
above defined.
soliciting or selling for the purpose of self-perpetuation and which
may be registered as charitable organizations with the state or
federal government.
School children selling goods, wares or merchandise where the
funds or proceeds of the sale are to be applied exclusively for
a function or organization sponsored or approved by the school
where such children attend.
(7)
Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants, for resale to an ultimate consumer.
(8)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful to engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
of White without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
B. No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
without first having taken out a license as herein provided.
A. Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling in the
Township shall first make application to the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors for a license. A fee in an amount to be established from
time to time by resolution of the Township shall be paid to the Township
Secretary for processing of application for license. If such person shall
also be required to obtain a license from any state or county offices, he
or she shall, when making such registration, exhibit a valid license from
such state or county offices. The application shall be upon a blank form
provided by the Township Secretary and shall contain at least the
following information verified by oath or affirmation:
(1) Proof of the identity, including date of birth, photo ID, home
address of the applicant and the name and address of the employer
or firm which such applicant represents;
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-3
1:147
§ 196-3.1. Background check.
To ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare,
each application for license will be required to undergo a criminal
background check. Criminal background check authorization forms must
be filled out and accompanied with the application for license. A fee in an
amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the Township
shall be paid to the Township Secretary for processing of criminal
background check. White Township shall deny an applicant with a criminal
history including but not limited to burglary, theft or assault.
(2) A description of the nature, character and quality of the goods to be
sold;
(3) If employed by another, the name, address and telephone number
of the employer, or if acting as an agent, the name, address and
telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with
credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the
authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or
principal as the case may be;
(4) If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle
including make, model and color together with the motor vehicle
state and license plate number;
(5) A description of the proposed location(s) of the solicitation;
(6) The hours for which the license to engage in peddling or soliciting
is desired;
(7) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the
nature of the offense or offenses and the punishment or
punishments imposed there;
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any agent has
been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation
(other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation,
the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place where
such offense occurred, and other pertinent details;
(9) Written proof of his authority to represent the company or
individual he states he represents.
B. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more helpers,
all applicable personal information specified above shall be given for
each helper and verified or affirmed by oath or affirmation by him, and
an individual license shall be required for each helper. No license under
this chapter shall be transferable from one person to another.
§ 196-3 WHITE CODE § 196-4
1:148
§ 196-4. License fee.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the application fee sum in
an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the Township
shall be paid to the Township Secretary, and it shall be for the use of
the Township. The application fee shall include the first thirty-day license.
Such licenses may be issued, in advance, for consecutive thirty-day periods
not exceeding 12 in number, upon payment, in advance, of an amount
established from time to time by resolution of the Township Supervisors for
each thirty-day period. A separate application shall be filed and a separate
permit fee shall be paid by each person who shall actually conduct the
soliciting or peddling, and shall apply where an employer desires to secure
licenses for his employees, agents or servants.
§ 196-5. License terms; new license.
The license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for 30 days
after the date of such license and, upon the expiration of any license, if
the person holding the same shall desire to continue or renew soliciting or
peddling, he shall be required to file a new application for a permit and pay
a new license fee. Such licenses may be issued, in advance, for consecutive
thirty-day periods not exceeding 12 in number, upon payment, in advance,
of an amount established from time to time by resolution of the Township
Supervisors for each thirty-day period provided in § 196-4.
§ 196-6. License exhibition.
Every solicitor or peddler shall at all times, when engaged in soliciting or
peddling in the Township, carry such license upon his person and shall
exhibit it upon request to all police officers, Township officials and citizens.
No solicitor or peddler shall engage in selling any product or service not
mentioned on such license.
§ 196-6.1. Operating regulation and prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person while engaged in peddling or soliciting
to:
A. Engage in any such business without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Engage in peddling or soliciting activity between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m., and 8:00 p.m. Friday until 9:00 a.m. Monday unless said
activity is as a result of a request or an appointment made by the
occupant or such activity is authorized pursuant to the terms of a
license for a special event.
C. Engage in peddling or soliciting activity on any federally observed
holiday.
§ 196-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-6.1
1:149
§ 196-7. Time limits.
Persons licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall engage
in soliciting or peddling Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.
No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting activity between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. Friday until 9:00 a.m. Monday unless said activity is as a
result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant or such activity
is authorized pursuant to the terms of a license for a special event. No
person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall engage in
soliciting or peddling on any federally observed holiday.
D. Knock, ring the doorbell, or otherwise attempt to gain the attention of
the occupant(s) of a building other than at the primary entrance to the
building.
E. Knock, ring the doorbell, or otherwise attempt to gain the attention of
the occupant(s) of a residence in the Township where the owner,
occupant, or person legally in charge of the premises has posted at the
primary entrance to the premises, or at the entry to the principal
building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors," or words of similar import, provided that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any solicitor or canvasser who knocks at
any door, or rings any bell at the invitation or with the consent of some
member of the household at which he so applied for admission.
F. Engage in peddling or soliciting activities from any vehicle while the
vehicle is located upon any street, avenue, boulevard or alley within the
Township. This section shall not apply to the delivery of previously
ordered merchandise.
G. Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation.
H. Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual
informs the solicitor that he does not wish to make a purchase from that
solicitor.
I. Represent the issuance of a license under this article as an
endorsement or recommendation of the Township of White.
J. Solicit in the Township of White without displaying the required license.
K. Solicit at locations other than those listed in his application for a
license.
L. Fail or refuse to display such license and identification upon the request
of any person demanding the same.
M. Duplicate, copy or otherwise display a facsimile of a license issued
pursuant to this chapter.
N. Engage in any activity that interferes with the safe and convenient
movement of persons and vehicles, creates any hazardous condition or
is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 196-6.1 WHITE CODE § 196-7.1
1:150
§ 196-7.1. Prohibition against entering upon posted property.
Any and all peddlers and solicitors are prohibited from entering upon any
property that is posted with a "No Peddling or Soliciting" sign. If such sign
is posted, the peddler or solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the property.
§ 196-8. Parking vehicle on street; littering.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall park
any vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the Township
in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares, services or
merchandise. No such person shall place or deposit any refuse on any such
streets, highways or alleys. No such person shall maintain or keep a street
or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street or alley in the
Township for any longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons
residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 196-9. Fixed location prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall occupy
any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks of the streets, highways, alleys
or sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of soliciting or peddling with
or without any stand or counter.
§ 196-10. Crying wares, using noisemakers prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall hawk
or cry his wares or services upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the
Township, nor shall he use any loud speaker, bell, whistle or other device
for announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 196-11. Record of licenses.
The Secretary shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter,
and from time to time the Township Administrator shall apply for a list of
licenses issued hereunder. The Township Administrator shall supervise the
activities of all holders of such licenses and make a report to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 196-12. License suspension; appeals therefrom.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended at any time by
the Secretary of the Township for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or for giving false information on any application for a license
hereunder or for the applicant or licensee having been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude after issuance of such license or for the
licensee having been convicted for disorderly conduct under any law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any ordinance of the Township. Appeals
from any suspension may be made to the Board of Supervisors at any time
§ 196-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-12
1:151
within 10 days after such suspension. No part of a license fee shall be
refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended.
§ 196-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or
each section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 203
PORNOGRAPHY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 75.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth below shall
have the meaning respectively ascribed to them:
AUDIENCE — One or more persons who are permitted to view a
performance for valuable consideration or in or from a public place.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY — The exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any
other fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, material
or performance in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content
or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a public
place or vehicle.
DISSEMINATE — To manufacture, issue, publish, sell, lend, distribute,
transmit, broadcast, exhibit or present material or to offer or agree to do
the same, or to have in one's possession with intent to do the same.
MATERIAL — Any printed matter, visual representation, or sound recording,
and includes, but is not limited to, books, magazines, motion-picture films,
pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, threedimensioned
forms, sculptures, and phonograph, tape or wire recordings.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
NUDITY — Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals or pubic area, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals
§ 196-12 WHITE CODE § 203-1
1:152
in a discernibly turgid state. For the purpose of this definition, a female
breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the
areola only are covered.
PANDER — Advertising or propagandizing in connection with the sale of
material, the offering of a service, or the presentation or exhibition of a
performance by appealing to the prurient interest of potential customers.
PERFORMANCE — Any live or reproduced exhibition, including, but not
limited to, any play, motion-picture film, dance or appearance presented to
or performed before an audience.
PORNOGRAPHIC — Relating to pornography.
PORNOGRAPHY — Any material or performance, except as hereinafter in
this subsection set forth, is pornography if all of the following elements are
presented:
PORNOGRAPHY FOR MINORS — Any material or performance, except as
hereinafter in this subsection set forth, is pornography for minors, if all of
the following elements are present:
Considered as a whole by the average person, applying contemporary
community standards of the Township of White, if appeals to the
prurient interest.
A.
It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way, sexual
conduct, as hereinafter defined.
B.
It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; provided,
however, that anything contained in this chapter to the contrary,
notwithstanding, pornography shall not include any motion-picture film
which:
Carries a rating of G, PG, R or X, as is currently granted by the
Motion Picture Rating Board of the Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors Association, or any other rating which from time to
time may be customarily granted by said Motion Picture Rating
Board.
(1)
Carries the symbol of said Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors Association.
(2)
C.
Considered as a whole by the average person, applying the
contemporary community standards of the Township of White with
respect to what is suitable for minors, it is presented in such a manner
as to appeal to a minor's prurient interest.
A.
It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way nudity or
sexual conduct as hereinafter defined.
B.
It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors;
provided, however, that anything contained in this chapter to the
contrary notwithstanding, pornography for minors shall not include any
motion-picture film which:
C.
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-1
1:153
PRURIENT INTEREST — Desire or craving for sexual stimulation or
gratification. In determining prurient interest, the material or performance
shall be judged with reference to average persons, unless it appears from
the character of the material or performance that it is designed to appeal
to the prurient interest of a particular group of persons, including, but not
limited to, homosexuals or sadomasochists. In this case, it shall be judged
with reference to the particular group for which it was designed.
PUBLIC PLACE OR VEHICLE — Any of the streets, alleys, parks,
boulevards, schools or other public property in the Township, or any dance
hall, rental hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store,
depot, place of public accommodation, or other private property generally
frequented by the public for the purposes of education, recreation,
amusement, entertainment, sport, shopping or travel; or any vehicle for
public transportation, owned or operated by government, either directly
or through a public corporation or authority, or owned or operated by any
nongovernmental agency for the use, enjoyment or transportation of the
general public.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of such person being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT —
Carries a rating of G, PG, R, or X, as is currently granted by the
Motion Picture Rating Board of the Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors Association, or any other rating which from time to
time may be customarily granted by said Motion Picture Rating
Board.
(1)
Carries the symbol of said Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors Association.
(2)
A. Masturbation.
Sexual intercourse, whether genital-genital, oral-genital, oral-anal or
anal-genital.
B.
Any erotic fondling or touching of the covered or uncovered genitals;
buttocks, pubic area, or any part thereof the breasts of the female;
whether the conduct described is engaged in alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals
or humans and inanimate objects.
C.
Actual or simulated display or exhibition of the human pubic area or
genitals or any part thereof.
D.
E. Sexual excitement, as hereinafter defined.
F. Sadomasochistic abuse as hereinabove defined.
§ 203-1 WHITE CODE § 203-1
1:154
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The facial expressions, movements, utterances or
other responses of a human male or female, whether alone or with others,
whether clothed or not, who is in an apparent state of sexual stimulation
or arousal, or experiencing the physical or sensual reactions of humans
engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct.
§ 203-2. Promoting pornography prohibited.
§ 203-3. Promoting pornography for minors prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography. A person
commits the offense of promoting pornography if, knowing its contents
and character, he:
(1) Disseminates or causes to be disseminated any pornographic
material in or from a public place or vehicle, or for valuable
consideration; or has in his possession any pornographic material
with intent to so disseminate; or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or
managed by him, for such dissemination of pornographic material.
(2) Sells an admission ticket, or pass to premises where there is being
exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a performance
which is pornographic.
(3) Admits, by accepting a ticket or pass, a person to premises where
there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a
performance which is pornographic.
(4) Produces, presents, directs, or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place, owned, leased, conducted or
managed by him to be used for, a pornographic performance before
an audience.
(5) Participates in that portion of a live performance before an
audience which makes it pornographic.
(6) Panders, displays publicly, or disseminates door to door, any
pornographic material or performance, or causes such pandering,
public display or door to door dissemination.
B. For the purpose of this section, possession of two or more identical
copies of any pornographic material by any person engaged in the
business of disseminating material, as defined above, shall be prima
facie evidence of possession with intent to disseminate for valuable
consideration.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography for minors.
A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors, if,
knowing its content and character, he:
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-3
1:155
§ 203-4. Defenses.
It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under §§ 203-2 or 203-3
of this chapter if the pornographic material was disseminated by a person
who was acting in his capacity as:
§ 203-5. Violations and penalties.24
(1) Disseminates or causes to be disseminated to a minor material
which is pornography for minors, or knowingly allows the use of
any business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted
or managed by him for the dissemination to a minor of material
which is pornography for minors.
(2) Exhibits to a minor a motion picture film or other performance
which is pornography for minors.
(3) Sells to a minor an admission ticket or pass to any building, vehicle
or place where there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited a
motion-picture film or other performance which is pornography for
minors.
(4) Admits a minor to any building, vehicle or place where there is
being exhibited or is about to be exhibited a motion picture film or
other performance which is pornography for minors.
(5) Knowingly produces, presents, directs or allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or
managed by him for the presentation of performance which is
pornography for minors, before an audience which includes a
minor.
(6) Displays publicly or disseminates door to door any material or
performance which is pornography for minors, or causes such
public display or door to door dissemination.
B. Subsection A(1) through (5) do not apply to a parent, guardian or other
person in loco parentis to the minor.
A. A teacher of an accredited course of study related to pornography at a
state-approved educational institution.
B. A licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the treatment of a
patient.
C. A participant in the criminal justice system, such as a legislator, judge,
prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or related position.
D. A supplier to any person described in Subsections A through C above.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-3 WHITE CODE § 203-5
1:156
Chapter 210
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 105.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Rental property — See Ch. 221.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 257.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 299.
A. Fines. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Injunction. The Supervisors of White Township may institute
proceedings in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Indiana County
for the purpose of enjoining the sales, resale, lending, distribution,
exhibit, gift or show of any pornographic literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story-paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure or image, or any written or printed matter of a
pornographic nature, or any article or instrument of a pornographic
nature, as "pornographic," "pornography," and "pornography for
minors" are defined in § 203-1 of this chapter, and for such purposes
jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon said Court. A preliminary
injunction may issue and a hearing thereafter be held thereon in
conformity with the Rules of Civil Procedure upon the averment of the
Council that the sale, resale, lending, distribution, exhibit, gift or show
of such pornographic publication constitutes a danger to the welfare or
peace of the community.
§ 203-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-5
1:157

ARTICLE I
Height of Vegetation; Accumulation of Garbage
[Adopted 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 870]
§ 210-1. Duty of property owner.
It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate within any residential area
of the Township of White to at all times cut and mow the grass and weeds
on their respective lots and in the space between the property line and the
curbline and/or pavement line in front and in the rear and along the side
thereof so that neither grass nor weeds shall rise above the height of six
inches, and every such owner shall remove said cuttings or mowings and
all accumulations of garbage and rubbish and other debris from the said
premises.
§ 210-2. Nuisance.
The growth of grass or weeds above the height of six inches or the
accumulation of garbage and rubbish and other debris for the nonremoval
of the same from all real estate within residential sections of the Township
of White is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 210-3. Notice.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Supervisors of the Township of White
that any owner of any real estate in any residential section of the Township
of White has failed or neglected to comply with any of the terms of this
article, the Supervisors shall cause a written notice to be served upon the
owner directing the owner to comply with all of the terms and provisions of
this article within five days.
§ 210-4. Removal.
In the event of the failure of the owner or holder of said real estate within
any residential area of the Township of White to cut and destroy said weeds,
or have the same cut and destroyed, or remove said rubbish and other
debris within five days after being notified to do so, the Township of White
shall have said weeds cut and destroyed and/or said garbage and rubbish
and other debris removed from the said premises and bill the owner or
holder for the cost thereof.
§ 210-5. Additional remedies.
In addition to other penalties provided by this article, the Township of White
may institute proceedings in courts of equity to require the owners of real
estate within residential areas of the Township of White to comply with the
provisions of this article.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-6
1:159
§ 210-6. Lien.
The costs of removal, fine and penalties hereinabove mentioned or
hereinafter set forth, may be entered by the Township of White as a lien
against such property in accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 210-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No.
1055]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with
or violate any order made thereunder, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have
been violated shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permitted it to continue.
All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or
defects within a reasonable time.
§ 210-6 WHITE CODE § 210-7
1:160
ARTICLE II
Bamboo
[Adopted 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1069]
§ 210-8. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to control the planting, cultivating, or growing
of bamboo grasses in the Township of White, and to prevent the invasive
spread of existing bamboo into other areas of the Township.
§ 210-9. Definitions.
As used in article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BAMBOO — Any grasses from the genera Bambusa including, but not
limited to Bambusa, Phyllostachys, Fallopia and Pseudosasa as well as
Common Bamboo, Golden Bamboo, Arrow Bamboo, and Japanese Bamboo.
BAMBOO OWNER — Any property owner who has planted and/or grows
bamboo, or who maintains bamboo on his/her property, or who permits
bamboo to grow or remain on the property even if the bamboo has spread
from an adjoining property. Any property owner of a property on which
bamboo is found will be considered a bamboo owner.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of White, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 210-10. General provisions.
A. For the purposes of this article, bamboo found growing upon a property
shall constitute presumptive evidence that the bamboo was planted
and/or grown by and/or with the consent of the property owner, tenant,
or other individual entity or corporation having control of the property.
B. Prohibition. Except as provided in this article, upon the effective date of
this article, the planting or growing of bamboo shall be prohibited
within the Township and no persons, property owners, tenants, or other
individuals, entities, or corporations having control of property within
the Township shall plant, cultivate, or cause to grow, any bamboo on
any lot or parcel of ground within the Township. Any person who
thereafter plants or grows or causes or allows to be planted or grown,
bamboo within the Township shall be deemed to be in violation of this
article and shall be subject to such penalties as are set forth herein.
C. This article shall not be deemed to alter any rights at common law or
otherwise that any property owner may have to recover the cost of
removal of bamboo on their own property that has run over from a
neighboring property.
D. Exceptions.
(1) The root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained within
an above-ground-level planter, barrel or other vessel of such
design, material and location as to entirely prevent the spread of
§ 210-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-10
1:161
§ 210-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall,
in addition to the other charges hereinbefore provided for each offense,
upon summary conviction before any Magisterial District Justice, pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000 and costs of prosecution; and in default of payment
of the fines and costs, the violator may be sentenced to the county jail for
a term of not more than 30 days. Each and every day in which any person,
firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
growth of the bamboo plants' root system beyond the container in
which it is planted.
(2) Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no
part of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet from any property line,
pavement, sidewalk or 40 feet from a public road within the
Township.
E. Any bamboo that has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow on
any property within the Township prior to the effective date of this
article may remain on such a property subject to compliance with the
following:
(1) The bamboo shall not be closer than 10 feet from any property line,
pavement, sidewalk or 40 feet from a public road within the
Township.
(2) Any bamboo owner whose property contains bamboo shall remove
and abate the growth of the bamboo within 40 feet of the edge of
the pavement or traveled portion of a public road in the Township.
(3) Each bamboo owner shall be responsible to ensure that the bamboo
planted or growing on the property prior to the effective date of
this article is maintained such that it does not encroach or grow
upon any adjoining or neighboring property, including all public
property and public rights-of-way.
F. Removal. In the event that the bamboo owner does not remove or
contract for the removal of the bamboo from the property within 30
days from the date the Township first provided notice regarding
removal of the bamboo, the Township, at its discretion, may take the
appropriate steps to remove the bamboo from the property. The
bamboo owner shall be liable and responsible to the Township for all
costs incurred in removing the bamboo from the Township property,
including reasonable attorneys' fees. Such costs may be assessed
against the property of the bamboo owner and entered as a lien on the
property. Nothing herein shall be construed to create any affirmative
obligation on the part of the Township to abate or remove any bamboo
within the Township.
§ 210-10 WHITE CODE § 210-11
1:162
Chapter 221
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:163

ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 2-10-1982 by Ord. No. 876]
§ 221-1. Requirement.
Every person or firm owning, managing or operating a multiple-family
building, development or mobile home park within the Township of White is
hereby required to furnish to the Township Supervisors at their office at 950
Indian Springs Road, Indiana, Pennsylvania, or wherever else established,
not later than January 31 each year a list of the names and addresses of all
adult residents (persons 18 years of age or over) residing in the multiplefamily
building, development or mobile home park owned or operated by
them, as of January 1 each year.
§ 221-2. Violations and penalties.25
Any person, firm or corporation who owns, operates or manages a multiplefamily
building development or mobile home park within the Township
who fails to file the report required by § 221-1 of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-2
1:165
Chapter 235
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 149.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 263.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Water — See Ch. 311.
§ 221-2 WHITE CODE § 221-2
1:166
Part 1
Holding Tanks
ARTICLE I
Procedures for Use and Maintenance
§ 235-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that
the enactment of this Part 1 is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of this
Township.
§ 235-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words used herein
are defined as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. Holding tanks include, but are not limited to, the
following;
A. CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
B. RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
C. VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association,
corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — White Township, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-3
1:167
§ 235-3. Authorized use.
The use of holding tanks for sewage disposal, in lieu of treatment tanks
and subsurface absorption areas in White Township, Indiana County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby authorized and approved so long as they are
installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1
and the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of
the Supervisors of this Township.
§ 235-4. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 235-5. Permits.
No person shall maintain and use a holding tank in the Township of White
without first securing a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and from the Township of White.
§ 235-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part 1 continues or each section of this
Part 1 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 235-7. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this Part 1, any violation
of § 235-4 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this Part 1 or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and
the rules and regulations of any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applicable thereto.
B. Clean the holding tank and dispose of the contents therein at a disposal
site approved by the Department of Environmental Protection under the
direction and supervision of the Township of White.
C. In the event the owner fails to properly maintain and clean the holding
tank, the Township of White, its servants and employees are hereby
empowered to maintain and clean the holding tank in accordance with
this Part 1 and impose the cost thereof upon the owner which if not paid
may be filed as a municipal lien.
§ 235-3 WHITE CODE § 235-7
1:168
Part 2
On-Lot Sewage Treatment Facilities
ARTICLE II
Operation and Maintenance
§ 235-8. On-lot facilities permitted.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
maintain upon their said premises any sewage treatment facility, including,
but not limited to, a standard sewage septic tank with leach bead, a sewage
septic tank with an individual on-lot treatment mechanism, and/or plant,
and/or individual on-lot holding tank other than incompliance with the laws,
rules and regulations of the Township of White and of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 235-9. Accessibility.
All persons, firms or corporations operating or maintaining individual onlot
sewage facilities as described in § 235-8 of this Part 2 shall permit the
Township Administrator, Township Inspector or other appropriate Township
agent to have full and complete access to all individual on-lot sewage
treatment facilities as described in § 235-8 herein for the purpose of
inspection, including, but not limited to, the right to take samples of the
discharge therefrom for the purposes of analysis.
§ 235-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part 2 continues or each section of this
Part 2 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 235-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-10
1:169

Part 3
Wastewater Discharge To Sanitary Sewer
ARTICLE III
Discharge Regulations
§ 235-11. Wastewater discharge permit required.
All significant users proposing to connect to or contribute to the public
sanitary sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connection to or contributing to the public sanitary sewer system. A
"significant user" is one whose discharge flow is 25,000 gallons or greater
per average workday, or is found by the Township of White, Borough of
Indiana or the United States Environmental Protection Agency to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the
system's effluent quality or emissions generated by the system. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the public sanitary sewer
system shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after
the effective date of this Part 3. The Township of White may, at its discretion,
require any person discharging industrial waste or industrial waste and
sanitary sewage combined, which such person has obtained a permit from
the Township into the public sewer system, to install a suitable manhole or
manholes on his connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate observation. Such
manhole or manholes is to be installed by such person at his or her expense,
to be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible to the Township
of White at all times and to be constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the Township.
§ 235-12. Permit application; fee.
A. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Township an application in the form
prescribed by the Township and accompanied by a fee as set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.26 Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within 30 days after the effective date
of this Part 3 and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior
to connecting to or contributing to the public sanitary sewer system. In
support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in § 235-13 of this Part 3, as determined
26.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 235-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:171
by a reliable analytical laboratory, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA
pursuant to § 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136,
as amended.
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
(5) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(8) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Township, city, state or federal
pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or not
the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the application pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(b) No increment referred to in this section shall exceed nine
months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Township Manager, including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay
and the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
§ 235-12 WHITE CODE § 235-12
1:172
§ 235-13. National categorical pretreatment standard.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject
to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to
a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted
an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by § 235-12,
the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days
after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution
permit shall submit to the Township Manager within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard
the information required in § 235-12A(8) and (9).
§ 235-14. Wastewater discharge permit provisions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions
of this Part 3 and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the Township. Permits may contain the following:
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
the Township Manger.
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rates of production.
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(12) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
B. The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the
data furnished, the Township may issue a wastewater contribution
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
A. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
C. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
§ 235-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-14
1:173
§ 235-15. Issuance of permit.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated
to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by
the Township during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements
as identified in § 235-14 are modified or other just cause exists. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 235-16. Reassignment or transfer of permit prohibited.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new
or changed operation without the approval of the Township. Any succeeding
owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
§ 235-17. Reports.
E. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports
(see § 235-17).
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Township and affording
Township access thereto.
I. Requirements for notification of the Township of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
J. Requirements for notification of sludge discharges.
K. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this Part 3.
A. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the public sanitary sewer system,
shall submit to the Township Manager for the public sanitary sewer
system during the months of June and December, unless required more
§ 235-14 WHITE CODE § 235-17
1:174
§ 235-18. Monitoring facilities.
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Township Manager
for the public sanitary sewer system, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by
such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a
record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the
average daily flow reported in § 235-14 of this Part 3. At the discretion
of the Township Manager for the public sanitary sewer system and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, etc., the Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer
system may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
B. The Township Manager for the public sanitary sewer system may
impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases
where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by § 235-12 of this Part 3 shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the
user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration or
production and mass, where requested by the Township Manager for
the public sanitary sewer system, of pollutants contained therein which
are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard.
All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or with any
other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
Administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
EPA publication "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of
Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April 1977, and
amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the Administrator.
A. The Township shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's
own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
user's premises, but the Borough may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it
will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
§ 235-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:175
§ 235-19. Inspection.
The Township shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this Part 3 is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the Township or their representative
ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the
performance of any of their duties. The Township, approval authority and
(where the NPDES state is the approval authority) EPA shall have the right
to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Township,
approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 235-20. Compliance.
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Township's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90
days following written notification by the Borough.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Part 3 and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Township
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Township for review and shall be
acceptable to the Township before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the Township under the provisions of
this Part 3. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
Township prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. The Township shall annually publish in the Indiana Evening Gazette a
list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months.
§ 235-18 WHITE CODE § 235-20
1:176
§ 235-21. Confidentiality.
§ 235-22. Temperature.
Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity
in the public sewer system treatment plant is a prohibited discharge. In no
case is wastewater allowed with a temperature at the junction of the public
sanitary sewer system which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) unless the public
sanitary sewer system treatment plant is designed to accommodate such
temperature.
§ 235-23. Limitations.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards
for a particular subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under this Part 3 for sources in that subcategory, shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Part 3. The
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user during the same 12 months.
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon
request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
relating to this Part 3, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Township until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user,
except to the Operating Administrator of the Indiana Borough Sewage
Treatment System.
§ 235-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-23
1:177
Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer system shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 235-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
3, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that a violation of this Part 3 continues or each section of this Part 3
which shall be found to have been violated, after having been notified by
Township Supervisors or by the service of a summons in a prosecution or
in any other way that he is violating this Part 3, shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 235-25. Suspension of service.
§ 235-26. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part 3, or applicable
state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of § 235-31 of this Part 3:
A. The Township may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Township, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment,
causes interference to the public sanitary sewer system or causes the
Township to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Borough shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the public sanitary
sewer system or endangerment to any individuals. The Township shall
reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the
Township within 15 days of the occurrence.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge.
§ 235-23 WHITE CODE § 235-26
1:178
§ 235-27. Notice.
Whenever the Township finds that any user has violated or is violating
this Part 3, wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained herein, the Township may serve upon such person
a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the
date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the Township by the user.
§ 235-28. Notice to show cause.
The Township may order any user who causes or allows an authorized
discharge to enter the public sanitary sewer system to show cause before
the Township Supervisors why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
of a hearing to be held by the Township Supervisors regarding the violation,
the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action
and directing the user to show cause before the Township Supervisors why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made
on any agent or officer of a corporation.
§ 235-29. Hearing.
The Township Supervisors may themselves conduct the hearing and take
the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer of the
Township to:
§ 235-30. Hearing procedures.
At any hearing held pursuant to this Part 3, testimony taken must be under
oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring.
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. Issue, in the name of the Township, notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
B. Take the evidence.
C. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Township
Supervisors for action thereon.
§ 235-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-30
1:179
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges thereof.
§ 235-31. Review of evidence.
After the Township Supervisors have reviewed the evidence, it may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued.
§ 235-32. Legal and/or equitable relief.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
Indiana Borough wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of
this Part 3, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the
Borough, the Township Solicitor or the Borough of Indiana Solicitor may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
Court of Common Pleas of Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 235-33. Penalties for false statements.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 3 or wastewater
contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part 3
shall, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days.
§ 235-30 WHITE CODE § 235-33
1:180
Part 4
Sewer Use
ARTICLE IV
Authorizations
§ 235-34. Mandatory connection.
Every owner of property in the Township of White, whose property abuts
upon any public sanitary sewer presently constructed or to be constructed
in the future, shall connect at his own cost the building, buildings, or
other structures located on said property with the aforementioned sanitary
sewers for the purpose of disposing of all sanitary sewage as is customarily
disposed of in such a system of sanitary sewers.
§ 235-35. Notification to connect to system.
Where any structure in the Township is now, or hereafter may be, using
any method for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than through said
public sanitary sewers, except as otherwise herein provided, it shall be the
duty of the Township Secretary or other person authorized by the Township
Supervisors to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of such structure, in
writing, either by personal service, certified mail or registered mail, to
disconnect the same and to make proper connections for the discharge and
disposal of the sewage through the said public sanitary sewers, as herein
provided, within 60 days after receipt of such notice; provided, however,
notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, no owner, tenant
or occupier of such structure shall be required to make a connection where
his structure is more than 150 feet from said public sanitary sewer.
§ 235-36. Septic systems during sewer tap prohibition.
At any time when no taps are available for connection to the public sanitary
sewer, an owner of property whose property abuts the public sanitary
sewer as herein provided may secure a permit from the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer for the construction of a sewage septic or treatment
system as an alternate. Such a system, if approved, will be constructed in
accordance with the specifications, rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection. Such a system, when constructed, may be
used for the purpose of disposing of sanitary sewage until taps to the public
sanitary sewage system become available, in which event the alternate
sewage, septic or treatment system provided for in this section must be
abandoned within 60 days, and any buildings erected on the property
served by such alternative sewage, septic or treatment system must be
connected to the public sanitary sewage system within said sixty-day period.
§ 235-37. Violations and penalties.
A. If the owner or owners of any occupied building or buildings in the
Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions in this
§ 235-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-37
1:181
§ 235-38. Vandalism.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
contaminate, uncover, cover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Township's sewer system.
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of an
offense and sentenced as provided in § 235-37B, plus the costs of repairs.
§ 235-39. Supervisors responsible for sewer system.
§ 235-40. Rates, rules, and regulations authorized.
Part 4 or the written notice as prescribed in § 235-35 hereof, the
Township or the Authority may perform or cause to be performed such
work and labor, and furnish, or cause to be furnished, such material
as may be necessary to comply with the provision,. of this Part 4, at
the cost and expense of such owner or owners, together with 10%
additional thereof, and all charges and expenses incident thereto, which
sum shall be collected from said owner or owners for the use of the
Township, as debts are by law collectible, or the said Township may, by
its proper officer or agent, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against
said premises as provided by law.
B. In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm, or
corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 4, or is found to
have violated any order of the White Township Municipal Authority, or
who willfully violated or failed to comply with any provision of this Part
4 in the rules, orders, regulations and permits issued hereunder, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part 4 continues or each
section of this Part 4 which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township or its duly designated agent
shall have charge and management of the public sanitary sewers and
shall issue such rules and regulations governing the use, operation, and
maintenance of said public sanitary sewers as they shall deem
necessary.
B. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White shall have the
authority to enter into agreements with other parties for the purpose of
acquiring, owning, operating, and/or managing sewer collection and/or
treatment systems serving White Township residents.
A. The Township of White will furnish sewage collection service only in
accordance with the currently prevailing and as hereafter revised rates,
rules, and regulations of the Township, which rates, rules and
§ 235-37 WHITE CODE § 235-40
1:182
§ 235-41. Authority to bind Township.
No agent or employee of the Township shall have authority to bind it by
any promise, agreement, or representation not provided for in these rules
without the approval of the Township Supervisors.
§ 235-42. Service of notices.
§ 235-43. Complaints.
Complaints relative to the character of service furnished or of bills rendered
must be made in writing and delivered to the main business office of the
Township.
§ 235-44. Authorization to enter upon private property.
The Board of Supervisors of White Township hereby authorizes employees
of the Township to enter upon private property at all reasonable times
for the purpose of conducting inspections and investigations to assure
compliance with rules and regulations set forth herein.
regulations are made a part of every application, contract, agreement,
or license entered into between the property owner or customer and
the Township. Such rates, rules, and regulations may vary by sewer
district within White Township.
B. The Township hereby reserves the right so often as it may deem
necessary to alter, amended and/or repeal the rates and/or these rules
and regulations, or any part; and in whole or in part to substitute new
rates, rules and regulations, which altered, amended and/or new rates,
rules and regulations, shall forthwith without notice, become and
thereafter be a part of every such application, contract, agreement or
license for sewage service in effect at the time of such alteration,
amendment and/or adoption.
A. All notices and bills relating to the Township or its business shall be
deemed to have been properly served if left upon the premises of the
customer, or if mailed first class to the customer, directed to or left at
his address as shown on the records of the Township.
B. The Township will send by first-class mail all such notices and bills to
the address given on the application for sewage collection service until
a change, in writing, has been filed with the Township by the applicant.
C. All notices of general character affecting or likely to affect a large
number of customers shall be deemed to have been properly served if
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in White Township.
§ 235-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-44
1:183

ARTICLE V
Conditions of Service
§ 235-45. Prohibited disposal methods.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or occupier of any property in
the Township abutting on any line of the public sanitary sewer system to
employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy tank, mine hole or
otherwise, for the disposal of sanitary sewage, other than into and through
said public sanitary sewers, except as otherwise herein authorized.
§ 235-46. Prohibited connections.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at any time, now or hereafter, be connected with the
aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
§ 235-47. Downspouts and surface water prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof drain thereto or
permit any roof drain to remain connected thereto or to permit, allow or
cause to enter into said public sanitary sewers any stormwater, foundation
drain water, basement drain water (other than sewage), groundwater,
spring water, surface water or any sewage from any property other than
that for which a permit is issued.
§ 235-48. Control of industrial wastes.
A. The discharge of industrial wastes into the public sanitary sewers,
without prior written consent of the Township, is hereby prohibited.
Any establishment desiring to discharge industrial wastes into the
public sanitary sewers shall make application to the Township for a
permit therefor. The applicant for such permit shall furnish the
Township with such information as is required for the purpose of
determining whether the proposed discharge of industrial wastes will
conform with the requirements of the rules and regulations of the
Township and the Authority. The granting of such permit may be made
contingent upon the applicant providing and maintaining, at the
expense of the applicant, apparatus for regulating the rate of discharge
and for the proper sampling thereof, from time to time, as the Township
and/or the Authority may deem necessary.
B. The Township reserves the right to refuse permission to connect to the
public sanitary sewers, to compel discontinuance of use of the public
sanitary sewers, or to compel pretreatment of industrial wastes by any
industry in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful or to have a
deleterious effect upon any portion of the public sanitary sewers. No
sewage or industrial waste shall be discharged to the public sanitary
sewers containing chemicals or other matter as listed in § 235-49.
§ 235-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-48
1:185
§ 235-49. Prohibited wastes.
No oil, tar, grease, gasoline, combustible gases or liquids, garbage or
insoluble solids, hazardous wastes, or any substance that would impair
or interfere with the public sanitary sewers, or any part thereof in any
manner, or with the function of the processes of sewage treatment, shall
be discharged into the public sanitary sewers. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the public sanitary sewers any ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, hay, shavings, metal, glass, scrap, rags, disposable wipes,
feminine hygiene products, septage, feathers, plastics, wood or any other
or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the
public sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation
of the public sanitary sewers or the processes of sewage treatment. All
sewage discharge into the public sanitary sewers shall meet the following
requirements. (NOTE: refer to Article XI for additional/revised standards.
Article XI standards shall take precedent over § 235-49 standards where a
conflict may exist):
C. Industries shall install suitable pretreatment facilities to meet the
requirements stipulated herein. The Township reserves the right to
require industry having large variations in rate of waste discharge to
install suitable regulating devices for equalizing waste flows. The
Township representatives shall have access at all reasonable times to
industrial establishments and any meters used for establishing or
determining water consumption, water excluded from the sewer system
and sewage and/or wastewaters discharged to the sewer system.
A. The five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall not exceed 400
parts per million (ppm) by weight.
B. The suspended solids (SS) shall not exceed 400 parts per million (ppm)
by weight.
C. The total other soluble grease (grease, fats or oils) shall not exceed 25
parts per million (ppm) by weight.
D. The sewage shall be free of any corrosive, volatile, suffocating,
inflammable or explosive liquids, solids, vapor or gas, such as gasoline,
benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, tar or oil.
E. The sewage shall be free of unshredded garbage.
F. The pH (hydrogen ion concentration) of the sewage shall be between
4.5 and 9.0, and the sewage shall not have any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or
personnel of the public sanitary sewers.
G. The sewage shall be free of toxic or poisonous substances in quantities
sufficient to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the
receiving stream of the sewage treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall
include, but not by way of limitation, wastes containing cyanide,
§ 235-48 WHITE CODE § 235-49
1:186
§ 235-50. Grease traps and clean-out schedule required.
Each commercial establishment, existing or new, which uses or produces
greases or oils shall construct a grease trap to prevent the excess greases
from entering the public sanitary sewers. The following regulations shall be
complied with by each property owner required to construct a grease trap:
§ 235-51. Inspection port installation.
chromium and/or copper ions. The sewage shall contain no malodorous
gases or substances capable of creating a public nuisance.
H. The temperature of the sewage when discharged into the public
sanitary sewers shall not be higher than 100° F.
A. Prior to construction of the grease trap, the property owner and/or
tenant shall prepare and submit to the Township for approval a written
schedule of maintenance to regularly clean the trap.
B. On or before March 31 of each calendar year, the property owner and/
or tenant shall submit to the Township a certified copy of the grease
trap cleaning that was performed during the past year.
C. Existing establishments required by this article to install a grease trap
shall complete construction and have the grease trap in full operation
no later than one year from the date of adoption of this Part 4.
D. Grease traps shall be provided on service line extensions as directed by
the Township and/or Authority and in accordance with this section and
§ 235-56E. Grease traps shall be sized for a capacity convenient for the
owner; however, it shall be large enough to hold six months' estimated
grease accumulation from the structure.
A. In the event that any of the above-listed conditions of service are
violated, the property owner shall correct the violation after written
notice from the Township and shall install an inspection port at the
property line within the time period specified in the notice, but not to
exceed 45 days from the date of the notice. The inspection port shall be
installed in accordance with the current technical specifications of the
Authority, as the same may be from time to time amended by resolution,
copies of which shall be maintained on file at the Township Office. This
installation shall be made at the property owner's expense and shall be
inspected by the Township prior to backfilling of the excavation.
B. If the property owner shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this section or the written notice, the Township may
perform or cause to be performed such work and labor and furnish or
cause to be furnished, such materials as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions of this section at the cost and expense of such owner
or owners, together with 10% additional thereof, which sum shall be
collected from said owner or owners for the use of the Township, as
debts are by law collectible, or the said Township may, by its proper
§ 235-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-51
1:187
officer or agent, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said
premises as provided by law.
§ 235-51 WHITE CODE § 235-51
1:188
ARTICLE VI
Application for Service
§ 235-52. Connection procedures.
No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until all
of the following conditions have been fulfilled:
§ 235-53. Information on applications.
Each applicant for sewage service will be required to supply the requested
information and to sign the application form provided by the Township.
A. An application to the Township shall be made upon a permit form to be
supplied by the Township, for permission to connect to the public
sanitary sewers. Among other things, the applicant must state the
character and use of each structure located upon the property.
B. The applicant shall pay a tap or connection charge in accordance with
the fee schedule set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and shall
pay all costs associated with making the tap to the public sewer line.27
The Township inspector shall be present when the tap is connected and
shall inspect the connection in accordance with the current technical
specifications.
C. The applicant shall establish the elevation for his lateral to the public
sanitary sewer subject to the approval of the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer or his representative. The elevation must be
established prior to the issuance of a connection permit.
D. No work shall commence before the payment of the tap charges,
issuance by the appropriate officer for the approval of the elevation and
issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
E. The applicant shall give the designated inspector of the Township at
least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be made,
in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve the
work of connection. The inspector shall signify approval of the
connection by endorsing the inspector's name and date of approval of
the aforementioned connection permit.
F. At the time of inspection of the connection, the applicant shall permit
the inspector full and complete access to all sanitary drainage
arrangements and facilities in each building and in and about all parts
of the property. No building sewer line shall be covered over, or in any
manner concealed, until after it is inspected and approved by said
inspector.
27.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township office.
§ 235-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-54
1:189
§ 235-54. Approval of applications.
Applications are merely written requests for sewer line connections; all
applications are subject to approval of the Township, being subject to
payment of all required fees and compliance with all regulations relative
thereto prior to commencement of the work or service requested therein.
§ 235-55. Approved application becomes contract.
The application for sewage service shall be a binding contract on both
the customer and the Township, upon approval by the Township. Rates for
sewer service shall accrue from the dates the sewage collection service is
available to the premises with respect to the work and responsibilities of
the Township; provided, however, that the said application contract shall be
subject to the provisions of § 235-40 hereof as regards revisions of the rules,
rates and regulations.
§ 235-56. Special contracts.
The Township may require prior to approval of service, special contracts
other than applications, under the following conditions:
A. If required by provisions in the schedule of rates, the duration of the
contract to be specified in the schedule.
B. If the construction of extension and/or other facilities is necessary.
C. For connections with other qualified utilities or municipal subdivisions.
D. If deemed necessary by the Township.
E. Where the amount of grease used on the premises exceeds the amount
usually used by an equivalent residential customer. Use includes, but is
not limited to, restaurants, service stations, nursing homes and other
units where food preparation will exist.
§ 235-54 WHITE CODE § 235-56
1:190
ARTICLE VII
Service Connections
§ 235-57. Separate connection for each building.
Except where physical conditions prevent the installation of separate
facilities as determined, in writing, by the Township, separate connections
to the public sewers will be required for each individual occupied building,
whether constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row, but a
single connection will be permitted to serve a school, factory, apartment
house or other permanent multiple unit structure whose individual
apartments or units may not be subject to separate ownership. The
Township, however, assumes no obligation or responsibility caused by or
resulting from any permitted single connections aforementioned.
§ 235-58. Installation of service line connection.
§ 235-59. Service line connection on private property.
Service line connections will not be installed on property other than that of
the premises to be served unless the owner of the premises obtaining such
service assumes all liability.
A. The Township will inspect service line connections in accordance with
Article VI, and maintain at the Township's cost all service line
connections and inspect all connections to sewage collection lines, the
said service line connection to be the property of the Township and
remain under its control.
B. Only duly authorized employees or agents of the Township will be
permitted to inspect a service line connection from the sewer lines of
the Township to the property line of the premises of the customer.
C. The installation of all service line connections is subject to the
submission of a written application to the Township, as set forth in
Article VI, to such requests being reasonable, to approval thereof by the
Township and to the payments of such charges for the service line
connection installation as are in effect at the time of the application,
said charges to be payable in advance. Where the Township charges a
fee for issuing a permit or permits for street or road openings, the
amount of such fee will be charged to the applicant in addition to the
other charges.
D. The Township reserves the right to defer the installation of service
connections during inclement weather until such times as, in the
judgment of the Township, conditions are suitable for an expeditious
and economical installation.
§ 235-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-60
1:191
§ 235-60. One service connection for each customer.
A service line will be used to provide sewage service to a single customer
only, except where otherwise authorized, and no premises shall have more
than one service connection, in which event the Township may agree to the
installation and use of more than one such connection. Where two adjoining
premises lie on the opposite side of a road from the sewer, the Township
may elect to connect both houses into the same service line connection.
§ 235-61. Change in location of service line connection.
The customer shall pay for the cost of relocation of all service line
connections made at his request or for his convenience.
§ 235-62. Inspection.
The Inspector of the Township, properly identified, shall have access to
the customer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of testing,
inspection, repair and/or replacement of service line connections. The
Township shall have the authority to make such excavations as are required
for proper execution of the work.
§ 235-60 WHITE CODE § 235-62
1:192
ARTICLE VIII
Bills and Payments
§ 235-63. Sewer rates established.
The schedule of sewer rates for the public sanitary sewer is adopted by
resolution of the Township of White by separate sewer district. The schedule
of sewer rates by sewer district may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.28
§ 235-64. Basis for preparation of sewer bills.
All bills for services furnished by the Township will be based on the
published rate schedule of the Township. Each residential premises will
be subject to a fixed charge for sewer service as determined in the rate
schedule of the Township. Commercial accounts will be subject to the base
rate plus usage charge. The charge for sewage services in all cases where
more than one premises is served through a service line connection shall be
determined as follows:
§ 235-65. Sewer bill responsibility of owner.
Bills for said sewer service shall be rendered by and in the manner and
in the form prescribed by the Township or its duly designated agent. All
bills for sewer service shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to
which sewer service is furnished, and such owner shall in all cases be
liable for payment of such bills. For commercial accounts only, should the
owner be absent from the premises and, therefore, or for any other reason,
desire that the Township conduct business directly with the tenant of each
premises, he must first provide the Township with the written agreement of
the tenant. However, neither this section nor any other provision in these
rules and regulations shall be construed to relieve the particular premises
from encumbrance by municipal lien for failure of the owner or tenant to
pay the charges required herein. The Township will honor existing billing
agreements for residential accounts that are under such a billing agreement
A. The total charge per service line connection shall be equal to the
number of premises served times the prevailing rate as set forth in the
schedule of sewer rates.29
B. Each premises so served shall be charged equally a rate as established
hereafter.
C. This regulation shall apply regardless of whether a business may be
owned by a customer also receiving sewer service through the same
service line connection, or two or more premises located in one building
or in different buildings, the ownership of the property or business not
being significant.
28.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township office.
29.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township office.
§ 235-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-65
1:193
at the time of adoption of this ordinance until such time a new tenant is
contracted or the existing tenant defaults on payment. When either of these
events occur, the bills will be sent directly to the owner.
§ 235-66. Collection of sewer charges.
The Township or its duly designated agent shall collect and receive all
sewer rates and charges prescribed by this article. All such monies shall be
deposited to the credit of a special fund, designated the "White Township
Sewer Fund," which shall at all times be a separate and distinct fund of the
Township of White.
§ 235-67. Time period for payment of sewer charges.
Sewer charges imposed by this article shall be due and payable immediately
upon receipt of the bill and shall be paid not later than the due date
appearing on the bill. Said charges shall be subject to a six-percent penalty
if not paid on or before the due date. If not paid within 30 days after the due
date on the bill, the charge, plus the penalty, shall bear interest at the rate
of 1/2% per month or any fraction thereof until paid.
§ 235-68. Effective date of sewer rates.
The sewer rates imposed by this article shall become effective immediately
upon passage of this article; provided, however, no charges shall be made
until actual service is rendered or March 1, 1965, whichever is earlier.
§ 235-69. (Reserved)
§ 235-70. Place of payment.
All bills are payable to any office or payment agency of the Township in
accordance with directions imprinted on the said bills.
§ 235-71. Bills rendered and due.
The Township will compile bills regularly, either monthly or quarterly at
its option, and bills will be rendered as soon as practicable after the
compilation. Payment of bills shall be due in accordance with the directions
imprinted thereon.
§ 235-72. Abatement.
Abatements of sewer charges shall comply with the following:
A. Any customer desiring an abatement from sewer charges for a singlefamily
residence due to vacancy, other than death or a permanent move
to another residence, shall give written notice to the office of the
Township. Such notice shall be received at the office of the Township at
the time the vacancy occurs. When a vacancy is properly reported, an
allowance may be made for the period of the vacancy, but not for a
§ 235-65 WHITE CODE § 235-72
1:194
period less than one billing quarter (January 1 through March 31; April
1 through June 30; July 1 through September 30 and October 1 through
December 31). It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify
the Township of reoccupancy of the residence. The Township reserves
the right to inspect the property at any reasonable time during the term
of the vacancy, to request from the customer additional documentation
in support of the vacancy application and/or reject the vacancy
application.
B. A vacancy of a single-family, owner-occupied residence due to death of
the owner or due to a permanent move to another residence by the
owner shall not be considered an abatement, but rather a temporary
discontinuance of service. For billing purposes, the date of the vacancy
shall be adjusted to either the 15th or the last day of the month in which
the vacancy occurs, whichever is closer to the actual date of vacancy.
Service shall be reestablished upon transfer or reoccupancy of the
premises. It shall be the responsibility of the former owner, or his agent,
to report such transfer to the Township.
C. Any owner of a mobile home park desiring an abatement from sewer
charges due to vacancies shall give written notice to the office of the
Township. Such notice shall be received at the office of the Township on
or before the 15th day of the third month of the billing quarter (i.e.,
March 15, June 15, September 15 or December 15) for which the
abatement is being requested. When a vacancy is properly reported, an
allowance may be made for the period of vacancy, but not for a period of
less than one billing quarter (January 1 through March 31; April 1
through June 30; July 1 through September 30 and October 1 through
December 31). The notice shall list all vacant units and the dates of
vacancy of each such unit. The Township reserves the right to bill the
owner of mobile home parks full occupancy if a proper notice is not
received by the dates listed above.
§ 235-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-72
1:195

ARTICLE IX
Sewer Line Construction Standards
§ 235-73. Purpose.
The following sections establish procedures and standards for the
construction of lines within the public sanitary sewer system.
§ 235-74. Extension of existing sewer lines.
The extension of existing sewer lines may be accomplished through one
of three funding arrangements listed below and shall be subject to the
following requirements:
A. Funding.
(1) Authority-performed projects: from time to time the Authority may
choose to extend the sewer services into other areas of the
Township based upon the business practices, models, and policies
of the Authority.
(2) Developer-performed projects: a developer may choose to make
application to the Authority to extend the sewer services of the
Authority at the sole cost of the developer. The developer may then
dedicate that infrastructure to the Township in lieu of paying the
White Township collection portion of the appropriate tap fee.
Furthermore, the developer may make the appropriate application
for reimbursement in accordance with Title 53, Chapter 56, of the
Pennsylvania Code.
(3) Cost-sharing, authority-performed projects: from time to time the
Authority may choose to extend the sewer services into other areas
of the Township based upon the business practices, models, and
policies of the Authority by sharing the cost. In this case all
preliminary assessment costs and excess costs beyond the current
business models that are considered to be a viable Authorityperformed
project are borne by the developer.
B. Requirements.
(1) An application shall be submitted on forms furnished by the
Township for the purpose of requesting the extension of existing
sewer lines, the application to be signed by the person or persons
requesting such an installation.
(2) The applicant, developer, or other interested parties will be
required to enter into an agreement with the Authority defining the
terms and extents to which the extension project will be pursued.
(3) Subsequent to a preliminary assessment study of the proposed
project, approval thereof and preparation of a detailed estimate of
cost, the applicant or others interested parties shall advance to the
§ 235-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-74
1:197
§ 235-75. Installation of interceptors, collectors and service line
connections.
The construction of all interceptors, collectors and service line connections
shall be done in accordance with the current technical specifications, plans,
and procedures established by the Township and the Authority, as the same
may be from time to time amended by resolution, copies of which shall be
maintained on file with the Township Secretary.
§ 235-76. Installation of service line extensions.
The construction of all service line extensions shall be done in accordance
with the current technical specifications, plans, and procedures established
by the Township and the Authority, as the same may be from time to time
amended by resolution, copies of which shall be maintained on file with the
Township Secretary.
Township a performance and payment bond which covers 110% of
the entire estimated project cost of the sewer line extension and
appurtenances, the cost to be based on a line at least eight inches
in diameter, except in special cases where a larger line is deemed
necessary to convey the flow of sewage according to specifications
and shall execute an approval agreement. Estimated project costs
are to include all engineering design, bidding and contract award,
materials and installation costs, as well as construction and startup
observation to be performed by the Authority's consulting
engineer.
(4) The installation of all sewage collection lines shall be in accordance
with the detailed specifications prepared by or approved by the
Authority's consulting engineer relative to such work, and the cost
of all sewage collection lines shall include the cost of furnishing
and installing of pipe, manholes, manhole frames and covers, and
completion of such other work, cost of obtaining all land and rightsof-
way, and all engineering, legal and other miscellaneous related
costs.
(5) The construction of sewer lines in a lot plan development or similar
areas shall be installed at the sole cost of the developer or owner
and subject to all Township requirements currently in effect.
(6) Service line connection to existing sewage collection lines shall be
subject to the fees established by the Township, and no connections
shall be made without proper application, inspection and approval.
§ 235-74 WHITE CODE § 235-76
1:198
ARTICLE X
Terminology
§ 235-77. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 4, certain terms and words used herein are
defined as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — Until the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection establishes an EPA approved pretreatment
program, the EPA Administrator for Pennsylvania will serve as the approval
authority.
AUTHORITY — The White Township Municipal Authority, a body corporate
and politic organized and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USE —
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2)
A.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their
designee.
C.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorizations is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
Borough of Indiana.
D.
§ 235-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-77
1:199
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 235-79A(1) and (2). BMPs
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
BILLING QUARTER — The first day of January through the last day of
March; the first day of April through the last day of June; the first day of July
through the last day of September; and the first day of October through the
last day of December.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20 centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BOROUGH or INDIANA BOROUGH — The municipal governmental entity
known as the "Borough of Indiana" and located at 80 North Eighth Street,
Indiana, Pennsylvania 15701.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with § 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear
in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
COLLECTOR LINES — Sewer lines which connect service lines with
interceptor lines, and which are generally located in streets, highways,
public ways, or private rights-of-way, and which are used to serve the
general public.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE — The provision of sewage service to premises
where the customer is engaged in trade and/or commerce.
DATE OF PRESENTATION — The date upon which a bill or notice is mailed,
as evidenced by the United States Post Office cancellation mark.
DOMESTIC SERVICE — The provision of sewage service for household
residential purposes.
EDU (EQUIVALENT DOMESTIC UNIT) — The amount of sewage estimated
to be generated from one typical residential unit.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Protection Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
FLAT RATE — A fixed periodic charge for unmeasured service.
§ 235-77 WHITE CODE § 235-77
1:200
FLAT RATE SERVICE — The provision of sewage services for premises in
unmeasured quantities.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE — The provision of sewage service to premises for
use in manufacturing or processing activities.
INSPECTOR — The White Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (or his
designee), the White Township Building Code Official, or other qualified
representative appointed by the Township to carry out sewer inspection and
regulatory services.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample
collected, independent of the industrial flowrate and the duration of the
sampling event.
INTERCEPTOR LINES — Lines receiving sewage from collector lines, and
which lead to points of treatment or discharge, and which are used to serve
the general public.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; or is a cause of a violation of the Borough's NPDES permit,
prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or
any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
"Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.
MUNICIPAL OR PUBLIC SERVICE — The provision of sewage service to
a municipal subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or agency
thereof or to other similar public bodies. This classification includes
educational institutions.
§ 235-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-77
1:201
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located.
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source.
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment.
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment.
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
C.
§ 235-77 WHITE CODE § 235-77
1:202
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
OWNER — The person, firm, corporation or association having an interest
as owner, whether legal or equitable, sole or only partial, in any premises
which is or is about to be serviced by the sanitary sewers of the Township,
and the word "owners" means all so interested.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES permit, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units (SU).
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PREMISES — The property or area, including the improvements thereon, to
which service is or will be provided through sewer lines of the Township on
which the property abuts and on which the improvements front, and as used
herein shall be taken to designate:
A building under one roof owned or leased by one customer and
occupied as one residence or one place of business.
A.
A group or combination of buildings owned by one customer, in one
common enclosure, occupied by one family, or one organization,
corporation or firm, as a residence or place of business, or for
manufacturing or industrial purposes, or as a hotel, hospital, church
parochial school or similar institution except as otherwise noted herein.
B.
C. The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall.
Each side or each part of a house or building occupied by one family
even though the closest and/or other fixtures be used in common.
D.
Each apartment, office, suite of offices and/or place of business located
in a building or a group interconnected by a tunnel, passageway,
covered area way, patio or some similar means of structure.
E.
§ 235-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-77
1:203
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — The person designated by the Borough
to supervise the operation of the pretreatment program in White Township.
The pretreatment coordinator is charged with the duties and
responsibilities of Article XI of this Part 4.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — No substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARDS — Pretreatment standards
shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 235-49 of this Part 4.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A "treatment works,"
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned or
leased by the Borough, the Township of White, or White Township Municipal
Authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to Indiana Borough's wastewater treatment plant.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS — The system of sewers and/or sewer
treatment plants owned and/or operated by the Township of White.
A public building devoted entirely to public use, such as a town hall,
school house, fire engine house.
F.
Each dwelling unit in a row of houses, a dwelling unit being defined
as a building or portion thereof with exclusive culinary and sanitary
facilities designed for occupancy and used by one person or one family
(household).
G.
Each individual and separate place of business and/or occupancy
located in one building or group of buildings commonly designed as
shopping centers, supermarket areas and by such terms.
H.
Each dwelling unit in a public housing development owned and
operated by the United States of America, a municipal subdivision of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by a philanthropic foundation or
organization or some such similar body or organization, or operated
under private ownership.
I.
§ 235-77 WHITE CODE § 235-77
1:204
SEPTAGE — Greater than 100 gallons of anaerobic sewage delivered from
a holding tank, privy or septic tank.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SERVICE LINE CONNECTIONS — The Y-branch from the collector lines to
the owner's property line.
SERVICE LINE EXTENSIONS — The sewer line and other facilities, to
include all below floor piping, within which sewage is conveyed from the
premises to the service line connection and which is privately owned and
maintained and which is also commonly referred to as the "house lateral
line."
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER RENTAL SCHEDULE — The entire body of effective rates, rentals,
charges and regulations, as published and made a part thereof.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater).
(1)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant.
(2)
Is designated as such by the Borough on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3)
B.
The Pretreatment Coordinator may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant
categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a
finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically
included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are
met:
The industrial user, prior to the Borough's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
(1)
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in § 235-83N(2) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with
(2)
C.
§ 235-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-77
1:205
SLUG LOAD or SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature or at
a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in § 235-49 of this Part 4.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLI DS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TENANT — Anyone occupying the premises under lease, written or oral,
from a lessor and being served by the sanitary sewers of the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of White, a body corporate and politic
organized and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TRUNK EXTENSIONS — Extensions of sewage collection lines beyond
existing facilities and exclusive of service connections.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
any additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
(3)
§ 235-77 WHITE CODE § 235-77
1:206
ARTICLE XI
Industrial Pretreatment30
§ 235-78. through § 235-93. (Reserved)
30.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 1039, adopted 10-13-2010, the White Township Board
of Supervisors authorized the Borough of Indiana to enforce Article XI, Industrial
Pretreatment. The Borough's current pretreatment standards can be found in Chapter 360
of the Borough Code. The web link to the Borough's code is: http://ecode360.com/IN2678.
§ 235-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-78
1:207

Part 5
Assessment Of Civil Penalties And Costs
ARTICLE XII
Procedures
§ 235-94. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 5 is to promote the public health, safety and welfare
by implementing and establishing procedures for assessing civil penalties
and costs as authorized by the SFA.31
§ 235-95. Civil penalties and costs.
White Township is empowered to assess civil penalties and costs and
implement an assessment process for violations of the SFA by and pursuant
to § 13a of the said Act (35 P.S. § 750.13a) which section was added to the
SFA by the Act of December 14, 1994, P.L. 1250.
§ 235-96. Applicability.
This Part 5 is applicable to any violations of the SFA, any violations of
state regulations adopted under the SFA (25 Pa. Code Chapters 71, 72
and 73), violations of any permits issued by White Township under or
pursuant to the SFA or the above-cited state regulations, violations of any
administrative order issued under or pursuant to the SFA or the abovereferenced
regulations by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or by or on behalf of White Township.
§ 235-97. Definitions.
The definitions of the various terms as listed and defined in the SFA and
in state regulations appearing at 25 Pa. Code Chapters 71, 72 and 73 are
hereby incorporated by reference into this Part 5, so that any of the terms
used herein which are defined by the SFA or the cited regulations, shall
have the same meaning as set forth in the statute and those regulations,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 235-98. Delegation of authority.
A. White Township hereby delegates to the White Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer ("SEO") the power and duty to issue, on behalf of
the Township, civil penalty and cost assessments and to take all other
action to effectuate the assessment process consistent with § 13a of the
SFA (35 P.S. § 750.13a), except as otherwise provided in this Part 5.
B. The SEO or his designee shall conduct the assessment hearing
authorized hereunder.
31.Editor's Note: See Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 235-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-99
1:209
§ 235-99. Notice.
Prior to assessing a civil penalty or cost, the SEO shall provide to the
violator in question, a notice of proposed assessment which shall include
the following:
§ 235-100. Assessment hearing.
A. A description of the action, activity or condition which constitutes the
violation or violations for which the penalty is being assessed.
B. A citation to the provisions of the SFA, regulation, the permit and
administrative order which the SEO finds has been violated by the
person or persons against whom the assessment is being issued.
C. A statement of the amount of civil penalty or costs proposed for each
violation.
D. A notice that the violator has the right to request an assessment
hearing, the purpose of which is to discuss and evaluate the violations
in question, including the amount of the proposed penalty or costs
applicable to each.
E. A statement that if the violator desires an assessment hearing, said
violator must notify the SEO, in writing, of the request for assessment
hearing which written notice must be received by the Township office
not later than 15 days following the violator's receipt of the notice of
proposed assessment.
F. A statement that if a request for assessment hearing is not received
within the allotted time as set forth herein, that the violator will waive
his right to an assessment hearing and that the Township may,
thereafter, proceed to issue an assessment of civil penalty or costs for
the alleged violations set forth in the notice of proposed assessment.
G. A statement explaining that whether or not the violator requests an
assessment hearing, the violator will have the right to appeal from any
assessment or costs which are ultimately issued, by filing a notice of
appeal with the White Township office within 30 days after receipt of
notice of the said final assessment.
H. The notice of proposed assessment shall also contain notice that the
assessment hearing will be informal and will not be governed by
requirements for formal adjudicatory hearings and that if it is
requested will be scheduled thereafter by the SEO or the SEO's
designee at the convenience of the participant.
A. If a person who has received notice of a proposed assessment requests
an assessment hearing within the time limit as set forth in the notice,
the SEO or his designee shall establish a date, time and place for the
assessment hearing, which shall be held promptly, but may be
scheduled at the convenience of the participants.
§ 235-99 WHITE CODE § 235-100
1:210
§ 235-101. Formal assessment.
B. The civil penalty and/or costs assessment hearing shall be conducted by
the SEO or his designee.
C. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by
requirements of formal adjudicatory hearings. There will be no sworn
testimony and no examinations or cross-examination of witnesses at
such hearing. No taping or recording of the meeting shall take place,
except upon notice and approval by the hearing officer and all others
present at the hearing.
D. At the assessment hearing, the SEO or other representatives of White
Township in possession of the facts shall describe to the violator the
findings and conclusions with respect to the violations cited in the
notice of proposed assessment. The basis for rationale for the proposed
assessment in the amount or amounts as set forth in the proposed
assessment document may also be explained. The person against whom
the proposed assessment has been issued, or his representatives, shall
have the opportunity to provide other relevant information as such
person sees fit, including mitigating considerations.
E. At or after the assessment hearing, the SEO and the alleged violator
may reach a settlement agreement as to the amount of penalty or costs
to be paid. In such case an appropriate consent assessment document
may be executed between the SEO and the alleged violator.
A. After the civil penalty/cost assessment hearing has been held, or in the
event the SEO find that the violator has failed or refused to attend or
schedule the assessment hearing within a reasonable time, the SEO
may issue a formal assessment against the violator.
B. The civil penalty or costs assessment shall include:
(1) A description of each violation for which a civil penalty or costs are
being assessed.
(2) A citation to the statute, regulation, permit or order that has been
violated.
(3) A statement of the penalty or costs assessed for each violation.
(4) The total amount of penalty or costs payable.
(5) Instructions as to where to make payment and to whom the check
or money order shall be made payable.
(6) An explanation off the alleged violators right to appeal from the
assessment which notice shall include language substantially
equivalent to the following:
§ 235-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-101
1:211
You have the right to appeal from this assessment by filing with
White Township at the above-referenced address a written notice
of appeal which must include or be accompanied by the following:
(1) Name, telephone number and address of the person or
persons filing the appeal.
(2) The reasons for the appeal.
(3) Payment of the amount of the civil penalty assessed or,
alternative, an irrevocable letter of credit in such amount
issued by a federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution or an appeal bond made payable to White Township
in the amount of the assessed civil penalty. Any such appeal
bond must be executed by a surely licensed to do business
in this Commonwealth and be in a form satisfactory to White
Township.
The said appeal documents must be received by White Township
not later than 30 days from the date of your receipt of the
assessment. In such appeal, you shall have the right to contest
the amount of the assessment of the fact of the violations. If you
fail to file an appeal and the amount of the penalty or appropriate
security within 30 days from your receipt of this assessment, you
will waive your right to appeal and thereafter proceedings to
collect the amount of this assessment will be initiated against you
as provided by law."
§ 235-101 WHITE CODE § 235-101
1:212
Part 6
McKee Run Sanitary Sewer System
ARTICLE XIII
Use of Sewer
§ 235-102. Title.
This Part 6 shall be known as the "White Township McKee Sanitary Sewer
Ordinance."
§ 235-103. Adoption of sewer system rules and regulations by
reference.
§ 235-104. Required connections.
A. The Township hereby designates the Indiana County Municipal Services
Authority (the "Authority") as its agent for the purposes of this Part 6.
Further, the officers and employees as designated by the Authority shall
have full powers to make all inspections, issue sewer connection and
lateral pipe installation permits and do all other actions required under
the rules and regulations as adopted.
B. The Township hereby adopts by reference, various rules and
regulations formulated by the Authority which regulate the discharge of
sanitary sewage to the Authority's McKee Run Public Sanitary
Sewerage System within the Township, exclude stormwater runoff from
entering the said public sanitary sewerage system within the Township,
declare unacceptable certain types of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, provide for general rules concerning sewage collection and for
surcharges for certain types of wastes, provide for general rules
concerning billing and collection of treatment charges, sewage
collection, transportation and surcharges within the Township, regulate
connections into the said public sanitary sewerage system, regulate
proposed extension of the public sewerage system by private
developers and provide general rules concerning delinquencies,
violations and remedies.
A. The owner of every property located within the Township which abuts
on McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System shall at his own cost
connect any building or other structure on such property producing
sanitary waste, or capable of producing sanitary waste, to the public
sanitary sewer system, provided that the said sanitary sewer system is
available for the purpose of disposing of all acceptable sewage
emanating from such property within 150 feet (horizontal straight line
measurement) of any part of the building or structure, including
appurtenances thereto.
B. It shall be the duty of the Authority to notify the owner of any structure
required to connect to the said sanitary sewer system to disconnect and
§ 235-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-104
1:213
§ 235-105. Abandonment and prohibition of septic tanks, cesspools
and privy vaults.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property in the Township required
to be connected to the McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System to employ
any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole or other
depository, for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than into and through
said public sanitary sewer system. No septic tank, cesspool, privy vault,
mine hole or other depository shall at any time be connected with the
aforesaid public sanitary sewer system. Such existing depositories at the
time for connection of the property to the public sanitary sewer system shall
be disconnected and properly abandoned.
§ 235-106. Prohibition against infiltration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or permit the entry or
infiltration into the McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System of any roof
drain water, stormwater, foundation drain water, spring water, surface
water or any other source of water or any sewage or industrial waste from
any property other than that which complies with the Authority's sewer
system rules and regulations.
§ 235-107. Failure to connect.
If the owner of any property required to be connected to the McKee Run
Public Sanitary Sewage System shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this Part 6 or the written notice as prescribed, the Authority
may institute any available civil or criminal action against the property
owner which the Authority deems necessary to effectuate this Part 6.
Additionally, the Authority may perform or cause to be performed such work
and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be
necessary to connect such property to the public sanitary sewage system at
abandon any other sewage disposal system and to make a proper
connection for the discharge and disposal of all sanitary sewage into
the public sanitary sewer system. Such notice shall be in writing and
delivered either by personal service or by certified or registered mail.
Such owner shall be required to complete a proper connection to the
public sanitary sewer system and to pay all fees and other charges
within 90 days of such notice.
C. Any owner who cannot comply with the provisions of Subsection B of
this section for reasons beyond his control shall apply to the Authority
within said ninety-day period for a time extension of up to six additional
months. The application shall be made on a form to be furnished by the
Authority and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant to
commence paying the regular monthly sewer rates (less a cost
treatment component) immediately, even though actual connection to
the public sanitary sewer will not be accomplished until some later date
within the six-month extension period.
§ 235-104 WHITE CODE § 235-107
1:214
the cost and expense of such owner, together with 10% thereof additional as
administrative expenses of the Authority and all other charges and expenses
incidental thereto and the tap-in fee and any service fees due, which sum
shall be collected from the property owner for the use of the Authority as
debts are by law collectible and it may file a municipal claim or lien against
the premises as provided by law.
§ 235-108. Right to inspect.
The Authority and the Township, or their respective agents, employees,
representatives, shall be permitted to enter upon any property at
reasonable times and hours for the purpose of inspection, observation,
sampling, testing and retesting building drains, sewers, connections and all
other matters pertaining to the disposal of sanitary sewage and industrial
waste to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Part 6.
§ 235-109. Maintenance and repair.
The Authority shall have responsibility for the operation, maintenance and
repair of the public sanitary sewer system outside the property lines or
rights-of-way of properties required to be connected to such system and
within any such right-of-way owned by the Authority. Within the property
lines or rights-of-way of properties required to be connected to the public
sanitary sewer system, except within the Authority's right-of-way, all
connections and sewers shall be maintained and repaired by the property
owner at the property owner's cost. All repairs shall be subject to the
direction, approval and inspection of the Authority. The details of
maintenance and repair within the property lines of property required to be
connected to the public sanitary sewer system shall be as set forth in the
Authority's sewer system rules and regulations.
§ 235-110. Condition and procedures for service.
No unauthorized person shall make or cause to be made any connections
with or opening in to use, alter or disturb the McKee Run Public Sanitary
Sewer System without first obtaining a sewer construction permit from the
Authority and all persons shall adhere to the following rules:
A. He shall make application to the Authority for a permit upon a form to
be furnished by the Authority. The charge of the permit shall be set by
the Authority to cover the inspection cost and shall be collected at that
time.
B. No work shall commence before the issuance of permit.
C. Upon the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay the required
connection charge which shall include the cost of one inspection of the
installation by a representative of the Authority. In the event that
additional inspections are required, the property owner shall be
charged $25 for each additional inspection.
§ 235-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-110
1:215
§ 235-111. Unlawful use of sewer.
§ 235-112. Prohibited wastes.
D. The applicant shall give the Authority's sewer inspector at least 48
hours' notice of time when connection will be made. The sewer
inspector shall be present to inspect and approve the work of
connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the connection
on the permit.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the property owner shall
permit the inspector full and complete access to all sanitary and
drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and in and about
all part of the property. No connection shall be covered over or in any
manner concealed until after it is inspect and approved by the
inspector.
F. All inspections shall be made and scheduled by the inspector during
regular business hours of the Authority.
G. Connections and building drains may be hydrostatically, pneumatically
or smoke-tested for leakage at the discretion and in the manner as
specified in the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations.
H. Sewage permits shall be a prerequisite to obtaining a building permit
under Chapter 92, Assessment Permits, of the Code of the Township of
White.
A. No stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters may be deposited in the
McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System.
B. No cross-connection shall be made between the McKee Run Public
Sanitary Sewage System and the potable water system whereby
vacuums or back siphonage could permit sanitary wastes to enter the
potable water system. No cross-connections shall be made between the
public sanitary sewer system and storm sewers.
C. No person shall connect, cause or permit to be connected with the
McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System, directly or indirectly, any
steam exhaust, boiler blow off, sediment, drip or any pipe carrying or
constructed to carry hot water, acid, germicide, grease, gasoline,
naphtha, benzene, oil or any other substance detrimental to the public
sanitary sewer system, except residential hot water tank or residential
boiler discharges.
A. No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or permit the
discharge of any of the following described waters or wastes to the
McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
§ 235-110 WHITE CODE § 235-112
1:216
§ 235-113. Connection charge.
All property owners covered by this Part 6 shall be subject to such
connection fees and due dates as may be established, from time to time, in
the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations.32
(2) Any water containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
which injure or interfere with any waste treatment process that
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals that creates a public
nuisance or that creates any hazard in the receiving waters of any
wastewater treatment plant.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, pipes, equipment and personnel or the
wastewater works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not
limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper,
plastic or foam dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
(5) Any other materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges
to the system in concentrations or quantities which will not harm
either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment,
will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not
cause the effluent from the wastewater treatment works to be in
violation of the requirements of state, federal or any other agency
having jurisdiction.
B. The provisions of the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations
shall apply to this section.
C. The Authority may require materials testing at the expense of the
property owner prior to connection and may refuse connection to the
McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System, or to compel discontinuance
of discharge or the use of such deleterious materials or to require
pretreatment of such wastes in order to prevent harmful or adverse
effect upon the public sewer system. The design, construction and
operation of such pretreatment facilities shall be subject to the
Authority's sewer system rules and regulations.
32.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 235-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-114
1:217
§ 235-114. Separate connection for each principal building;
exception.
A separate sewer connection shall be provided for every principal buildings,
except as is otherwise authorized by the Authority's Sewer system rules and
regulations.
§ 235-115. Connection approval required.
All connections to the McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System, materials
therefor, jointing materials and methods used shall at all times be subject to
the direction, supervision and approval of the Authority.
§ 235-116. Safety requirements.
All excavations for sewer connections shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazards. All roadways,
sidewalks and public property or public rights-of-way disturbed in the
course of making a sewer connection shall be restored in a manner as
provided in the Authority's or Township's rules and regulations, as the case
may be.
§ 235-117. Sewer fees.
All property owners covered by this Part 6 shall be subject to the monthly
sewer fee provided in the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations as
the same may, from time to time, be established.33
§ 235-118. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part 6, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Whenever such person, firm or
corporation shall have been notified in writing by the Authority that
such person, firm or corporation is violating this Part 6 or each section
of this Part 6 which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
B. All persons violating any portion of the Authority's sewer system rules
and regulations shall be in violation of this Part 6. Notice of such
violation shall be sent through the U.S. mail and if, after 30 days of
elapsed time, no action on the violation is taken, the sewer connections
may be removed or closed and reconnection will not be made until after
a correction of the violation and satisfaction of all costs incident thereto
have been paid. The expense of such removal or closing and the
33.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 235-114 WHITE CODE § 235-118
1:218
§ 235-119. Provisions applicable to public water supplies.
In the event that any owner whose property is required to be connected to
the McKee Run Public Sanitary Sewer System shall fail to pay any sewage
charges or other charges as provided in the Authority's sewer system rules
and regulations and the property to which public sanitary sewage disposal
is provided is served by a public water system, the Authority, in addition to
all other remedies provided in this Part 6 or at law, may make or cause to be
made modifications to the public water system of such property so that all
water used which passes through the sanitary sewer shall be metered and
water service shall be disconnected if sewage bills are not paid or this Part
6 is otherwise violated by the property owner or occupant of the property.
§ 235-120. Provisions not applicable to nonpublic water supplies.
In the case of a property which is required to be connected to the public
sewer system and which is not served by a public water system,
modifications to the water supply system shall be made in accordance with
the Authority's regulations so that all water use may be required to be
metered and water service may be disconnected, if sewage charges or other
charges as provided in the Authority's sewer system rules and regulations
are not paid or this Part 6 is otherwise violated by the property owner or
tenant. Residential nonpublic water systems shall not be required to be
metered unless sewage or other charges are not paid in accordance with
the Authority's regulations. Commercial and/or industrial customers using
nonpublic water supplies may be metered if it is necessary to measure flows
as defined in Article II, Item 20, of the Authority's sewer system rules and
regulations.
expense of restoring the sewer service shall be a property owner debt
due the Authority, a lien upon the property of the owner and may be
recovered by civil action in the name of the Authority.
§ 235-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-120
1:219
Chapter 244
SMOKING
§ 244-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — Includes the act of smoking and shall include the carrying
of lighted pipes, cigars, cigarettes or tobacco in any form or the carrying
of lighted pipes, cigars, cigarettes or other drugs or material commonly or
frequently used for smoking.
§ 244-2. Hazards.
Where conditions are such as to make smoking a fire or explosion hazard in
any areas of warehouses, stores, industrial plants, healthcare occupancies,
laboratories, places of assembly, schools and in open spaces where
flammable, combustible or hazardous materials are manufactured, stored or
handled, the Fire Chief, designated by the Township of White, is empowered
and authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post no smoking
signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall
be prohibited. The Fire Chief shall designate specific safe locations, if
necessary, in any building, structure or place in which smoking is to be
permitted.
§ 244-3. Signs.
No smoking signs of approved sized lettering and location, required in
accordance with § 244-2 above, shall read "By Order of the Fire Chief."
§ 244-4. Unlawful to remove signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required no
smoking signs or to smoke in a place where such signs are posted.
§ 244-5. Violations and penalties.34
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with
or violate any order made thereunder, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-120 WHITE CODE § 244-5
1:220
of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permitted it
to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violation or defects within a reasonable time.
Chapter 257
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 105.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 299.
§ 244-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-5
1:221

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 6-27-1990 by Ord. No. 915]
§ 257-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALUMINUM — Used cans comprised of 100% aluminum.
COMMERCIAL, MUNICIPAL OR INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT —
Any nonresidential establishment that is intended for human occupancy,
whether temporary or permanent.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges, including, but not limited to,
cardboard boxes and cartons.
DORMITORY PROPERTY — Any residential property within the Township of
White that contains thereon one or more dormitory structures.
DORMITORY STRUCTURE — A structure or portion of a structure that is
designed so as to provide sleeping quarters in one integral unit, with toilet
facilities and/or kitchen facilities being shared by other occupants living in
the structure.
GLASS — Includes glass bottles and jars and all products made from silica
or sand, soda ash and limestone; the product being transparent or
translucent (green or brown/amber in color) and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matters excluding, however, blue or flat glass
commonly known as "window" and "lead-based" glass, such as crystal or TV
tubes.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as white ledger paper and computer paper.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, waste water treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING PROPERTY — Residential property
within the Township of White containing thereon dormitory and/or
apartment structures occupied predominantly on a tenant basis, but not
including single-family and/or mobile home units.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-1
1:223
NEWSPRINT — Includes recyclable paper of the type commonly known
as "paper," but excluding therefrom periodicals, magazines and chemically
coated paper.
PLASTICS —
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property within the Township of White
that contains thereon one or more residential unit, and/or one or more
dormitory structure.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A structure or portion of a structure that is designed
so as to provide sleeping quarters, toilet facilities, and kitchen facilities in
one integral unit, to include single-family units, multifamily units and mobile
home units.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — Recyclable food and beverage
containers fabricated primarily of steel, tin, a combination of steel and tin or
a combination of steel and aluminum, said container which when full shall
not exceed 50 pounds.
USED BEVERAGE CANS — Includes recyclable cans fabricated primarily of
aluminum or a combination of steel and aluminum which are used for soda,
beer or other beverages.
§ 257-2. Mandatory recycling.
Includes nonmetallic recyclable containers or items which are
synthetically produced from organic compounds by polymerization and
comprised primarily of one of the following basic materials:
(1) Polyethylene trephthalate (PET).
(2) High density polyethylene (HDPE).
(3) Vinyl/polyvinylchloride (V).
(4) Low density polyethylene (LDPE).
(5) Polypropylene (PP).
(6) Polystyrene (PS).
(7) Other.
A.
Plastics required to be recycled will be identified by the commonly used
name for the container or item such as plastic milk bottle, plastic soda
bottle or plastic trash bags.
B.
A. On and after September 26, 1990, for commencement of mandatory
curbside recycling, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to separate
aluminum, clear glass, and colored glass, from all other solid waste
§ 257-1 WHITE CODE § 257-2
1:224
produced by such residence for collection and ultimate recycling of said
materials. [Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1071]
(1) On and after November 2, 2015, it shall be mandatory for all
persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential
property to separate newsprint and acceptable plastics No. 1 (PET
or PETE) and acceptable plastics No. 2 (HDPE) in addition to all
materials listed in the previous Subsection A.
B. On and after September 26, 1990, it shall be mandatory for all persons
who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to
separate leaf waste from all other solid waste produced by such
residence.
C. An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units may comply with its
responsibilities under this article by establishing a collection system for
recyclable materials at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers, and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply with
this act shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their
building.
D. On and after September 26, 1990, it shall be mandatory for all owners,
lessees and occupants of commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments to separate leaf waste, aluminum, corrugated paper,
high-grade office paper, clear glass, and colored glass from all other
solid waste produced by such nonresidential establishments for
collection and the ultimate recycling of such material. This requirement
also applies to community activities, such as fairs and organized
sporting events.
E. A commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may be
exempted from participating in the Township sponsored recycling
program if the establishment: [Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1071]
(1) Has provided on its own for recycling of the required materials
identified in Subsection D above.
(2) Has provided to White Township or designated agent (Indiana
County Solid Waste Authority) on or before February 1 of each year
documentation of the weight of the various materials recycled
during the period January 1 to December 31 of the preceding year.
Documentation for all recycled tonnage must include copies of
records originating from either the entity collecting the
commercial materials (hauler), or the entity accepting the
commercial materials (market). This documentation could include
§ 257-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-2
1:225
§ 257-3. Rules and regulations.
weight slips, market receipts, or signed hauler and market reports
verifying all tonnage claims.
F. In the future, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White
reserves the right to add or delete any one or more of the following
recyclable materials to the list of items required to be recycled, as
identified in Subsections A through D above:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Colored glass (green or brown/amber).
(3) Aluminum.
(4) Steel and bimetallic cans.
(5) Newsprint.
(6) Corrugated paper.
(7) High-grade office paper.
(8) Plastics.
(9) Leaves.
(10) Grass clippings.
(11) Any other specified recyclable material or item.
G. Once identified and made known to the public (as provided below), it
shall be mandatory for all persons, partnerships or corporations, who
are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property, and/or
commercial, municipal, or institutional establishments, to separate or
cease separating one or more of the above-referenced recyclable
materials from all other solid waste produced by such residential
property or nonresidential establishments. In such instances, however,
the Township shall notify all persons occupying residential property,
and commercial, municipal, or institutional establishments at least 90
days prior to implementing any new requirements imposed by this
article or any amendments thereto. Such notice shall be in the form of
radio and newspaper advertisements and brochures distributed during
regularly scheduled collection activities.
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White shall establish and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to:
(1) The manner, separation, placement of the recycled materials at the
curb or similar locations.
(2) Days and times for collection.
(3) Sorting requirements.
§ 257-2 WHITE CODE § 257-3
1:226
§ 257-4. Collection by authorized persons.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White may elect to enter
into agreements with any person, partnership, corporation, municipality
or municipal authority for the collection, transportation, processing or
marketing of recyclable materials.
§ 257-5. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
§ 257-6. Ownership of recyclables prior to placement for collection.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated
recyclable materials by the person who generated them unless and until
such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for collection
by the Township or its authorized agent. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, any person, partnership or corporation who is owner,
lessee or occupant of residential property or commercial, municipal, or
institutional establishments may donate or sell said recyclable material to
any person, partnership or corporation whether or not operating for profit.
§ 257-7. Violations and penalties.
(4) Transportation methods.
(5) Sale and marketing of recyclable materials.
(6) The assessment of properties and the owners thereof for the cost of
administering this recycling program.
B. The rules and regulations provided for hereunder shall be adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White prior to
the implementation of the recycling program. Copies of such resolution
shall be maintained at the Township Municipal Building and be
available for inspection or purchase.
A. From the time of placement of recyclables at the curb or similar
location for collection as designated in this article or the rules and
regulations associated with this article, items shall be and become the
property of the Township of White or its authorized agent. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Township to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items.
Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains recyclable materials designated for separation
combined with other forms of solid waste.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
§ 257-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-7
1:227
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. Said penalty may be amended by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of White, provided each violation of any
provision of this article and each day the same is continued shall be
deemed a separate offense.35
B. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Township of White may
recover all recycling fees, charges and expenses incident thereto,
which sum shall be collected from said property owner or owners, as
debts are by law collectible, or the said Township may, by its proper
officer or agent, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said
premises as provided by law.
C. Additionally, the Township of White may recover penalties, damages,
costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and
other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
property owner, person or user found to have violated this article or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued.36
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 257-7 WHITE CODE § 257-7
1:228
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste
[Adopted 1-25-1995 by Ord. No. 928]
§ 257-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "White Township Solid
Waste Ordinance."
§ 257-9. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (SB 528, Act 1988 - 101, July 28, 1988).
AUTHORITY — The Indiana County Solid Waste Authority.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited
to, appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which waste is held for storage and
collection.
COUNTY — The Indiana County Board of Commissioners or the County
of Indiana.
COUNTY LICENSED COLLECTOR OR WASTE HAULER — Any
municipal waste collector or hauler possessing a valid license issued by
the county pursuant to this article.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that
the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is
discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 257-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-9
1:229
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances or
odors, gases or vectors.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to,
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools, and universities.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any
municipal waste collector or hauler possessing a current, valid county
license issued by the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority pursuant to
County Ordinance No. 111391.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from any municipal,
commercial, or institutional water supply treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility. The term does not include any sourceseparated
recyclable materials or material approved by the PADEP for
beneficial use.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of White, Indiana County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, municipality,
state institution or agency, or any other legal entity recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties. In any provision of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, imprisonment or any combination of the
foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of
any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and any
sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided it is not
hazardous.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited
§ 257-9 WHITE CODE § 257-9
1:230
§ 257-10. Prohibited acts.
to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and
yard cleaning.
SALVAGING — The controlled removal of recycling of material from a
solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a
solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be
presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year shall
constitute disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at
any time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate, upon any public or private property within the Township of
White, garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or other municipal or residual
waste, or to process and/or dispose of any solid waste, except in
accordance with Act 97 and Act 101, and Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul, transport or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the Township of
White without a current, valid license to do so issued by the Indiana
County Solid Waste Authority, except for an individual transporting
municipal waste generated on their own private residence or property
to a county-designated processing or disposal facility.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
Township of White without prior written approval from the Township of
White.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the Township of White, except at an approved and
permitted resource recovery facility or municipal waste management
facility under any applicable Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
§ 257-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-11
1:231
§ 257-11. Standards for storage of solid waste.
§ 257-12. Standards and regulations for collection.
§ 257-13. Licensing requirements.
No person shall collect, remove, haul or transport any solid waste upon
or through any streets or alleys of the Township without first obtaining
a license from the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority pursuant to the
requirements of County Ordinance No. 111391.
§ 257-14. Injunction powers.
The Township of White may petition the Court of Common Pleas for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions
of this article.
§ 257-15. Violations and penalties.37
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
A. Storage of all solid waste shall be in containers which prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, which are or
may become harmful to public health, and which prevent the creation of
safety hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances and shall
comply with the minimum standards for the storage of municipal waste
as set forth in the Department's regulations.
B. Any person producing solid waste shall provide a sufficient number of
containers to store all waste materials generated during periods
between regularly scheduled collections and shall place and store all
waste materials therein.
A. All household and homeowners shall utilize the services of a licensed
hauler of their choice for disposal of their domestic waste or household
waste, unless they can demonstrate that the waste is properly disposed
in a manner consistent with this article and applicable Department
rules and regulations.
B. All licensed waste haulers shall comply with the minimum standards for
collection and transportation of municipal waste set forth in the
Department's regulations.
C. All municipal waste collected within the Township of White shall only be
conveyed or transported to a transfer station, processing facility, and/or
disposal site designated by the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority
pursuant to the approved Municipal Waste Management Plan for
Indiana County.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 257-11 WHITE CODE § 257-15
1:232
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 257-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-15
1:233
Chapter 263
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 149.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Water — See Ch. 311.
§ 257-15 WHITE CODE § 257-15
1:234
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 263-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "White Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 263-2. Findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 263-3. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted and implemented to promote health, safety,
and welfare within the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the
harms and maximizing the benefits described in this chapter, through
provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID) are
intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by using
systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to:
(1) Infiltrate and recharge;
(2) Evapotranspire; and/or
(3) Harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth.
E. Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the restoration or
maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
A. Manage and control stormwater runoff resulting from land alteration
and disturbance activities pursuant to the Pennsylvania Storm Water
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-3
1:235
§ 263-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code39, as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended,
The Stormwater Management Act.
§ 263-5. Applicability.
Management Act38 (Act 167 of 1978, as amended) and meet legal water
quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa.
Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and
designated uses of the waters of the commonwealth.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems
and to preserve the flood-carrying capacity of the streams and to
prevent the scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve groundwater
supplies and stream flows.
E. Provide for adequate design, construction and maintenance of all
permanent stormwater structures, facilities, best management
practices (BMPs) and all conveyance systems in the Township.
F. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development, land redevelopment, subdivisions
and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to develop or improve any
property within White Township for land development, as regulated by
the Code of the Township of White, Chapter 275, the White Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, without first receiving
approval of a stormwater management plan from the White Township
Planning Commission. No building permit shall be issued for a land
development that has not received said stormwater management plan
approval.
C. Regardless of size, all land developments shall provide adequate on-site
stormwater controls to protect neighboring properties from harm.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 263-3 WHITE CODE § 263-5
1:236
§ 263-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 263-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 263-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 263-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading,
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency, or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
D. The following table sets minimum standards for how development must
control stormwater runoff produced by the proposed regulated activity:
Disturbed Area
Proposed
Impervious Area
Stormwater
Management
Criteria
1.0 acre and greater
2.0 43,560 ft2 and
greater
All areas included NPDES requirements/
all provisions of this
chapter
0.50 to 0.99 acres
21,780 to 43,559 ft2
0.25 to 0.99 acres
10,890 to 43,559 ft2
All provisions of this
chapter
0.50 to 0.99 acres
21,780 to 43,559 ft2
0 to 0.24 acres
0 to 10,889 ft2
All provisions of this
chapter
0 to 0.49 acres
0 to 21,779 ft2
0.25 to 0.49 acres
10,890 to 21,779 ft2
All provisions of this
chapter
0 to 0.49 acres
0 to 21,779 ft2
0 to 0.24 acres
0 to 10,889 ft2
Water quality volume
retention
§ 263-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-10
1:237
§ 263-10. Modifications.
§ 263-11. Liability disclaimer.
A. The Township may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The modification, if authorized, will represent the minimum deviation
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
D. The condition leading to the request for modification shall not have
been created by the applicant.
E. The Township shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modification.
F. No modification or any regulated stormwater activity involving earth
disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be granted by the
Township unless that action is approved in advance by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the Indiana County
Conservation District.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater
management provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or with any condition imposed by a municipal
official hereunder shall relieve the developer, his agents, servants or
employees, their heirs, successors or assigns from any responsibility for
damage to persons or property resulting there from, or as otherwise
imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the municipality for
damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of
any kind by the Township, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 263-10 WHITE CODE § 263-11
1:238
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 263-12. Terms defined.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT — The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 through 680.17, as amended by Act of
May 24, 1984, No. 63).
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock, and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity, unless said building or
impervious area is part of a conservation practice (such as a manure
management facility) and approved by the Indiana County Conservation
District and meeting Natural Resources Conservation Service design
standards.
ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE RATE — The predevelopment peak rate of
runoff that is discharged from an outfall on the site after development.
It applies uniformly to all land development or alterations within the
project area.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application to the Township for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:239
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BIORETENTION AREA/RAIN GARDEN — A bioretention area/rain
garden is a planted depression that collects rainwater runoff from
impervious areas, like roofs, driveways, walkways, parking lots, and
compacted lawn areas. The bioretention area/rain garden must have a
soil mix that is capable of allowing rainwater to infiltrate. This reduces
rain runoff by allowing stormwater to soak into the ground. Plantings
for the bioretention area/rain garden would preferably be native plants
and the Township recommends that they be designed by a licensed
landscape architect. The purpose of a bioretention area/rain garden is
to improve water quality in nearby bodies of water.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which
periodically or continuously contains moving water or which forms a
connecting link between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and
banks which confine water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code 102.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Indiana County Conservation
District.
CULVERT — A conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under a
highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN CRITERIA —
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and
materials.
(1)
Objectives, results or limits which must be met by a facility,
structure or process in performance of its intended functions.
(2)
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:240
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of runoff flows
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area in a detention basin or
within the drainage system.
DETENTION BASIN FOREBAY — A forebay is a small pool located
near the inlet of a detention basin or other stormwater management
facility. These devices are designed as initial storage areas to trap and
settle out sediment and heavy pollutants before they reach the main
basin. Installing an earth berm, gabion wall, or other barrier near the
inlet to cause stormwater to pool temporarily can form the pool area.
Forebays act as a pretreatment feature on a stormwater pond and
can greatly reduce the overall pond maintenance requirements. The
minimum forebay volume shall be equal to 25% of the two-year, twentyfour-
hour storm volume.
DETENTION FACILITY — Any pond, reservoir, or basin, or any
combination of underground pipes or tanks constructed to impound or
temporarily retard surface runoff.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — The person, persons or any corporation, partnership,
association or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefore that undertakes the activities associated with changes in land
cover or contour. The term "developer" is intended to include but not
necessarily be limited to the term "subdivider," "owner" and "builder"
even though the individuals involved in successive stages of a project
may vary.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in
land cover or contour, or any practice that affects stormwater runoff
characteristics.
DISCHARGE — In general, the removal of surface water from a given
area; commonly applied to surface water and groundwater.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE — The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel,
or other hydraulic structure.
DRAINAGE AREA —
The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres,
square miles, or other unit of area; also called "catchment area" or
"watershed."
(1)
The area served by a storm sewer system receiving stormwater and
surface water or by a watercourse.
(2)
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:241
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right, granted by a landowner to a
grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management
purposes, including conveyance and detention.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A device that will safely convey the runoff
from a storm with a 100-year frequency or larger, through, over, or
around the detention/retention facility.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands or diminishes the course, current or cross section of
any watercourse, floodway or body of water.
ENGINEER — See "municipal engineer."
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation
through the use of BMPs.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion
of land surfaces.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered in good condition.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODPLAIN RESTORATION — Floodplain restoration is the use of
bioengineering practices, removal of fill material, restructuring of
stream channels and/or the restoration or management of riparian
corridors in order to create a floodplain to compensate for the past loss
of floodplains.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:242
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
FOREST RESTORATION — Forest restoration is the planting of trees
in areas that have become devoid of original forest cover. The new
tree plantings must be native species of trees. New trees must be
a minimum height of four feet for evergreen trees and six feet for
deciduous trees. It is recommended that forest restoration plans be
prepared by a professional forester who is a member of the Society
of American Foresters or the Association of Consulting Foresters. A
professional forester is a person who has a B.S. or higher degree in
forestry from a four-year school of forestry accredited by the Society of
American Foresters.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GREEN ROOF — A green roof is a conventional roof that is covered with
a layer of vegetation. Also known as "living roofs," green roofs serve
several purposes for a building, such as absorbing rainwater, providing
insulation, creating a habitat for wildlife, and helping to lower urban air
temperatures, and combat the heat island effect. There are two types of
green roofs: intensive roofs, which are thicker and can support a wider
variety of plants but are heavier and require more maintenance, and
extensive roofs, which are covered in a light layer of vegetation and are
lighter than an intensive green roof.
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone,
from which wells and springs are fed, as well as the base flows for
natural streams.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of groundwater
naturally by precipitation or runoff or by artificial means by spreading
or injection.
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:243
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) defines the four groups and provides a list of most of
the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in
the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey
report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation
district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to
D (NRCS1,2).
IMPERVIOUS — Not allowing or allowing only with great difficulty the
movement of water; impermeable.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION — The flow or movement of water through the
interstices or pores of a soil or other porous medium; the absorption of
stormwater by the soil.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
INLET — A surface structure designed to allow for the inflow of
stormwater flows; the upstream end of any structure through which
water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a)
a group of two or more buildings or (b) the division or allocation of
land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any
subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section
503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.40
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the changing, grading,
transportation, fill and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:244
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on-site.
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of
physical properties.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A registered engineer or engineering firm
employed by White Township to assist in administering this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — White Township, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS) — USDA
agency (previously SCS).
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
OFF-SITE CONTROLS — Those stormwater flows that are generated on
property that is not part of the land being developed.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include but shall not be limited to
natural and man-made drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE — The means of controlling the
relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge,
placed at the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which
water may flow.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given
point and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PEAK FLOW — Maximum flow.
PENNSYLVANIA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP).
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PERVIOUS (POROUS) PAVEMENT — Pervious (porous) pavement is
a special type of pavement with a high porosity that allows water
from precipitation and other sources to pass directly through, thereby
reducing the runoff from a site and allowing groundwater recharge.
Pervious pavement can be concrete, brick pavers and other types of
material that allow for infiltration.
The point, location or structure where drainage discharges from a
sewer, drain or other conduit.
(1)
(2) The conduit leading to the ultimate discharge point.
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:245
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged.
PRIVATE ENTITY — A partnership, corporation, homeowners'
association, condominium association, or any other similar
associations, as distinguished from an individual lot owner.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RECURRENCE INTERVAL — The average interval of time, stated in
years, within which a given storm event will be equaled or exceeded
once.
REDEVELOPMENT — A change to previously existing, improved
property. This includes but is not limited to the demolition or building of
structures, filling, grading, paving; including the conversion of gravel
areas to pavement, or excavating. Redevelopment excludes ordinary
maintenance activities such as remodeling of buildings on the existing
footprint, resurfacing and/or repaving of existing paved areas, and
exterior changes or improvements that do not materially increase or
concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source
pollution.
REGIONAL STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY — A stormwater
facility that controls runoff from more than one development site used
by developers when it is more cost effective than providing a
stormwater management facility for each development separately.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may
affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa.
Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.41
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The percentage of predevelopment
peak rate of runoff from a watershed subarea which defines the
allowable post-development peak discharge from any development site
in that subarea. This release rate applies uniformly to all land
development or alterations within the subarea. A delineation of the
release rate percentages by subarea is shown on the Municipal
Stormwater Management District Map.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any earth disturbance and/or
construction that occurs on a residential lot and is not subject to the
requirements of Chapter 275, Subdivision and Land Development, of
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:246
the Code of the Township of White. A residential lot would contain
a single-family home or similar dwelling. Earth disturbance and/or
construction activities could include, but are not limited to, a new
dwelling or addition to an existing dwelling, accessory structure
(garage, shed, pool, etc.), and/or driveway creation or modification
thereof.
RETENTION BASIN (POND) — An impoundment designed to collect
and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate. Retention basins may also be
designed to permanently retain additional stormwater runoff. Retention
basins are designed to retain a permanent pool of water during dry
weather.
RETENTION FACILITY — A basin or pond, usually enclosed by artificial
dikes, that retains a permanent pool of water and is used to retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent area of trees and shrubs located
adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds, and wetlands.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any
watershed which affect the rate, amount and direction of stormwater
runoff. These may include but not be limited to vegetation, soils, slopes,
and man-made landscape alterations.
SCS — United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth
occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement, or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:247
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind, or gravity.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEEPAGE TANK — A subsurface concrete tank surrounded by stone,
into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff that flows over the ground surface
as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)."
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the NRCS
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which
are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not
very permeable and produce much more runoff.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharges greater than the maximum design
storm controlled by the pond.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.42
STORAGE FACILITY — See "detention facility" and/or "retention
facility."
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval in years over which a
storm event of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff,
street water, and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and
industrial waste.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Natural or
man-made structures that collect and transport stormwater through
or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet including, but not
limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features,
canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, and streets.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:248
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY OPERATIONS AND
MAINTENANCE PLAN — The plan prepared by the developer or his
representative indicating how the operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities will be managed by the appropriate
party.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by White Township.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM
site plan throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — All of the facilities, to
include, but not limited to, the outlet structure, storage basins,
collection/conveyance systems, swales, etc., that make up the entire
stormwater system as depicted on the stormwater management plan
intended to control the rate of runoff from a development site.
STORMWATER REUSE — Entails storing stormwater runoff and then
using it as a source of irrigation water or other nonpotable use. The
philosophy behind the practice is that the lowest-quality water should
be used for the lowest-quality need.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow of water over and/or in water
bodies that results from and occurs during and immediately following a
rainfall event.
STREAM RESTORATION — Stream restoration is the use of
bioengineering practices, native material revetments, channel stability
structures, and/or the restoration or management of riparian corridors
in order to protect upland BMPs, restore the natural function of the
stream corridor, and improve water quality by reducing sedimentation
to streams from stream bank erosion.
SUBBASIN — A specific area contributing runoff to a predefined point.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,43 Act of July 31,1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TOWNSHIP — Township of White, Indiana County.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 263-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-12
1:249
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 263-12 WHITE CODE § 263-12
1:250
ARTICLE III
Standards
§ 263-13. General requirements.
A. The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater control
measures shall be evaluated and shall apply throughout the Township of
White.
B. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such
measures shall include such actions as are required:
(1) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater
after development than prior to development activities.
Development activities will be considered any activity that has
occurred after the effective date of the original White Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance;
(2) To manage the quantity, velocity, and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury;
(3) To meet any and all requirements of the NPDES permit; and
(4) To provide stormwater BMPs to control the volume of stormwater
being generated by the development. The stormwater BMPs are an
integral part of the stormwater management plan.
C. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 263-14.
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
D. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with
§ 263-24, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
E. The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.44
44.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 263-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-13
1:251
F. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual45), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated.
G. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 263-15 and the peak
rate controls of § 263-16 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
H. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
I. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual46). If methods
45.Editor's Note: See § 263-39D.
§ 263-13 WHITE CODE § 263-13
1:252
§ 263-14. Exemptions.
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification
demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not
practicable.
J. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
K. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
L. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm.
M. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 145 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
N. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.47
O. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
A. Regulated activities are not exempt from the requirements of §§ 263-15
and 263-16, and Article IV of this chapter and shall be required to meet
the appropriate stormwater management criteria as it is noted in
§ 263-5 (see table of requirements).
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
46.Editor's Note: See § 263-39C.
47.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 263-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-14
1:253
§ 263-15. Volume controls.
D. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 263-15D through N.
E. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose
a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
A. The stormwater management practices to be used in developing a
stormwater management plan for a particular site shall be selected
according to the following order of preference:
(1) Nonstructural BMPs.
(2) Structural BMPs.
(3) Stormwater detention/retention structures.
B. Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to reduce
volume increases and promote groundwater recharge. A combination of
successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum
control requirements. Design calculations must be provided for all
stormwater facilities, including detention ponds, BMPs, ditches, swales,
inlets, pipes, culverts, etc. All BMPs must be shown on the recorded
plan.
C. Required BMPs (for all developments not qualifying for water quality
volume retention). A minimum of 80% of the ten-year, twenty-four-hour
storm runoff volume must be treated by stormwater BMPs. All
stormwater management plans must include a minimum of two of the
following BMPs with the plan:
(1) Bioretention area/rain garden.
(2) Grassed waterway/channel.
(3) Pervious (porous) pavement.
(4) Detention basin forebay.
(5) Water quality inlets.
(6) Stormwater reuse.
(7) Green roof.
D. Other BMPs may be used as approved by the municipal engineer.
E. The following restoration items may be used in lieu of the required
BMPs. Use of these items must be approved by the municipal engineer.
(1) Wetland/wetland restoration.
(2) Stream restoration.
§ 263-14 WHITE CODE § 263-15
1:254
(3) Floodplain restoration.
(4) Forest restoration.
F. Water quality volume retention.
(1) Water quality volume retention will be the calculated volume of
stormwater runoff from impervious or semi-impervious areas which
is required to be captured and mitigated through various BMPs.
(2) This may be achieved through the use of structural or
nonstructural BMPs.
(3) The water quality volume is the difference in stormwater runoff
volume between the predevelopment conditions and the postdevelopment
conditions as calculated for the two-year storm event.
(4) All impervious areas must drain to a stormwater BMP.
G. The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices
provided in the BMP Manual shall be utilized for all regulated activities
wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using
the Design Storm Method in Subsection G(1) or the Simplified Method
in Subsection G(2) below.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual48) is
applicable to any size of regulated activity. This method requires
detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for
all storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(b) For modeling purposes:
[1] Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas
must be considered meadow in good condition.
[2] 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions. If constructing facilities to
accommodate the resulting volume requirement is
believed by the developer to be unfeasible on site, the
developer may submit a modification request along with
technical support documentation for review by the
Township. The Township may grant a modification to
alternatively construct off-site volume controls providing
that the alternative site is located within the same
subwatershed as the project site and the peak discharge
rates downstream of the project site are not increased
above predevelopment magnitudes. The developer shall
48.Editor's Note: See § 263-39C.
§ 263-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-15
1:255
§ 263-16. Rate controls.
consider on-site facilities to the maximum extent
practicable before considering off-site alternatives.
[3] Design and construction of the off-site controls shall be
subject to review and approval by the Township. Costs
shall be the responsibility of the developer. Design
documentation shall demonstrate that the proposed
facilities are effective in removing an amount equal to the
project's increase in the two-year storm volume from the
overall runoff where the facility is to be located.
[4] In lieu of construction of off-site controls, the developer
may request and the Township may accept payment into
the Township stormwater fund. The cost shall be based
upon the Township's current fee schedule (adjusted
annually) based upon an established cost per cubic foot of
storage.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual49) provided below
is independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design
Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to
regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that
require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious
surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 263-16, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. If
49.Editor's Note: See § 263-39D.
§ 263-15 WHITE CODE § 263-16
1:256
§ 263-17. Riparian buffers.
it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates
of discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-
, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-fourhour
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as
necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan:
(1) For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year,
twenty-four-hour storm events, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that contains a riparian buffer.
B. Except as required by 25 PaChapter 102, the Riparian Buffer Easement
shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the 100-year
floodplain or a minimum of 50 feet from the top of the streambank (on
each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(2) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the Township and
shall be recorded in the appropriate county recorder of deeds office, so
that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property
located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private
ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as required by
the municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.50
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 263-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-17
1:257
§ 263-18. Redevelopment criteria.
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian buffers:
(1) Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drain fields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
A. The purpose of these criteria is to provide post-construction
requirements for redevelopment projects. The intent of these criteria is
to improve stormwater runoff and drainage patterns on existing
properties while encouraging redevelopment and urban renewal. Since
these properties would have been developed under a previous version
of this chapter, and in some cases, even previous to any related
ordinance, the predevelopment condition to be used for the new
stormwater management plan and related calculations shall be the
condition of the property previous to the existing development
occurring.
B. When redevelopment occurs, an additional opportunity exists to receive
credit toward the existing White Township Municipal Authority
stormwater management system user fee, established under Resolution
No. MA-2-15, dated December 21, 2015. A developer shall work with
the White Township municipal engineer or other designated staff to
determine the level of credit, where applicable. Please refer to the
White Township Appeal and Credit Manual for Stormwater Fees for
more details about this policy.
C. When a development qualifies as a redevelopment project, the existing
stormwater facilities (if any) may be used provided they meet the
requirements of this chapter.
D. If the existing stormwater facilities are in place, a report detailing the
condition of the infrastructure to be used is required. This report must
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in
Pennsylvania.
E. The developer shall make all necessary repairs or modifications to the
existing facilities as detailed in the engineer's report.
F. If no or insufficient stormwater facilities exist at the time of the
proposed redevelopment, the developer shall submit a plan that meets
the requirements of this chapter for the entirety of the development and
§ 263-17 WHITE CODE § 263-18
1:258
that falls into accord with the criteria established in § 263-5 and the
subsequent requirements of this chapter.
G. Additionally, land development that qualifies as redevelopment shall
meet at least one of the following criteria:
(1) Reduce impervious cover. Reduce existing site impervious cover by
at least 20%.
(2) Provide treatment. Provide water quality treatment for at least 20%
of the site's predevelopment impervious cover and 100% of any
new impervious cover, not to exceed 150% of the total new
impervious.
(a) This can be accomplished through stormwater BMPs designed
in accordance with the criteria from the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP
Manual).51
(b) Runoff reduction may be used instead of water quality
treatment on parcels where the lot size is at least 2.5 acres and
impervious cover is less than 10%.
(3) Apply innovative approaches. Utilize innovative approaches to
reduce stormwater impacts across the site. Examples include green
roofs and pervious parking materials.
(4) Provide off-site treatment. Provide equivalent stormwater
treatment at an off-site facility within the same watershed and as
immediately downstream of the site as feasible.
(5) Address downstream issues. Address downstream channel and
flooding issues through channel restoration, increase in existing
system capacity and/or other off-site remedies.
(6) Combination of measures. Any combination of (1) through (5)
above that is acceptable to White Township.
51.Editor's Note: See § 263-39C.
§ 263-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-18
1:259

ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Requirements
§ 263-19. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from White Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,52 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances where the
Township lacks subdivision and land development regulations, the
content of SWM site plans shall follow the county's subdivision and land
development ordinance.
B. White Township shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in
meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the Township may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
Township may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the Township: "(Municipal official or
designee), on this date (signature date), has reviewed and hereby
certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the Municipal Ordinance No. 1083."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project,
including locations of all stormwater controls.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual53. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and
other environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 263-13.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Subdivision and Land Development.
53.Editor's Note: See § 263-39D.
§ 263-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-19
1:261
§ 263-20. Plan submission.
Four or five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 263-21. Plan review.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including discharge
control structures, emergency spillways, drainage structures,
pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed onlot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan
shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
(10) A justification must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other
than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate, and water quality controls under this
chapter.
A. Three copies to the Township.
B. Typically, one copy to the county conservation district and/or other
applicable agencies.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Township for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code54 (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the Township.
C. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the Township will not approve the
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 263-19 WHITE CODE § 263-21
1:262
§ 263-22. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 263-23. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township's concerns, to the Township in accordance with
this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 263-24. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific
SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Township
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 263-25 within the term of validity, then the
Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any
and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the
Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 263-23.
§ 263-25. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID
practices are not practicable.
D. If the Township disapproves the SWM site plan, the Township will state
the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Township also may
approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the Township.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent
SWM BMPs must also be submitted at the central location of the BMPs.
If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction
§ 263-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-25
1:263
plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion
certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the Township, the
Township may conduct a final inspection.
§ 263-25 WHITE CODE § 263-25
1:264
ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 263-26. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 263-27. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an "operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement" (see
Appendix A55) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor, and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Township conservation easements to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within 10 working
days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails
to adhere to the O&M agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 263-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-28
1:265
§ 263-28. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls
as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.56
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 through 10511.
§ 263-28 WHITE CODE § 263-28
1:266
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 263-29. General.
A. The Township may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged
to an applicant.
B. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Attendance at meetings.
(4) Inspections.
§ 263-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-29
1:267

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 263-30. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized, unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution, into a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage, and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from
foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
condensation and water from geothermal systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
D. In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
Township or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 263-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-31
1:269
§ 263-31. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 263-32. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this
chapter without the written approval of the Township.
§ 263-31 WHITE CODE § 263-32
1:270
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 263-33. Right-of-entry.
§ 263-34. Inspection.
§ 263-35. Enforcement.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of any stormwater BMPs or
evidence of stormwater runoff beyond a property line with regard to
any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter. Persons working on behalf of
the Township shall have the right to temporarily locate on any BMP in
the Township such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. Unreasonable delay
in allowing access to a BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Township for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Township within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 263-14.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 263-32 of this chapter.
§ 263-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-35
1:271
§ 263-36. Suspension and revocation.
§ 263-37. Penalties.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Township.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a minimum
fine of $300, not to exceed $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense
and penalties shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 263-35 WHITE CODE § 263-38
1:272
§ 263-38. Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the municipal
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the county court of common
pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of
the Township's decision.
§ 263-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-38
1:273

ARTICLE IX
References
§ 263-39. Documents referenced.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center, 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 263-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-39
1:275
Chapter 270
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Numbering of buildings; naming of
roads — See Ch. 178.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 295.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 299.
§ 263-39 WHITE CODE § 263-39
1:276
ARTICLE I
Street Acceptance Standards
[Adopted 7-13-1972 by R-3-72]
§ 270-1. Acceptance standards.
The Board of Supervisors shall not accept as a part of the public road
system of White Township any streets or alleys shown in any plan of lots
existing prior to the adoption of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations on
February 14, 1963, unless in conformity with the following provisions:
A. By presentation to the Township of a petition signed by all abutting
landowners on a form approved by the Township Solicitor, containing a
dedication of the said street for public use as a Township street,
containing necessary release of damages, and containing four copies of
a draft or survey of said attest.
B. All streets shall be at least 50 feat in width, and the traveled portion
thereof shall be at least 29 feet in width with grades of not less than 1/2
of 1% or more than 10%.
C. All streets shall have a berm and ditch line extending at least three feet
on each aide of the traveled portion thereof and all necessary cross
drains and other drainage shall be installed, the traveled portion of said
streets shall have a six-inch slag or stone base, graded and rolled to
compaction satisfactory to the White Township Planning Commission
and the Board of Supervisors, the post of which shall be borne 1/3 by
the Township and the remaining 2/3 on the front foot basis by the
abutting owners on each side thereof.
D. Any rearing surface to be applied by the Township to the hereinbefore
prescribed base shall be paid for on the basis of 1/3 thereof by the
Township and the remaining 2/3 thereof on the front foot basis by the
abutting owners on each aide thereof.
E. The Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, accept as a part of the
public road system of White Township such streets and alleys in plans of
lots which meet the requirements of this article, if a majority of said
Board deems such acceptance to be for the best interest of the
Township.
F. All provisions of resolution of the Board of Supervisors of White
Township adopted on May 16, 1960, as appears in Resolution and
Ordinance Book No. 1, page 6, inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-1
1:277

ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 5-22-1974 by Ord. No. 5-22-74]
§ 270-2. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions § 1156 of Article XI of the Second Class
Township Code, as amended,57 no railroad or street railway shall hereafter
be constructed upon any Township road, nor shall any railroad or street
railway crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits, or other
piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph, or electric
light or power poles, or any coal tipples or any other obstructions, be
erected upon or in any portion of a Township road except under such
conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the installation and
maintenance thereof as may be prescribed in permits granted by the
Township for such purpose.
§ 270-3. Application for permit.
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township
and submitted to the Township in triplicate. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth
by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy permits and
restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of
a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the intended facility,
width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
§ 270-4. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 270-5. Written notice of completion of work.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 270-6. Inspection.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify any such settlement or other defect, within 60 days after written
notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall
impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%
of such cost.
57.Editor's Note: Section 1156 was repealed by 1995, Nov. 9, P.L. 350, No. 60, § 1. See now 53
P.S. § 67322.
§ 270-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-7
1:279
§ 270-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject, upon conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, to pay a fine of not more than $100 and cost
of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than five days.
§ 270-7 WHITE CODE § 270-7
1:280
ARTICLE III
Hauling; Excess Maintenance Agreement
[Adopted 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 971]
§ 270-8. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "White Township
Hauling Ordinance." "Township," when used herein, refers to White
Township, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 270-9. Excess maintenance agreement required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, business entity or any other party
(hereinafter "hauler") shall transport or haul any materials, cargo, freight,
equipment or other items that result in a gross weight, including the weight
of the vehicle, in excess of 10 tons, on a posted White Township road or
bridge, unless and until the hauler and the Township have entered into an
excess maintenance agreement, the Township has granted a permit for such
of any Township road and/or bridge which will be used by the hauler.
§ 270-10. Local traffic.
For the purposes of this article, local traffic shall include school buses,
emergency vehicles, vehicles making local deliveries, vehicles of
governmental agencies and utilities or their contractors engaged in
construction or maintenance on a posted highway or bridge or in a location
which can be reached only by way of a posted road or bridge. Local traffic,
as defined in this article, having a gross weight in excess of a posted weight
limit, may exceed said posted weight limit unless the Township Supervisors,
or their designated representative, determine that such vehicle or vehicles
having a gross weight in excess of the posted weight limit, being driven
to or from a particular destination or destinations, are likely to damage a
Township road or bridge. If the Supervisors determine that one or more
over posted weight vehicle which otherwise meets the definition of local
traffic is likely to damage a Township road or bridge, the Supervisors will
so notify the registrant or owner, or both, of the over posted weight vehicle
of the destination or destinations and will also notify state and local police.
After two business days following delivery of the notice or after five days
following mailing of the notice, such over posted weight vehicles shall not
exceed the posted weight limits except in accordance with the provisions of
this article relating to use under permit.
§ 270-11. Township roads or bridges.
A Township road or bridge shall include any roadway or bridge, including
the right-of-way, laid out or accepted by the Board of Supervisors of White
Township, but not including any federal or state highways or bridges within
White Township. Permitting shall only be required on Township roads or
bridges or sections thereof wherein signs have been posted.
§ 270-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-12
1:281
§ 270-12. Application for permit.
Application for an overweight vehicle permit as set forth herein shall be
made, in writing, in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be
established by the said Township. Application shall be made to the White
Township Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 270-13. Bond. [Amended 11-14-2001 by Res. No. 7-01]
No permit shall be issued unless and until a bond of a kind and with
such security as is determined by the said Supervisors to be satisfactory
according to the type of road or bridge affected, distance of the road
or bridge to be used and anticipated damage is reviewed, approved and
executed by the said Supervisors. To secure the performance of the
permittee's obligations as set forth in this section, the permittee shall
execute and deliver to the Township of White the following type(s) of
security:
§ 270-14. Terms and conditions of excess maintenance agreement.
§ 270-15. Erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The Township may require, if the heavy hauling adversely affects the road or
bridge beyond normal vehicular traffic, that no permit shall be issued unless
and until the party or parties seeking the permit submits an erosion and
sedimentation control plan that complies with the Pennsylvania Department
A. Irrevocable letter of credit.
B. Certified check.
C. Performance bond.
A. Any permit shall not be issued unless and until an excess maintenance
agreement, satisfactory to the Supervisors, is signed by the hauler and
the Supervisors. The excess maintenance agreement shall have such
terms as may be required by the Supervisors. In addition to the
provisions of the excess maintenance agreement, the Township
reserves the right to suspend use of the road or bridge by the permitted
party on prior notice due to maintenance or because of inclement
weather or climatic conditions.
B. The permitted party shall be responsible for the road or bridge or
section of road or bridge for which the permit is granted until the
posted security is released by the Township or unless otherwise
mutually agreed by the Township and permittee. Any maintenance or
restoration of any permitted section or road or bridge shall use such
materials and be done in such a fashion as is satisfactory to the
Supervisors. Each excess maintenance agreement shall have terms and
conditions allowed by law and those additional terms deemed necessary
by the Supervisors.
§ 270-12 WHITE CODE § 270-15
1:282
of Environmental Protection regulations, as contained in Title 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102, and its amendments.
§ 270-16. Required documentation.
The White Township Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or disapprove
any application for a permit with 30 days after submission of all required
documentation. The Township need not take any action on an application
until all required documentation is submitted by the applicant. If no action
whatsoever is taken within 30 days after all required and properly complete
documentation has been forwarded to the Township by the applicant, the
applicant will be permitted to use the road or bridge, pending a response
from the Supervisors.
§ 270-17. Security.
Any security required to obtain a permit under this article will remain in
effect to indemnify the Township, should any damage occur to any portion
of the surface, berm, drains, culverts, bridges or any other appurtenance
or aspect of or pertaining to the road or section thereof that is permitted,
until released by the Township in accordance with the terms of the excess
maintenance agreement entered into with the permittee. In the event
excessive damage occurs, then the permit may be revoked. The
determination of damage shall be made by the Supervisors, or their
designated representatives, in their sole discretion, and the Supervisors
shall be satisfied that no damage exists prior to the releasing of said
security. The security shall be any type allowable by law and of a form and
type that is satisfactory to the Supervisors. The amount of the security shall
be based upon a formula of $6,000 per mile for unpaved roads and $12,5000
per mile for paved roads or of such greater amounts as shall be required,
from time to time, by revisions of the laws and regulations pertaining to
bonding amounts.
§ 270-18. Damage caused by permittee action.
It shall be deemed to be an immediate violation of the provisions and intent
of this article if, in the sole discretion of the Township, it is determined
that at any time any portion of the road or bridge or section thereof that is
under permit becomes damaged, impassable, unsafe or otherwise not in the
condition of a public thoroughfare due to the activity or use of the road or
bridge by the permittee.
§ 270-19. Violations and penalties.
Any party operating a vehicle upon a road or bridge in violation of a
prohibition or restriction imposed herein is guilty of a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $750, except that any
party convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of a
posted weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus
$150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-19
1:283
the maximum allowable weight. Furthermore, in the event of any violation,
as determined in the discretion of the Supervisors, the permit of any party
operating in the Township under this article shall be forfeited and revoked.
Each use of a Township road or bridge which constitutes a violation of this
article shall be treated as a separate and distinct violation for purposes of
this section.
§ 270-20. Rules and regulations.
The Supervisors, from time to time, shall have the authority to enact the
rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this article by
resolution.
§ 270-19 WHITE CODE § 270-20
1:284
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Obstructions
[Adopted 1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 1003]
§ 270-21. Purpose.
§ 270-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSTRUCTION — Includes, but not be limited to, the following: signs,
equipment, debris, trash, ice, snow, racks, vehicles, displays, fixtures,
products, furniture, trees, plants, shrubbery, fences, and other similar
objects.
PERSON — A person, partnership, corporation or other entity.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK — A permanent walkway that parallels a street or
highway located within the public road rights-of-way.[Amended 1-24-2018
by Ord. No. 1079]
TOWNSHIP — White Township, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.[Amended
1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 1079]
§ 270-23. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep all public sidewalks that
abut property or properties that the person owns, rents, or leases free and
clear of any and all obstructions.
§ 270-24. Inspections.
Duly authorized representatives of White Township shall have the authority,
but shall not be obligated, to inspect such public sidewalks for the purposes
of determining whether a safe walkway has been maintained.
§ 270-25. Violations and penalties.
A. This article is adopted and implemented to achieve the following
general purposes and objectives:
(1) To keep public sidewalks located within public road rights-of-way
free and clear of obstructions; and [Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord.
No. 1079]
(2) To provide for the protection and welfare of the general public.
A. White Township shall have the power, through the Township Manager,
Township Code Enforcement Officer, and/or any other duly authorized
personnel, to cite the abutting person should their public sidewalk not
be in compliance with this article.
§ 270-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:285
B. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 270-25 WHITE CODE § 270-25
1:286
ARTICLE V
Driveways
[Adopted 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 1080]
§ 270-26. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, safety, and
welfare of the community and provide safer public Township roads.
§ 270-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTIFICIAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES — Those facilities which are used to
collect, reroute, drain, or otherwise divert water from its natural course and
include, but are not limited to, rain spouts, cellar drains, spillway for ponds
or dams, overflow from storage ponds or containers, and facilities carrying
sewage.
DRIVEWAY — Any vehicular entrance or exit to private property from or to a
Township road, whether it is designed as such or not, whether it is surfaced
or unsurfaced, and shall also include parking areas along the Township
road.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, or
corporation.
TOWNSHIP ROAD — Any road or street adopted or maintained by the
Township of White and includes the full width of the Township's right-ofway,
together with all ditches, watercourses, and facilities maintained by
the Township therein.
§ 270-28. Permits.
A. No person shall construct a new driveway or install or replace any
culvert pipe under an existing driveway until they have received a
permit from the Township.
B. Application for the permit must be on the forms provided by the
Township, and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the
Township from time to time.
C. The application shall describe the intended construction in accordance
with the standards set forth in this article relating to depth, slope, size,
and location of any culvert pipe.
D. The Township shall review the application, inspect the site of the
driveway, and issue any comments before issuing the permit.
E. Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the applicant
shall notify the Township for final inspection.
§ 270-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-28
1:287
§ 270-29. Permit standards.
§ 270-30. Prohibitions.
F. A permit shall be valid for a period of three months.
A. All driveways and related improvements shall be located and
constructed in such a manner as to not impair drainage or normal
maintenance within road rights-of-way, alter the stability of a roadway,
subgrade, or roadway embankment, change the drainage of adjacent
areas, or interfere with the traveling public.
B. Repairs to a driveway, a driveway entrance, drain, culvert, or swale
shall be performed in such a manner that the repairs shall not change
the original design or existing conditions unless a new design and
specifications are submitted to the Township for approval.
C. Driveway entrances shall be located so as to provide safe access to the
intersecting road. To accomplish this, Pennsylvania Code, Title 67,
Transportation, Department of Transportation, Chapter 441, Access to
and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads, shall be
used as a guide and the requirements therein shall be followed as
closely as reasonably possible, subject to the review of the Township.
D. When possible, driveway grades shall not exceed 8% within the road
right-of-way, and shall not exceed 14% on the remainder of the
driveway. Special consideration shall be given to avoid excessive cuts
and/or fills to achieve this standard. Slopes on cuts or fills shall not
exceed 3:1 (three horizontal to one vertical).
E. Where it is necessary to install or replace culvert(s) under a driveway to
keep the drainage channel open, it shall be the responsibility of the
permit holder to do so in accordance with these standards. The culvert
shall be a minimum 12 inches in diameter and sized appropriately to
carry the normal flow of the drainage channel. The Township will take
the existing culverts, ditch, channels, or any other conveyance into
consideration in determining appropriate culvert size.
F. Any culvert(s) installed shall be of sufficient strength to bear the weight
of the heaviest vehicle normally using the driveway and shall be
reinforced concrete, standard plastic drainage pipe, or its equivalent.
The equivalency substitute has to be approved, in writing, by the
Township prior to installation.
G. A minimum fall of 2% shall be maintained from the edge of the
pavement or cartway of the Township road to the top of the culvert
cover.
A. No person shall design, construct, or maintain any driveway or artificial
drainage facility which shall permit water in any form, mud, rock, or
debris be deposited upon or discharged over a Township road;
§ 270-28 WHITE CODE § 270-30
1:288
§ 270-31. Maintenance responsibilities.
§ 270-32. Fees.
There is hereby imposed a fee for the issuance of permits required under
this article, which shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and paid upon the application for permit. Said fee shall be
retained by the Township for its general use.
§ 270-33. Enforcement and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal or agent, firm or corporation, who shall
violate this article, or assist or abet its violation, upon conviction thereof
in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No person shall design, construct or maintain any driveway in any
manner which will block, impede, or restrict the flow of culverts,
ditches, or other drainage facilities relating to a Township road;
C. No person shall design, construct, or maintain any driveway in any
manner which restricts or permits the restriction of sight distance
below standards established in Title 67 S201.6 (16) of the Pennsylvania
Code,58 as amended, which standards are hereby incorporated by
reference.
A. All driveways and related improvements shall be maintained in such a
manner as to not impair drainage or normal maintenance within road
rights-of-way, or interfere with the traveling public.
B. Roads should be kept free of mud, debris, snow, ice, stormwater, and
any other nuisance.
C. Removing obstructions including trees, brush, rocks, landscaping, and
signs to allow for appropriate site distance.
58.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 270-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-33
1:289
Chapter 275
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 149.
Numbering of buildings; naming of
roads — See Ch. 178.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 263.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 295.
Water — See Ch. 311.
§ 270-33 WHITE CODE § 270-33
1:290
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Authority and jurisdiction.
White Township has the power to review and approve or disapprove plans
for the subdivision of land, for the arrangement and administration of land
developments, and for the layout of multifamily residential developments
within its corporate limits under the authority vested in the Board of
Supervisors by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1969, as amended.59
§ 275-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following reasons:
§ 275-3. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "White Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 275-4. Subdivision and development definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — The arrangement of
nonresidential building or buildings and supporting facilities on a parcel of
land for use by a commercial or industrial business, or a nonprofit entity
when the building is used for any use except a single-family dwelling.
Examples of the latter include, but are not limited to, hospitals, places
of worship and assembly, or educational facilities. Supporting facilities
will normally include, but not necessarily be limited to, access drives into
the site, car parking, truck servicing areas, storm drainage system and
A. To promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents and property owners.
B. To guarantee that a vehicular circulation system, a safe means of
sewage disposal, a potable water supply of sufficient capacity and
control of storm drainage are provided for in each subdivision and
development plan.
C. To safeguard lands subject to flooding or subsidence, and to prevent
erosion, unnecessary destruction of plant materials and excessive
grading.
D. To assure property owners and residents of the Township that all plans
will be considered on an established public policy, objectively and
uniformly enforced.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:291
landscaping. The impact of the development on adjacent roads and the
surrounding neighborhood, as the result of site grading and traffic
generation among other considerations, are of sufficient concern to the
public health and safety to require the Township's review and action prior
to construction.[Amended 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which five or more lots, tracts or
parcels are created, and/or new streets or extensions of existing streets,
public or private, required to serve at least one of the lots, tracts, or parcels
in order to provide the minimum street frontage for the lot or lots, and/or
sewer or water lines or both must be extended to serve one or more of the
lots.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which less than five lots, tracts
or parcels are created, all of which abut a public street in existence prior
to presentation of the subdivision, each lot with sufficient frontage thereon;
and further, no extension of public or private sewer or water lines is
required to serve any or all of the lots, tracts or parcels.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A tract of land in one ownership which has been
planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes, each
on a prepared site at which sanitary sewage and water supply connections
are available. Improvements within the tract shall include paved roads
abutting all mobile home sites connecting to a public street and community
facilities. Each mobile home to be accommodated on the site shall contain
its own bathing and toilet enclosure, as well as its own cooking and food
storage facilities. The mobile home park regulations are incorporated into
this chapter as Article VIII.
PLANNED MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A design
concept to be applied to a tract of land which is proposed for improvement
as a single plan for a number of dwelling units. The arrangement of
buildings and density of development may be more intense on the more
accessible and easily developed parts of the property, provided a
compensating portion of the property is permanently set aside for open
space and recorded as such. The purposes of the concept are to safeguard
forever steep slopes, woods, floodplains and other environmentally sensitive
areas, permit shorter lengths of streets and utilities with less land surface
disturbance and encourage a wider range of housing types.
SUBDIVISION —
The division by the owner, grantor or devisor, of a single lot, tract
or parcel of land, or a part thereof, into two or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land, including lots, tracts or parcels to be retained by
the owner, grantor or devisor, and those lots, tracts and parcels to
be conveyed, or leased, whether now or in the future, to others for
immediate or later development. The rearrangement of property lines,
although not creating any new properties, and the combining of several
lots, tracts, or parcels or parts thereof to create a new property or
properties, whether resulting in fewer properties in number or not,
shall be considered subdivisions for the purpose of this chapter.
A.
§ 275-4 WHITE CODE § 275-4
1:292
§ 275-5. Applicability.
The division of land for agricultural purposes into lots, tracts, or parcels
of more than 10 acres and not involving the construction of any new
streets, utilities or access easements shall be exempted provided each
such lot, tract or parcel thus created has access to at least a usable,
permanent recorded easement not less than 20 feet wide connecting to
a public road.
B.
A. On and after the effective date of this chapter, no lot in a subdivision
may be sold, no permit to erect, alter, repair or remove any building
upon land in a subdivision or a land development may be issued and no
building may be erected in a subdivision or land development or mobile
home placed in a mobile home park unless and until a subdivision plan
or land development plan has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors or its designated representative, the Planning Commission
and recorded in the office of the Indiana County Recorder of Deeds, and
until the improvements required by this chapter have either been
constructed or guaranteed.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
C. This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots, plan of lots, development,
or mobile home park plan created and lawfully recorded prior to
February 14, 1963, except as regards the development of such lots or
plan.
D. Any redivision or combination of lots within a plan previously recorded
or any rearrangement of structures, parking areas, graded land
surfaces or other elements within a development plan or mobile home
park shall be subject to this chapter.
E. Any lot or plan of lots or development or mobile home park plan illegally
recorded or not lawfully recorded prior to adoption of this chapter shall
not be given legal status by adoption.
F. It is not the intent of this chapter to annul or interfere with existing
laws or ordinances or with private restrictions placed upon property by
deed, covenant or other private agreement or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the Township is a party,
except that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon land
and development than are imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, it shall be interpreted
that they are in addition to the restrictions of such other existing
regulation or ordinance.
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:293
§ 275-6. Grant of power. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001]
The Board of Supervisors hereby delegates the White Township Planning
Commission to act and to have full authority in the administration of this
chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto. The Planning
Commission shall have the power to grant reasonable modifications, in
accordance with § 275-66 herein, and to propose and to hold public
hearings upon amendments to this chapter. The Board of Supervisors shall
approve or reject proposed amendments to this chapter.
§ 275-6 WHITE CODE § 275-6
1:294
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 275-7. Word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein are defined
as follows:
§ 275-8. Definitions. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS LANE — The passage within a parking area allowing traffic to
enter and leave the individual parking spaces.
ACCESS POINT — A location along the frontage of a property providing
connection between the property and the adjacent highway.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building used for an activity in support of
but secondary to the principal use of the property, such as a garage on a
residential lot.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The cultivation of field crops, orchard
produce or forests, or the raising and maintenance of cattle, sheep, horses,
pigs or fowl.
ALIGNMENT — The vertical or horizontal line to which a street, road or
utility adheres in its passage across, over or under the land.
AMENDMENT — A change in these regulations, including addition of new
requirements, revision of existing requirements or deletion of obsolete
requirements, necessitating public hearings and formal adoption by the
Board of Supervisors before becoming effective.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building designed to contain at least three
dwelling units, each with access to the outside via a common interior
walkway and stair system, or by individual exits, or any combination.
A. The word "person" or "developer" includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an
individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
E. Words generally found in legal terminology and not otherwise defined
in § 275-8 shall be considered to have meanings in this chapter similar
to their generally held definition in a court of law.
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:295
APPLICATION — A formal request, in writing, by a developer for
consideration of a proposal to develop land in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations.
BERM — The graded strip, usually filled with crushed stone, along each
side of a street pavement when curbs are not present, designed to direct
stormwater from the pavement to a gutter, and to provide a stable location
for disabled or parked vehicles off the pavement.
BLOCK — An area of land, generally in a plan of lots, surrounded by streets.
BOUNDARY — A line that demarcates the edge of a municipality, a
development plan, zoning district, property or other land area.
BUILDING — Any permanent man-made structure attached to or into the
ground enclosing a volume of space and intended to shelter or contain
people, animals, businesses and activities associated with any of
them.[Amended 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1044]
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Township attesting that
a proposal for construction meets all requirements of these regulations
and other applicable development ordinances in force and allowing such
proposed construction to commence.
BUFFER — A strip of land which is planted and maintained in shrubs,
bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within which no
structure is permitted except a wall or fence. The purpose of a buffer is
to place additional horizontal space between potentially conflicting land
uses.[Added 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
CENTER LINE — A line running parallel to and equidistant from the edges
or curbs on each side of a street.
COMMISSION — Unless indicated specifically as the County Planning
Commission, the term refers to the local Township Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land within a multifamily
residential development or other land development owned and maintained
jointly by the residents of the development for their exclusive benefit.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL OR WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A
system for sewage collection and treatment or water storage and
distribution developed, financed and operated by a private corporation for
the use of the subscribers to the system.
CONTOUR — An imaginary line connecting all points with the same
elevation above or below a fixed base point whose elevation is known.
CORNER LOT — A property that abuts two adjacent streets that intersect
at one corner of the lot.
COVENANT — An agreement legally binding successor owners of a
property to certain conditions regarding use of the property stipulated by
the original owner and running with the land.
§ 275-8 WHITE CODE § 275-8
1:296
COVERAGE — The portion of a lot occupied on the ground by permanent
buildings, but excluding driveways, parking areas, patios, and other areas
at grade open to the sky.
CROSS SECTION — A cut through a road or utility at right angles to its
length revealing materials and dimensions of components of construction.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with connection to other streets at only one end
and having a permanent vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
CURB — The raised edge of a street pavement designed to create a gutter
for stormwater removal, to eliminate the need for berms, and to provide a
guide for paving and snow removal.
CURVE — A rounded change of direction of an alignment that can be
described by radii and arc distances.
CUT — An excavation into earth material that has laid dormant for at least
two years.
DEDICATION — The designation of property, formerly privately owned, for
public or semipublic purpose, such designation stipulated in writing and
recorded by the private owner and accepted by the public or semipublic
body.
DENSITY — The measure of compactness per unit area such as the number
of families per net acre on the ground.
DEVELOPER — An individual, group or corporation that undertakes to
improve a property or properties in accordance with these regulations and
with concurrence of the Board of Supervisors.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot that abuts two streets that do not
intersect adjacent to the lot.
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively for residential purposes for
one or more families on a permanent basis.
DWELLING UNIT — A series of connected enclosed rooms for the exclusive
use of one family, without interconnection to other such units, and
containing its own bathing, toilet, cooking and food storage facilities.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way grant across private property generally for
public utility lines or for access to another property beyond, passage over
which is guaranteed by the grantor to those entitled to use the easement.
EROSION — The process of breaking down and carrying away of exposed
ground surfaces by action of wind, water and temperature change.
FAMILY — A single individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption or by court order, or not more than five unrelated
persons living together in a dwelling unit.
FILL — Earth material excavated elsewhere and deposited upon the ground
surface in the process of grading.
FINAL PLAN — The documentation presented by a developer to the
Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors for consideration under the
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:297
terms of these regulations after approval has been granted a preliminary
plan proposal that included the land area covered by the final plan.
FINISHED GRADE — The condition of the land surface after mechanical
rough and finished grading is completed and topsoil applied.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Land subject to inundation
during an intermediate regional flood.
FREESTANDING STRUCTURE — A self-supported structural improvement
greater than three feet in height above ground level, which may include,
but is not limited to, freestanding or billboard signs, poles (not including
public utility poles), or antennae. "Freestanding signs" are defined as a
self-supported structural improvement greater than three feet in height
above ground level that is intended to communicate a message, service,
facility, commodity direction or any other information to the general public.
Freestanding signs include, but are not limited to, structures commonly
identified as billboard signs, directional signs, business signs and
advertising signs, but shall not include signs commonly identified as
political signs, religious displays devoid of business advertising or
directional content, traffic control signs owned and maintained by a federal,
state or local units of government within located within public road rightsof-
way. A "billboard sign" is a freestanding structural improvement which
represents a division or allocation of space for the purpose of directing
attention to a business commodity, service, or entertainment conducted,
sold, or offered at a location other than the premises upon which the
improvement is located.[Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026]
FRONT BUILDING LINE — An imaginary line parallel to the street rightof-
way line extending across a property between side lot lines a prescribed
distance from the right-of-way line and describing the limit of construction
on the property relative to the street.
FRONTAGE — The edge of a property abutting a public street. When a
property abuts two or more streets, frontage shall be considered the edge
abutting the principal street to which the property has access.
GRADE — The percentage that the center line of a street or sewer line
deviates from the level. A change of grade is a change in the percentage.
"To grade" means to mechanically alter the land surface in the course of
property development.
GUTTER — The low point or points in the cross section of a street designed
to collect and direct stormwater to a planned discharge off the street
surface.
HIGHWAY — A street carrying large traffic volumes between areas of major
traffic generation, usually a state-maintained street, and often called a
traffic arterial.
HOME OWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An association of persons resident in a
lot plan or development plan that has an interest in or outright ownership of
a community facility or facilities or common open space which it maintains,
holding the Township free of responsibility.
§ 275-8 WHITE CODE § 275-8
1:298
IMPOUNDMENT AREA — A natural or man-made concavity in the land
surface designed to accept storm drainage and to hold it for gradual release
into a receiving stream in order to minimize downstream flooding.
IMPROVEMENT BOND — A guarantee, backed by the developer's collateral
held in escrow, that improvements agreed upon as a condition of final plan
approval will be carried out as specified.
INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL FLOOD — The water level generated by a
storm whose frequency can be anticipated once in every 100 years, using
current U. S. Army Corps of Engineers criteria, and determined by detailed
stream flow analysis.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1044]
LOT — A property within a group of similar sized properties in a plan
available for development.
LOT AREA — The square foot or acre measurement of all the land surface
within a lot or property, except for street rights-of-way which shall be
considered as not less than 50 feet in width for purposes of calculation, 25
feet on each side of the street center line.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
front building line of a lot.
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
(3) The construction of any structure or building.
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
In accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, the following activities shall be excluded
from the definition of land development:
The conversion of a single-family residential dwelling into two
units; and
(1)
The addition of accessory buildings subordinate to the principal
buildings on residential and multifamily lots.
(2)
C.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:299
MARKER — A permanent indication, established by a registered surveyor,
of specified points in a subdivision or planned development, as required in
these regulations.
MINOR STREET — A vehicular street serving the properties abutting it but
not intended to carry traffic collected from other streets.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit,
or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for the placement of at least two mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SITE — A location in a mobile home park prepared to
receive one mobile home in accordance with the Township requirements
governing mobile home parks.
MODIFICATION — A grant by the Planning Commission allowing a
developer to proceed with a deviation of the regulations normally in force on
his property because unusual conditions are present not of the developer's
making but create a hardship for him, and the deviation will not be contrary
to the public interest and the purpose and intent of this chapter.[Amended
12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001]
MONUMENT — A permanent indication, established by a registered
surveyor, of points at changes of direction in the boundary of a subdivision
or development plan, or at points, of crossing street rights-of-way within a
plan.
MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT — A grouping of dwelling buildings in an
integrated plan approved as a whole, with supporting off-street parking and
recreation areas.
NO-MOW AREA — An area intended for return to native forest through
natural succession, accomplished by planting or encouraging the natural
establishment of wild plants.[Added 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Those public capital improvements which
are not on-site improvements and that serve the needs of more than one
development.[Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026]
OFF-STREET PARKING — Accommodation for storage and maneuvering of
motor vehicles not within a public street.
ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — All improvements constructed on the
applicant's property, or the improvements constructed on the property
abutting the applicant's property necessary for the ingress or egress to
the applicant's property, and required to be constructed by the applicant
pursuant to any municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
§ 275-8 WHITE CODE § 275-8
1:300
municipal building code, subdivision and land development ordinance, PRD
regulations, and zoning ordinance.[Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026]
OWNER OF RECORD — The individual or corporation whose name appears
on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds as the current owner of a
property.
PARKING AREA — The portion of a lot or parcel set aside for motor vehicle
storage on a multifamily, commercial or industrial property.
PARKING SPACE — The location in a parking area laid out for storage of
one motor vehicle.
PETITION — An appeal to an elected or appointed public body asking for
review of a condition from which relief is requested, and attesting that the
appeal is supported by a constituency of sufficient size.
PLAN — An arrangement for development of a property, either for sale
or rental of lots or construction of buildings, including the provision of
improvements as required by this chapter.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The documentation presented by a developer to
the Township in support of a subdivision or land development plan for
consideration under the terms of this chapter.
PRIVATE ROAD — A vehicular access to a second property as an easement
over the land from which the second property was subdivided, approved in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners.[Added 4-12-2006 by Ord. No. 1018]
PROFILE — A vertical cut along the center line of a street or utility line
indicating the vertical alignment of the street or utility line, the vertical
dimension often exaggerated to clarify the relation between horizontal and
vertical measurements.
PROPERTY or PARCEL — An area or tract of land, all portions of which are
in the same ownership and the boundary of which closes on itself.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary line surrounding a property or any
portion of such line.
PUBLIC HEARING — An advertised meeting called by the Township and
open to the public at which testimony is gathered on a proposal for
development or a revision to these or other development regulations in
order to assist the Township in reaching a decision of approval or
disapproval on the proposal or revision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Those improvements contained in a plan for
development of a property required by the municipality to be built by the
developer as a condition of approval of his plan since the improvements will
ultimately be publicly maintained.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:301
PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER SYSTEM — A system for sewage collection
and disposal or water storage and distribution developed, financed and
operated by a public authority or municipal governing body.
PUBLIC STREET — A right-of-way dedicated for public vehicular use which
may or may not have been accepted for maintenance by the Township.
RECORDING — The act of registering with the County Recorder of Deeds a
subdivision or land development plan which has received final approval by
the Township.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land which has been dedicated for public use
and provides access to private property abutting it, connecting with other
rights-of-way; or an easement across private property for the passage of
public utilities, the disposal of stormwater, or restricted vehicular use.
ROAD — Same as "street."
SCREEN or SCREENING — An arrangement of vegetative material,
purposely built earthen mound, or opaque architectural materials (such as
a fence) of sufficient height and density to conceal from view of adjoining
or adjacent property owners the structures and uses on the premises on
which the screen planting or material is located. The purpose of screening
is to place a vertical visual barrier between potentially conflicting land
uses.[Added 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
SEDIMENTATION — Material scoured from the earth surface by water
action and carried into nearby streams, raising their level and reducing
their water carrying capacity.
SERVICING AREA — The portion of a commercial or industrial property set
aside for the maneuvering and parking of trucks engaged in delivery and
loading of goods.
SETBACK — The distance between a property line and the line parallel and
closest to it within the property defining the limit of building construction.
SETBACK LINE — An imaginary line describing the boundary of the area
on a property behind which construction can occur and parallel to adjacent
property boundaries.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An individual certified by the state
and appointed by the Board of Supervisors to determine whether each
property proposed for an on-lot sewage disposal system is capable of
absorbing sewage effluent generated on the lot, and what type and size of
system must be installed.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance than an automobile driver can see ahead
unobstructed by changes in alignment or roadside structures or topography,
usually measured between points on a road center line between three feet
six inches and eight feet above the surface.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A procedure for measuring the ability of
soil to absorb moisture as an indication of problems that will occur in
connection with on-lot sewage disposal, conducted by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
§ 275-8 WHITE CODE § 275-8
1:302
STOP BARS — Devices attached to a parking area pavement to prevent
vehicles from drifting off the edge of the area and to guide motorists in the
proper placement of their cars.
STORMWATER — Precipitation falling upon the ground surface, requiring
structures to direct and contain it to prevent damage to downstream areas
in developed areas.60
STREET — An open public vehicular and/or pedestrian passage within a
recorded right-of-way at least 30 feet in width, connecting with other streets
to form the municipal circulation system.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made construction erected on the ground or
attached to the ground directly or indirectly, including buildings, fences,
poles, masts and signs, but excluding vehicles ready for immediate
movement or any paved surfaces at grade level.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, or other divisions of land, including
changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
SWALE — An elongated indentation in the ground surface which collects
stormwater from higher elevations and directs it to an established allweather
stream or man-made subsurface drainage system.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map delineating by contours the surface
elevations of a land area.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A structure containing three or more dwelling
units, each separated from similar units on one or both sides by a common
party wall, each unit having direct at-grade access to the outside and
exterior walls on both the front and rear.
TOWNHOUSE GROUP — Two or more townhouse buildings.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional civil engineer registered in
Pennsylvania and retained by the Board of Supervisors to represent the
Township in the review of proposed public improvements and in the
inspection of them during construction and upon completion.
TRACT — A property, parcel or lot but usually a large piece of land to be
subdivided or developed.
VARIANCE — A grant by the Planning Commission allowing a developer to
proceed with a deviation of the regulations normally in force on his property
because unusual conditions are present not of the developer's making but
create a hardship for him, and the deviation if permitted will not downgrade
the neighborhood.
WALKWAY — A path designed for pedestrian use which may be designated
through paint striping or other pavement marking, a slight rise in grade to
calm traffic, or an elevated walkway at least four inches in height.[Added
4-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1042]
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 263, Stormwater Management.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:303

ARTICLE III
Processing of Plan Applications
§ 275-9. Preliminary considerations.
§ 275-10. Minor subdivision procedure.
Developers seeking approval of a minor subdivision as defined in § 275-4 or
a division of land into tracts of at least 10 acres for agricultural purposes
may disregard the preliminary plan stages and proceed to final plan
application. Four copies of the final plan shall be submitted. All steps in the
final review procedure, with the exception of those guaranteeing provision
of streets and public utilities, shall apply to a minor subdivision. If approved
the final plan shall be officially stamped as approved, dated and signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission, and recorded within 90
days with the Indiana County Recorder of Deeds, or the approval will be
voided.
§ 275-11. Preliminary plan application.
A. Activities denied prior to final approval. No person, firm or corporation
contemplating subdivision or development of a tract of land shall
proceed with any grading of the site until preliminary approval has
been granted or shall record or sell any lots until he has received final
approval of his plan from the Planning Commission.
B. Unsuitable conditions jeopardizing approval. The Township may refuse
to grant approval of all or a part of certain plans that provide
inadequate access, or that are unsuitable for development by reason of
flooding hazard, steep slopes, poor drainage, slide-prone soils or
nonconformity with the Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Preliminary sketch plan. Any developer may present at his option a
preliminary sketch plan for the Planning Commission's review at a
regular meeting. The developer is urged to attend to answer questions
and receive advice. The sketch plan shall show the entire property,
slopes and grading, parking if a multifamily, commercial or industrial
project, streams and storm drainage, easements, natural features of the
property and relationship of the site to major roads and landmarks in
the vicinity. In addition the plan shall indicate the name of the property
owner, developer, and preparer of the plan, proposed number of
dwelling and/or commercial units and average area and frontage of lots.
The purpose of this part is to provide guidance. No recommendations of
the Commission are binding on the developer.
D. Exchanges of property. When property is being divided or property lines
rearranged with particular buyers and sellers involved, each parcel to
be transferred in title shall be indicated with the seller's and buyer's
name so the line of conveyance is clear.
§ 275-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-11
1:305
§ 275-12. Final plan application.
A. Submission. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to subdivide or
develop land, except for minor subdivisions or divisions of land into
tracts of at least 10 acres for agricultural purposes, shall submit seven
copies of the information, plans and profiles required by this section to
the Planning Commission at a regular monthly meeting. The
Commission may, at its option, postpone consideration of the plan and
official receipt of it until the developer can be present at a regular
meeting.
B. Review. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted
documents for conformance with this chapter and inclusion of
recommendations made at the preapplication meeting. It shall submit
one copy of the submission to the Board of Supervisors, one copy to the
Township Engineer, one copy to the Planning Commission files and
other copies to state or federal agencies as appropriate.
C. Approval. The Planning Commission shall render its decision granting
preliminary approval, denying it or granting preliminary approval with
conditions, and shall inform the applicant not later than 90 days after
officially receiving the plan at a regular meeting. The decision shall be
in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision. The decision shall set forth the reasons for the
disapproval, if that is the decision, specifying the defects found,
describing the requirements which were not met and citing the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon. Failure of the
Commission to reach a decision or to communicate it within the time
limits shall be deemed an approval of the plan as presented. Failure of
the developer to accept any and all conditions upon approval shall
render the approval void. No amendment to this chapter after official
receipt of a subdivision plan shall detrimentally affect the plan or its
processing unless the plan is withdrawn and resubmitted, nor shall
such intervening amendment adversely affect the right of a developer
to commence and complete any approved plan or portion of a plan
within five years of the date of preliminary approval. Preliminary plan
approval shall only be an expression of tentative approval and
authorization to proceed to the final plan application. The plan shall be
stamped, dated and signed by the Commission Chairman and Secretary
upon granting of the preliminary approval. [Amended 8-9-1989 by
Ord. No. 907; 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001]
A. Submission. Having received preliminary approval, the developer or his
authorized representative shall within three years submit a final plan
application for all or part of the plan given preliminary approval. The
application shall be provided in seven copies plus a reproducible
transparency for recording of the plan. If the developer does not appear
at the meeting at which his plan is received, the Commission may
§ 275-11 WHITE CODE § 275-12
1:306
postpone review until he can be present at a regularly scheduled
meeting.
B. Review. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted
documents for conformance with this chapter and inclusion of any
conditions attached to preliminary approval. Copies of the submission
materials shall be distributed as for the preliminary plan application. In
making its review and before granting final approval, the Commission
shall determine that adequate means of sewage disposal, as determined
by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, are available on each lot,
or if each lot or building is to be connected to the public sewage
collection system that sufficient sewer tap-in permits have been
assigned to accommodate all the lots in the plan or all the buildings in a
multifamily residential, or commercial or industrial development
connected to a water supply.
C. Approval. The Planning Commission shall render its decision granting
final approval or denying it and shall inform the applicant of its decision
not later than 90 days after officially receiving the plan at a regular
meeting. The decision shall be in writing and shall be communicated to
the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision. The decision shall set forth
the reasons for the disapproval, if that is the decision, specifying the
defects found, describing the requirements that were not met and
citing the provisions of the stature or ordinance relied upon. Failure of
the Commission to reach a decision or to communicate it within the
time limits shall be deemed an approval of the plan as presented. The
final plan shall be dated and signed by the Chairman and Secretary of
the Commission if approved, using the official stamp. The developer
shall within 90 days of final approval record the approved plan in the
Indiana County Office of the Recorder of Deeds. Failure to record within
the time limit shall void the plan. At the time of submittal of the final
plan, the developer shall pay a fee in accordance with § 275-71 of this
chapter. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001]
D. Guarantee that improvements will be completed. Before approving any
final plan application the Planning Commission shall require that the
developer deposit with the Board of Supervisors a guarantee of
completion of all improvements agreed upon at the time of final
approval in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities to be
held in escrow, to the benefit of the Township, such guarantee equal to
110% of the value of the improvement as estimated by a qualified
engineer. The form and type of guarantee shall be approved by the
Township Supervisors. The Township may permit partial release of the
guarantee funds as construction proceeds provided sufficient funds
remain to complete all the improvements in the estimation of the
Township Engineer. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907]
E. Maintenance bond as condition of immediate acceptance. If the
developer requests the Board of Supervisors to accept the
improvements covered under the guarantee immediately after their
§ 275-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:307
§ 275-13. Preliminary plan submission requirements.
Preliminary plan submission requirements are as follows:61
completion, he shall post a maintenance bond or shall deposit funds or
securities to be held in escrow to the benefit of the Township, such bond
or deposit to equal 15% of the value of the improvements as completed
and to run for a period of 12 months. As a condition of accepting
the developer's offer of a maintenance bond or escrow deposit, the
Board of Supervisors shall take responsibility for the improvements
upon their completion. The form and type of maintenance guarantee
shall be approved by the Township Supervisors. [Amended 8-9-1989
by Ord. No. 907]
A. General information: names and addresses of the property owner,
developer and preparer of the plan; date that plan was prepared; total
acreage of the property; total number of lots, mobile homes and/or
commercial units to be accommodated; density of development
expressed as average lot size, or number of dwelling units per acre in a
multifamily development.
B. Map of existing conditions and proposed plan: scale not smaller than
one inch equals 100 feet, such as one inch equals 50 feet; north arrow;
title block; graphic scale; boundary of the property showing bearings
and distances of all lines and arcs; names of owners of abutting
property or abutting plans; contours at five-foot intervals throughout
the property which may be interpolated from USGS data; existing and
proposed streets showing right-of-way and pavement widths; existing
and proposed sanitary sewer, water supply and storm sewer lines in
approximate locations; existing and proposed easements noting
purpose; existing structures, railroads, streams and other natural
features; proposed plan of lots showing approximate dimensions for
each lot line; proposed location and height of buildings and parking
areas if a multifamily commercial or industrial development; proposed
areas of site grading indicating percentage of finished slopes; locational
map relating the site to prominent features in the vicinity at a scale of
the U.S.G.S. map.
C. Profiles where the developer proposes new streets, sanitary sewers
and/or storm sewers, he shall provide profiles along the center line of
the improvements, showing grades with approximate percentages,
relationship to existing ground surface, manholes, inlets and
approximate lengths of tangents and curves.
D. Engineer's report. At the discretion of the Planning Commission, the
developer's engineer shall prepare a feasibility report on proposed
sewage disposal, whether on-lot based on soil absorption, or utilizing a
community or public sewage disposal system based on interceptor and
61.Editor's Note: See Attachment 1, Procedure for Requesting Plan Approval, included as an
attachment to this chapter, for a summary of the requirements.
§ 275-12 WHITE CODE § 275-13
1:308
§ 275-14. Final plan submission requirements.
Final plan submission requirements are as follows:62
disposal plant capacity and impact of effluent discharge to the receiving
stream. In addition, feasibility of stormwater collection and retention
in terms of impact on downstream properties may be required as well
as feasibility of water supply if provided by wells as to quality, quantity
and likely depth, and presence of flood-prone or slide-prone land on the
property or adjacent to it.
A. General information. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
"Professional Engineers Registration Law" (P.L. 913, No. 367) and shall
be presented in ink on tracing cloth or plastic material at a scale not
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet; North arrow, graphic scale and
the preparing engineer's seal shall be shown; a key map shall be
provided if the plan is in sections to show the relationship between the
portion proposed for final approval and that given preliminary approval;
a title block shall be placed in the lower right corner of the plan
showing the plan name, name and address of property owner and
prospective developer if different, name and address of engineer, and
date of submission. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907]
B. Plan for final approval and recording. All property boundary lines, lot
lines, street lines and easement lines shall be shown by bearings and
distances to the nearest minute and tenth of a foot; building setback
lines on all properties; street and easement widths, pavement widths
and street names; number of each lot running consecutively over entire
plan given preliminary approval or number corresponding to the
assigned street number address, if requested by the Township; location
of all monuments; designation of areas to be dedicated for public or
community use; names of abutting property owners and subdivisions;
location of structures, including height of each and distances between
adjacent buildings and between buildings and adjacent property lines in
a multifamily, commercial or industrial plan; location of access points
from adjacent roads, private drives and parking areas indicating
number of spaces if a multifamily, commercial or industrial plan;
proposed grading with contours at two-foot intervals if a multifamily,
commercial or industrial plan; sewage collection lines showing line size,
direction of flow and manholes; water distribution lines showing line
size, valves and hydrants; stormwater lines showing line size, direction
of flow, inlets and retention devices.
C. Profiles along the center line of all new street sections and sanitary
sewer and stormwater sewer lines profiles shall be drawn at the same
scale as the plan showing the lengths and grades of tangents and
curves and curve data of all roads; the lengths of sanitary and
stormwater sewer line sections and slope of each; manholes and inlets
62.Editor's Note: See Attachment 1, Procedure for Requesting Plan Approval, included as an
attachment to this chapter, for a summary of the requirements.
§ 275-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14
1:309
with top and bottom elevations; stormwater impoundments showing
dam, spillway and drain pipe.
D. Cross section: a section across a typical street right-of-way showing
materials to be used, depth of materials, dimensions and grading to
create gutter lines.
E. Supporting documents: evidence that the property is owned by the
person or corporation submitting the plan or that he or it has entered
into a sales agreement for purchase; a statement describing in detail
the improvements to be built by the developer, together with estimates
of the cost of each; a completion bond properly executed and approved
by the Township Solicitor, or a certified check, drawn to White
Township, to cover the full cost of the public improvements; any
restrictive covenants to be applied by the developer upon the sale of
lots in the form of recording.
§ 275-14 WHITE CODE § 275-14
1:310
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Development Standards
§ 275-15. Streets. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907; 10-14-1998
by Ord. No. 954]
A. Access.
(1) The street layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land
within the subdivision. Where streets cross other streets, offsets
shall not be created. The minimum distance between center lines of
parallel or nearly parallel streets intersecting a cross street from
opposite directions shall be 150 feet. There shall be no reserve
strips controlling access to streets except where the control of such
strips is definitely placed with the Township.
(2) The arrangements of streets shall make provision for the direct
continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining
subdivisions (or their proper projection when adjoining property is
not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public
requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width at least as
great as the existing streets, and in no case less than the minimum
requirement specified in this chapter.
(3) When the tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the
Planning Commission may require an arrangement of streets such
as to permit a later subdivision in conformity with the street
requirements specified in these regulations.
(4) In general, streets shall not be laid out on the boundaries of the
tract, except where such streets are desirable for further expansion
or connection to existing streets or where a previously dedicated
half-street adjoins the tract, in which case sufficient additional
width of street shall be dedicated to make the street width conform
to the minimum requirements in this chapter.
(5) Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as
to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
B. Intersections.
(1) In general, minor streets should intersect main highways at right
angles. As far as is practicable, acute angles at intersections are to
be avoided and where a deflection angle of more than 10° in the
street line occurs at any point between two intersecting streets, a
curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. Intersections
of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
(2) All new subdivisions abutting federal or state highways shall be
arranged to provide access to such highways at intervals of not less
than 1,320 feet, except where impractical or impossible due to
existing property division or topography. All roads and streets
§ 275-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15
1:311
within such subdivisions shall be arranged to permit access to
adjacent future subdivisions without modifying this regulation.
C. Street widths.
(1) Right-of-way widths. The minimum width for a vehicular right-ofway
shall be 50 feet measured between opposite front lot lines.
Where a property abutting or traversed by an existing road is
subdivided, the right-of-way width of the road shall be assumed to
be 50 feet for purposes of calculating setbacks within the lots
created by the subdivision and for calculating lot area. The
Township may require a sixty-five-foot right-of-way for the segment
of road providing the principal access to a very large lot plan or
development.
(2) Pavement widths. The Planning Commission may, at its option,
require street widths greater than those listed below where
alignment, topography and potential traffic indicate increased
width would be in the public interest. The Commission may also, at
its option, require curbs in certain locations where stormwater
runoff control, topography or other factors may dictate curbing
should be installed. Developers in any case shall not construct
streets with widths less than the following between curbs or
between the edges of the paved surface:
(a) Within lot plans where lot widths are at least 100 feet:
[1] Without curbs: 20 feet with six-foot stabilized berms each
side.
[2] With deck curbs and underdrains: 27 feet.
(b) Within lot plans where lot widths are predominantly less than
100 feet:
[1] With deck curbs and underdrains: 27 feet.
[2] Where a plan is extended, the streets in the extension shall
continue the street design contained in the original plan.
(c) Within commercial or industrial developments or multiplefamily
residential developments:
[1] With or without deck curbs and underdrains: 34 feet.
[2] Deck curbs and underdrains may be required, at the
Planning Commission's option, in commercial or industrial
developments.
(d) Street and curb construction and other roadway improvements
shall comply with the minimum standards established in
Attachment 2 of this chapter, and said road construction
standards set forth in Attachment 263 may be amended in the
§ 275-15 WHITE CODE § 275-15
1:312
future from time to time by resolution of the White Township
Board of Supervisors. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No.
1001]
D. Street alignment.
(1) Streets shall be laid out so that there will be unobstructed sight
distances along the center lines, measured three feet above the
grade line, to permit horizontal visibility of at least 150 feet at any
point.
(2) Minor streets intersecting a major highway shall be separated by at
least 800 feet between center lines. Within a lot plan two streets
intersecting or crossing a third street shall be separated by at least
300 feet, or 150 feet if entering from opposite sides of the third
street. The angle of intersection shall be as nearly 90° as possible,
but shall not in any case be less than 70° or more than 110°.
E. Street grades.
(1) Center line grades shall not exceed 10%.
(2) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall be not less than 100 feet in arc length.
(3) The minimum grade along a street center line shall be not less than
1/2%.
(4) Where street grades at intersections exceed 7%, a leveling area
shall be provided so that within a distance of 50 feet of the right-ofway
line of the intersected street a grade of not more than 4% shall
be created.
(5) A clear sight distance of at least 150 feet in each direction shall be
provided motorists entering an intersection. The sight distance
shall be measured three feet above the finished pavement 15 feet
back from the edge of the intersected street pavement. Vegetation
and embankments impeding the sight lines shall be cut back.
F. Alleys. Alleys will not be approved in residential districts, but may be
required where applicable in business districts.
G. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Streets designed to have one end closed, whether permanently or
not, shall generally not exceed 1,000 feet in length and shall be
equipped at the closed end with a vehicular turnaround not less
than 80 feet in diameter outer edge, so as to provide a continuous
paved surface at least 20 feet wide all around and surrounded by a
utility easement having an outside diameter of not less than 100
63.Editor's Note: Attachment 2, Road Construction Standards, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 275-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15
1:313
feet. The center of the circle may be paved or covered with a low
maintenance crushed limestone surface or equivalent.
(2) The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center
line of the through street that the open end intersects to the center
point of the closed circular end. A through street shall mean a
street that connects to other streets at each end.
(3) The length of a cul-de-sac street may be increased if a modification
is granted by the Planning Commission based on topographical
conditions or other hardship not of the property owner's making.
The potential future connection of a cul-de-sac to streets or future
streets in adjacent plans or properties shall be considered in the
decision.
(4) The number of single-family detached dwelling lots abutting only
the same street or street system having one only entrance to a
through street shall not exceed 50 or in the case of attached
dwellings, multifamily buildings or projects with a mix of dwelling
types, 62 dwelling units.
H. Private roads. Private roads may be permitted only when they serve not
more than two separate properties that have no other feasible access to
a public road, not counting the original tract from which the two
properties were subdivided. Private roads shall be within an easement
at least 25 feet in width. Exceptions may be permitted where
topography or peculiar property shape indicate no other alternative
solution to access than a private road. If the original tract is to be
further divided into more than three parcels, the owner shall provide,
and have approved, a plan for the entire tract.
I. Private streets in a development plan. The Planning Commission may
approve a plan containing a private street or streets if the following
conditions can be met:
(1) The developer shall state on the recorded plan that the street or
streets are private and that the Township has no interest or
obligation in their maintenance.
(2) The plan shall state that the street abutting each lot to be sold in
the plan is private, and the deed for each lot shall indicate that fact
also. Any utility easements within a private street shall be clearly
marked on the plan and identified as to width and use.
(3) A private street shall be permanently marked as private at its
intersection with a public road.
(4) A building on a lot abutting a private street shall be set back at
least 50 feet from the street center line. All private streets shall be
in a right-of-way of not less than 50 feet although the width and
surfacing of the street is left to the developer's discretion.
§ 275-15 WHITE CODE § 275-15
1:314
§ 275-16. Blocks.
§ 275-17. Lots. [Amended 5-8-1985 by Ord. No. 892; 8-9-1989 by
Ord. No. 907; 5-27-1992 by Ord. No. 917; 10-14-1998 by Ord. No.
954]
(5) The right of passage over the private street or streets for the
maintenance of public utilities or for access of emergency vehicles
shall be guaranteed in writing to each utility and emergency
service involved. The developer shall file with the Township a letter
granting such right of passage.
(6) An association shall be established by the developer for the
perpetual maintenance of the street or streets in the plan at no cost
to the Township, such association made up of all the owners of
property in the plan, each to share equally in the expenses of the
association.
(7) The bylaws of the association shall be approved by the Township
Solicitor, prior to recording of the plan, to guarantee protection of
the plan residents and the Township.
(8) If at a future time the lot owners petition the Township to adopt the
street or streets as a public street or streets, they, at their expense,
shall widen, reconstruct or otherwise improve the street or streets
to meet the Township road specifications current at the time, and
shall have completed the work to the Township's satisfaction prior
to adoption of the street or streets by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
A. Length. Residential blocks shall ordinarily not exceed 1,200 feet in
length, and commercial blocks 600 feet, except for unit shopping
centers. Where a residential block exceeds 1,200 feet in length, a
pedestrian right-of-way shall be provided approximately in the center of
the block except where impaired by the natural terrain.
B. Width. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tier of lots of
appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a limited
access highway or major traffic street, or except where it backs up to a
railroad, creek, or other natural terrain.
A. Depth. The minimum depth of lots shall be 120 feet. No lots with double
frontage (through lots) shall be plotted. Each lot shall front on a road or
street dedicated for public use, except as provided by § 275-15H.
B. Side yards. Side yards shall be required. The combined side yards of a
lot shall be a minimum 25% of the lot width, and in no case shall the
vertical wall of a building be closer than seven feet to a side lot line.
Roof overhangs may extend to four feet of the lot line.
C. Arrangement. On all lots, so far as is practical, the side lot lines shall be
at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
§ 275-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-17
1:315
D. Setback lines.
(1) Building setback lines shall be established on all lots. On lots
abutting the intersection of two streets, the setback from each
street shall be at least that required for the state or local street
abutting the lot.
(2) On residential lots a setback from the rear property line of not less
than 25 feet for principal buildings shall be established. On all
other lots, and in the case of accessory structures on residential
lots, a rear setback of not less than seven feet shall be established.
(3) Where a lot abuts a Township-maintained road or one that may
ultimately become a Township road, the setback line shall be
established 25 feet from the street right-of-way line or 50 feet from
the center line of the abutting Township road, whichever is greater.
(4) Where a lot abuts a federal or state maintained road, the setback
line shall be established 75 feet from the center line of the abutting
road.
(5) When existing lots of record containing less area and/or having less
lot frontage than required by Subsection E are proposed for
development, the following rules shall apply:
(a) On lots, except corner lots, less than 56 feet wide along the
front building line, side yard setbacks of not less than seven
feet each side of the lot shall be maintained.
(b) On corner lots with less than 44 feet of width along the front
building line, the side yard abutting the adjacent lot shall be
not less than seven feet and the opposite side yard abutting the
street shall be not less than seven feet, increasing by one foot
for each additional foot of lot width between 44 feet and 62
feet, when the side yard abutting the street will be 25 feet.
(c) All new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be set
back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way line on which
the lots containing such buildings front, or 50 feet from the
street center line, whichever is greater, regardless of the area
or width of the lots or setback of buildings on neighboring lots.
(6) On a lot with irregular lot lines (several tangents and/or arcs), the
setback lines shall be always parallel with such irregular lot lines
and separated from the adjacent property lines by the minimum
distances required by this section.
E. Lot width and area.
(1) Lots served by both public sewer and water systems or by
community sewer and water systems, acceptable to the state
agency having jurisdiction, or a combination of systems: 7,200
square feet of lot area and a lot width of 60 feet.
§ 275-17 WHITE CODE § 275-17
1:316
§ 275-18. Other considerations.
(2) Lots served by either a public sewer or public water system or by
either a community sewer or water system, acceptable to the state
agency having jurisdiction: 20,000 square feet of lot area and a lot
width of 100 feet.
(3) Lots not served by public sewer: 1.25 acres (54,450 square feet) of
lot area and a lot width of 150 feet. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 1066]
(4) The final determination of the minimum size of any lot supporting
an on-lot disposal system shall be made by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1066]
(5) Lot width exceptions.
(a) Lot width shall be measured along the front building line.
However, no lot shall have less than 50 feet of frontage on a
public road, except for lots of less than 10,000 square feet in
the area abutting the closed end of a cul-de-sac, when the
minimum frontage shall be 30 feet.
(b) On pie-shaped lots, the front setback line may be established
behind the normal setback depth to provide sufficient width for
the building proposed on the lot and seven-foot side yard
setbacks each side as long as the rear yard setback of 25 feet is
not compromised.
F. Lot occupancy.
(1) On any lot to be occupied by dwelling units, only one building
containing a dwelling or dwellings shall be permitted, except in the
following situations.
(2) In a multifamily residential development as many apartment or
townhouse dwelling units are permitted by this article may be
placed on one property, but single-family dwellings and two-family
dwellings shall be on their own lots abutting public streets.
(3) Additional single-family or two-family dwellings may be placed on a
lot already occupied by a single-family or two-family dwelling,
provided the additional dwellings are located so that later
subdivision of the property will allow each dwelling to occupy a
separate lot meeting at least the minimum applicable lot area,
width and setback requirements without the need for a variance,
and provided each lot will abut a public or private street.
A. Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than
eight feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines as
necessary for public utilities. Easements of greater width may be
required along lot lines or across lots where necessary for sewer mains,
§ 275-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:317
stormwater sewers, drainage ditches, watercourses and similar
conditions.
B. Natural features. The developer shall plan the subdivision or
development plan to preserve the natural features of the site.
C. Public sites designated by Comprehensive Plan. The Planning
Commission may require the developer to dedicate to the Township,
School District, Recreation and Park Commission or County any portion
of his property indicated in the Township or County Comprehensive
Plan as the future location of a park, playground, school, or other public
use. However, the appropriate public body shall complete acquisition of
the property before final approval of the developer's plan or within 30
days, whichever is later. The developer may disregard the Commission's
requirement if the public body fails to complete acquisition within the
one-year limit unless the developer and public body have gone to
arbitration to determine a settlement on the property.
D. Dedication of open and community space. The Planning Commission
may require a developer to dedicate a part or parts of his plan as open
space or for community use, and shall require the developer to note
such areas on his plan as "permanent open space" or other specific
purpose, described by bearings and distances. Such areas as
floodplains, exceptionally wet ground, steep slopes or heavily wooded
land may be included in the common open space, but in a large
residential plan, land for a park or playground or other community use
may be included at the Commission's discretion. The developer shall
offer to dedicate the open space to the Township. In the event the
Township does not agree to accept the offer, the developer shall retain
ownership of the open space areas until he sells properties in the plan.
At that point he shall establish a home owners' association responsible
for taxes, insurance and maintenance of the open and/or community
space. Each property owner in the plan shall be required to be a
member of the association. The form and content of the bylaws of the
association shall be approved by the Township Solicitor prior to their
recording with the final plan. Each piece of common and/or community
land shall have access, either directly or by easement, to a public street.
E. Freestanding structures. Land development plans subject to this
section shall illustrate the location of all freestanding structures upon
the plan submittal. The following subsections must be complied with
pursuant to the land development process to ensure adequate sight
distance, access to light and air, and minimal uniform standards for
proposed improvements. Billboard signs are considered freestanding
structures and shall comply with the requirements of Subsection F
below. [Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026; amended 6-24-2015
by Ord. No. 1066; 1-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1073]
(1) The site development plan shall show precisely the location of all
freestanding structures relative to the location of ingress/egress
§ 275-18 WHITE CODE § 275-18
1:318
areas, buildings, parking, rights-of-way, utility easements, and
neighboring property lines.
(2) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, as well as
ensuring safe vehicular sight distances, all freestanding structures
that are not buildings shall be set back from public rights-of-way
and utility easements adjacent to public rights-of-way, by at least 10
feet, plus one foot for every foot of height over four feet. No part of
a freestanding structure, regardless of its height, may block any
vehicular line of sight consistent with street alignment standards of
this chapter. To prevent interference with overhead utility lines or
traffic controls, as well as preventing access to light and air, no
freestanding structure shall be erected pursuant to this section in
excess of 35 feet in height, except as specifically provided for under
Subsection E(6)(a)[1], (b), (c) and § 275-35J(6) relative to
communications towers.
(3) No portion of a freestanding structure pursuant to this section may
be located within 50 feet of a neighboring dwelling unit.
(4) No part of a freestanding structure, regardless of its height, may
block any vehicular line of sight consistent with street alignment
standards of this chapter.
(5) All lighting associated with freestanding structures shall be aimed,
located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a
hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property, or
onto any public or private roadway or pedestrian way. Directional
fixtures, such as floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded,
installed and aimed that they do not project their output into the
windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the face of
the sign, skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrian way.
Cutoff fixtures are to be employed as feasible.
(6) Freestanding structure height, setbacks and buffer yards.
(a) Allowable height increases:
[1] Nonhabitable structures limited to silos, smoke stacks,
and exterior conveyors, standpipes, church spires,
stadium/sporting event lights and elevated water tanks
may increase height above 35 feet provided that the
setback from all property lines and public rights-of-way is
increased to 10 feet plus one foot for every foot in
structure height. If such nonhabitable structure is
attached to a building, the height increase shall entail not
more than 15% of the total roof area of the building.
(b) Maximum building height may increase to 50 feet provided
that the following setbacks and buffer yard requirements are
§ 275-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:319
met. All buildings shall comply with the following setbacks
as they uniformly relate to site context and the type of land
development.
Land
Development
Type
Proposed
Building
Height
(feet)
Setbacks
from Side
and Rear
Property
Lines
Buffer Yard
Requirement
Nonresidential
building
0 to 35 15 feet from
any property
line which
adjoins
another
nonresidential
building; 25
feet from any
property line
which adjoins
a residential
building
5 feet from
any property
line which
adjoins
another
nonresidential
building; 10
feet from any
lot which
adjoins a
residential
building
Nonresidential
building
36 to 50 1 foot setback
for each foot
in building
height from
any property
line
10 feet from
any property
line
Residential
building
containing 3
or more
dwelling units
0 to 35 15 feet from
any property
line which
adjoins
another
nonresidential
building; 25
feet from any
property line
which adjoins
a single family
residential
property
5 feet from
any property
line which
adjoins
another
nonresidential
building; 10
feet from any
lot which
adjoins a
residential
building
Residential
building
containing 3
or more
dwelling units
36 to 50 1 foot setback
for each foot
in building
height from
any property
line
10 feet from
any property
line
§ 275-18 WHITE CODE § 275-18
1:320
(c) Occupied buildings in a multibuilding land development
containing at least four nonresidential buildings may increase
height to a maximum of 70 feet provided that setback increases
of one foot for each foot in building height from any property
line containing a residential building are provided plus an
additional ten-foot buffer yard is installed along any such
property line. Such buildings shall be allowed only as part of a
planned campus or other unified development that ensures
adequate light, air and emergency access, and has uniform
internal street systems, parking, pedestrian interconnections,
and landscaping between four or more buildings.
(d) Buffer yard requirements. No structure is permitted within any
required buffer yard, except for fences for screening and
decorative purposes, or essential service utility structures
limited to electrical, natural gas, sewer, water, and cable/
internet/telecommunications for the lot being served. Buffer
strips shall not be used for parking, storage of vehicles,
equipment, or materials, nor for any other use incompatible
with their purpose as a visual, noise, dust, and pollution
barrier. The ten-foot buffer strip shall contain suitable
screening, defined as either of the following:
[1] A solid fence or wall, architecturally compatible with
existing structures in the area, no less than five feet nor
more than eight feet in height; or
[2] A sight-obscuring planting of evergreens, not less than
four feet in height at the time of planting and of a variety
that will maintain full, dense growth from the ground up to
a height of not less than six feet upon maturity, planted at a
spacing of the lesser of four feet or the diameter of a
mature specimen of the species being planted.
(e) Five-foot buffer strips and areas of the ten-foot buffer strip not
covered with a fence, wall, or screening plantings, shall be
planted with grass or other appropriate ground cover
vegetation, or mulched to prevent weed growth. Installation
and maintenance of the buffer and screening shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which the land
development is located. Installation must be completed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Fences or walls must be
maintained in safe and structurally sound condition. Dead or
diseased plants shall be removed and replaced within six
months.
(7) In all cases of height increase above 35 feet, the Planning
Commission may refer applications to applicable fire and
emergency service providers to ensure that the design does not
create a hazard. Applications may also be referred to the Indiana
County Office of Planning and Development for compliance with
§ 275-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:321
airport hazard regulations. The Commission may require
documentation that no hazard exists to airspace including Federal
Aviation Administration Part 77 certification, FAA approval and
consent of any established airport or helicopter landing site.
F. Billboard signs. Billboard signs are considered a type of freestanding
structure and are subject to this chapter as a division or allocation of
space pursuant to land development and/or a subdivision by lease.
Billboard signs shall comply with the following: [Added 10-10-2007
by Ord. No. 1026]
(1) A plan shall be prepared to show the site, described by bearings
and distances, within the property from which the site will be
leased and dimensions to the nearest boundary line of the property
from the sign. In addition, a scaled site development plan shall be
prepared to show precisely the location of the billboard structure
relative to the lease site, ground level support structures, sign
surface dimensions, access to the site and parking area, and any
other structures within the lease area or within 100 feet of the
lease area.
(2) No other structure shall be permitted within the leased property.
(3) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, and to
avoid interference with overhead utility lines or traffic controls, no
billboard shall exceed 35 feet in height. The distance in any
direction from the base of the sign to the boundaries of the lease
area shall be no less than the height of the billboard structure, and
no portion of the billboard sign shall be within 20 feet of any
portion of the lease area boundary or any public right-of-way or
utility easement.
(4) One parking space, together with adequate right-of-way to access
the parking space from a public road, shall be provided for a
maintenance vehicle within the lease area. The size of this space
shall be consistent with § 275-35D(2).
(5) No portion of the billboard sign structure may be within 100 feet of
a dwelling unit.
(6) No part of the sign structure may block any vehicular line of sight
consistent with street alignment standards of this chapter.
(7) All lighting related to a billboard structure shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard to
drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse
and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting
objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property or onto a
public roadway of pedestrianway. Directional fixtures, such as
floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded, installed and aimed
that they do not project their output into the windows of
neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the face of the sign,
§ 275-18 WHITE CODE § 275-18
1:322
skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrianway. Cutoff fixtures
are to be employed as feasible.
(8) Only one billboard sign or freestanding sign structure shall be
permitted per leased property.
§ 275-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:323

ARTICLE V
Minimum Public Improvements
§ 275-19. Requirements.
The subdivider shall, at his own expense, provide the following public
improvements which shall meet the minimum design standards of this
chapter, and shall be shown on his final subdivision plan.
§ 275-20. Monuments and markers.
§ 275-21. Street improvements.
A. Type. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of
four inches by 36 inches long, and shall be marked on top with a onehalf-
inch round brass pin, or a drilled hole. Markers shall consist of iron
pipes or iron or steel bars at least 24 inches long, and not less than 1/2
inch in diameter.
B. Placement. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored
or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to
be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker
is level with the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments shall be
set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
subdivision, at points where street right-of-way lines cross a boundary
and at points of intersection of streets within the subdivision. Markers
shall be set:
(1) At the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines.
(2) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
(3) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(4) At all other lot corners.
C. Replacement. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be
replaced by a registered engineer or surveyor, at the developer's
expense, until such time as the developer's involvement in the
subdivision ceases.
A. Minimum paving requirements. Streets shall be graded, surfaced and
improved to the grades and dimensions shown on plans, profiles and
cross sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Board
of Supervisors after receiving recommendations from the Planning
Commission.
(1) A private road (see § 275-15H) connecting to a public road will not
be subject to the street specifications.
(2) Where an approved plan contains not more than six lots each at
least 30,000 square feet in area, and none attached to public sewer
§ 275-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:325
or water systems, the street abutting each lot, if not an existing
public street, shall be within a fifty-foot right-of-way but only a
base course not less than 20 feet in width built to meet the street
specifications need be provided. The Township, however, will have
no maintenance responsibilities on the street until or unless it is
paved to the street specifications.
(3) Where an approved plan of not more than six lots with an unpaved
street developed as permitted by Subsection A(2) (above) is
extended to more than six lots, the developer shall pave in
accordance with the street specifications, the portion of the street
serving the original plan as well as the portion serving the
extension. In the event that a second developer extends the plan,
the owners of the lots in the original plan shall share
proportionately the cost of paving the portion of the street serving
their plan as well as the installation of stabilized berms six feet
wide each side. The deeds conveying each of the lots in the original
plan shall indicate the purchaser's obligation or that of his
successor in this matter. In no case shall more than one plan served
by an unpaved street be permitted on a property existing as of
January 1, 1979.
B. Other improvements. The Township may require a heavier pavement
and subbase than stipulated by the Township street specifications if a
proposed street will function as the main access to a large residential
development or if the street will serve a commercial or industrial plan.
(1) Subsurface drainage. Prior to placing the street surface, adequate
subsurface drainage and all subsurface utilities shall be provided
or installed by the developer. The size of the stormwater drainage
structures shall be computed by using Talbot's formula for runoff.
(2) Slopes. Slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line
of the street shall not exceed 3:1 for fills, and 2:1 for cuts.
(3) In all respects in which standards for required improvements are
not set forth in these regulations, the applicable standard
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
shall govern, and all work shall be performed in the manner
prescribed in the standard specifications of that Department for the
type of construction under consideration.
C. Approval, maintenance and security.
(1) The work of constructing streets or roads, including the methods
and materials incident thereto, shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer. Final acceptance of the completed streets
or roads shall rest with the Board of Supervisors. The developer
shall enter into a contract with the Board which provides that in
consideration of the acceptance of the roads or streets for inclusion
in the Township highway system, the developer agrees to construct
the roads or streets in the subdivision or development to the
§ 275-21 WHITE CODE § 275-21
1:326
standards prescribed herein at his own expense with no cost to the
Township.
(2) In the event that the developer or subdivider desires to complete
the construction of the streets after the plan is placed on record, he
shall be required to submit a cost estimate prepared by a
registered professional engineer, setting forth all items of work to
be performed and the estimated cost. Said estimate shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Engineer. A certified check or
contract performance bond issued by a surety company, subject to
the approval of the Board of Township Supervisors, in an amount
equal to the approved estimate to insure the completion of the
work, shall be filed with the Board of Township Supervisors. All
construction items shall be completed within one year after the
plan is placed on record, except where bituminous paving
construction is required. When bituminous construction is
required, it shall be completed within two years after the plan is
placed on record.
(3) The certified check shall be made payable to the Township. In the
event the work is satisfactorily completed within the time specified,
the certified check or surety bond shall be returned.
(4) The developer or subdivider shall be required to maintain all
culverts, ditches, backslopes, and shoulders until the Township
takes over the street.
D. Traffic safety improvements. Developers shall comply with the
following standards and procedures regarding the need to install traffic
safety improvements in order to provide adequate and safe access and
egress to subdivisions and land developments, said improvements to be
properly installed and fully operational prior to occupancy of the
subdivision and/or land development: [Added 10-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 1026]
(1) Traffic impact studies. The White Township Planning Commission
may include in their review process the requirement for developers
to provide a traffic impact study completed by a registered
professional engineer in order to analyze the impact that a
proposed subdivision or land development may have on traffic
access points and on adjoining public roadways. Traffic impact
studies shall be completed in accordance with the standards
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and
the Institute of Transportation Engineers, as best applicable to the
Township or state road being impacted. Developers shall be
responsible to pay for the cost of completing the study and any
engineering/professional consultant review costs incurred by the
Township in reviewing the traffic impact study, all in accordance
with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Article V, Subdivision and Land Development and § 275-71,
Fees, of this chapter. The applicant shall provide the appropriate
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:327
escrow to ensure the payment of the Township's costs of such
traffic study review. If the traffic study concludes that traffic
improvements are necessary, the Township shall require such onsite
traffic improvements to be provided by the applicant as the
Township deems appropriate. The study shall identify
improvements/facilities to be installed or actions to be undertaken
by the applicant.
(2) High traffic roadways.
(a) The following roadways within White Township are identified
as arterial or collector roads where significant development
has occurred, or will occur, and which are considered high
traffic areas:
[1] Philadelphia Street West, from Borough line to Barclay
Road.
[2] Warren Road, from Route 286 to Barclay Road.
[3] Oakland Avenue, from Borough line to Hilltop Road.
[4] Ben Franklin Road, from Route 286 to Fleming Road.
[5] Indian Springs Road, from Route 286 to Route 954.
[6] Wayne Avenue, from Borough line to Old Route 119.
[7] South Sixth Street, from Borough line south to Township
line.
[8] Route 286 East, from Borough line to Musser Road.
[9] East Pike Road, from Route 286 to Ramsey Run Road.
[10] North Fourth Street, from Borough line to Hamill Road.
[11] Shelly Drive, from Philadelphia Street West to Ben
Franklin Road.
[12] Plaza Road, from Route 286 to terminus.
[13] Rustic Lodge Road, from Route 286 to Simpson Road.
[14] Rose Street, from Route 286 to Wayne Avenue.
[15] South 13th Street, from Borough line to Rose Street.
[16] Lucerne Road, from Route 954 to Township line.
[17] Ferguson Road, from Route 954 to Township boundary.
[18] Barclay Road, from Warren Road to Philadelphia Street
West.
§ 275-21 WHITE CODE § 275-21
1:328
(b) While the above-listed roadways are considered high traffic
roadways that exhibit traffic safety and capacity concerns, the
White Township Planning Commission shall have the discretion
to apply requirements of this section to any subdivision or land
development located along any roadway in White Township
where it is felt that a traffic safety or capacity issue may result
from a proposed subdivision or land development.
(3) Coordination of access points. Where proposed access points (new
parking lot entries, driveways, intersecting roads, intersecting
local streets, etc.) connect to a high traffic roadway that already
has access points located on the opposite side of the high traffic
roadway, the proposed access points shall be coordinated to
directly coincide with the existing access points, as approved by
the Planning Commission. Off-set intersections may be permitted
as a traffic calming measure within the local internal road network
of a subdivision, provided no intersection meets a collector road or
identified high traffic roadway.
(4) Turn lanes.
(a) New access points (parking lot entries, driveways, intersecting
roads, intersecting local streets, etc.) shall provide turning
lanes along high traffic roadways based upon anticipated
average daily traffic (ADT), as follows:
ADT Turn Lanes Required
Less than 100
vehicles
None required
100 to 500 vehicles One turning lane required, the direction
of which shall be based upon principal
anticipated flow direction, normally this
would be towards the next intersection
with a higher traffic count
500 or more
vehicles
Turn lanes as warranted by Township
Engineer
(b) Turning lane(s) may also be required to mitigate level of
service deficiencies as identified in a traffic impact study, as
required by the Township, or to fulfill a recommendation of an
existing traffic impact study or official traffic study, including,
but not limited to, the "Indiana Area Multi-Modal Mobility
Study."
(5) Traffic control devices. The developer shall submit an estimate of
peak hour trips, based upon the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) standard land use classifications. For any
subdivision or land development estimated to generate more than
five peak hour exiting trips, and in the event of a signal warrant
study conducted within 10 years of the date of approval of a final
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:329
§ 275-22. Sanitary sewage disposal.
subdivision or land development plan, the developer shall agree
in writing (developer's agreement) to pay a proportionate share of
costs for any traffic control device that abuts his access point(s).
Said proportionate share shall be established at the time the signal
warrant study is conducted that establishes the need to erect a
signal or other traffic control device. Cost sharing for this traffic
control device would be based upon peak hour exiting trips,
expressed as a proportionate share of the signal warrant threshold.
This would typically be between 70 and 100 peak hour exiting trips.
The proportionate cost share for a traffic control device shall be
identified by the Township, and shall become a part of a developer's
agreement that shall be properly signed by the developer and
forwarded to the Township for review and approval as to both form
and substance. The developer's agreement shall be recorded at the
Indiana County Courthouse prior to the subdivision and/or land
development receiving final approval.
(6) Access management alternatives. To preserve capacity and traffic
flow within high traffic areas, the developer may have the option of
preparing a coordinated access management plan in lieu of
entering into a developer's agreement. This plan should show the
ultimate build out of properties that would share an access point,
consistent with this chapter, an estimate of peak hour trips, and
how the proposed coordinated access management plan would use
such techniques as deceleration lanes, jug handles, turning lanes
and other techniques to manage traffic and preserve road capacity.
The plan shall include shared access agreements and cost share
agreements between all present and future developers. This plan
shall be prepared by a qualified transportation engineer pursuant
to PA Department of Transportation Model Access Management
standards or the Institute of Transportation Engineers standards.
The Township may utilize its own professional consultants to
review such plan consistent with § 503 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and this chapter.
A. Every structure in any subdivision, development plan or mobile home
park connected to a water supply shall be connected to a sanitary
sewage disposal system, either on-lot approved by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer, or a private, public or community system
approved by the state agency having jurisdiction.
B. Connection to the public system shall be in accordance with the rules of
the White Township Municipal Authority.
C. On-lot disposal systems shall not be backfilled until approved by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
D. No stormwater sewers, footer drains or downspouts shall be connected
to any sanitary sewage disposal system.
§ 275-21 WHITE CODE § 275-22
1:330
§ 275-23. Water supply.
§ 275-24. Stormwater drainage and site grading.64
E. In the case of a community sewage disposal system, the developer shall
provide the Township with a complete set of plans and details of the
collection system and disposal facilities, as completed.
A. Every dwelling and each commercial or industrial business shall be
provided with a potable water supply of sufficient quality, quantity and
pressure to meet the minimum standards of the state agency having
jurisdiction.
B. Water lines shall be installed in accordance with the regulations of the
company providing the water supply.
C. Water wells shall be isolated from sanitary sewage absorption fields and
shall be protected from surface water runoff in accordance with
requirements of State Act 208. Outdoor storage vessels shall be kept
tightly covered.
D. In the case of a community water supply system, the developer shall
provide the Township with a complete set of plans and details of the
transmission system, including water pumping and storage facilities as
completed.
E. If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision
or development, applicants shall present written evidence to the
commission that the subdivision is to be supplied with water by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners,
or by a municipal authority. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907]
A. All areas of a subdivision, development plan or mobile home park to be
developed shall be graded to assure positive drainage. Any areas that
hold water, contain habitual swamp conditions, have no drainage outlet
or harbor insects or other disease carrying or producing agents shall be
drained even though not otherwise to be developed, unless to create a
permanent designed pond.
B. Stormwater sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided
to insure the unimpeded but controlled flow of natural watercourses
and to guarantee the drainage of all low points along curb or gutter
lines, as well as at intervals related to slope, for all streets in or
adjacent to the plan.
C. The intersection of driveways and streets shall be designed to permit
uninterrupted flow along the gutter line, or via a pipe of sufficient size
to carry the runoff below the driveway. In no case shall stormwater
64.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 263, Stormwater Management.
§ 275-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24
1:331
§ 275-25. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
flowing down a driveway be permitted to cross a public street on the
surface.
D. Developers shall design their storm drainage system in accordance with
Chapter 263, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
White, as amended. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 100165]
E. Grades of embankments resulting from preparation of building lots or
sites shall not exceed one-foot vertical rise for every two feet of
horizontal run on all slopes except that one-foot vertical rise for every
1 1/2 feet of horizontal run may be permitted for slopes created by
excavating in areas that have laid dormant for at least two years.
Steeper slopes may be permitted in areas where, in the opinion of a
professional engineer, conditions are such as to allow slopes up to a
maximum grade determined by the engineer.
F. Graded areas shall be planted with erosion resisting, quick catching
ground cover placed immediately after completion of grading.
G. No grading shall occur within five feet of any subdivision or
development plan or mobile home park boundary except as is needed
for the entrance of streets or to grade off land immediately adjacent to a
street to the street's elevation.
A. Every public street or road shall be crowned to create gutter lines on
each side or between the travel lanes and parking lanes. Street grades
in excess of 5% will normally require curbing at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Curbs shall be poured integral with the street pavement as part of the
paving operation and as specified in the cross section curb and paving
detail contained in Attachment 2 of this chapter. For streets on which
heavy traffic is anticipated, the Planning Commission may require the
developer to install separate concrete curbs at least seven inches by 24
inches in cross section with a seven inches reveal, set on 12 inches
crushed aggregate base and with expansion joints every 20 feet and
continuous No. 4 rods top and bottom.
C. Curb cuts and stormwater inlets shall be placed in the initial curb
installation.
D. Berms, where curbs are not used, shall be well compacted and shall
consist of at least six inches of stabilized aggregate base.
E. Sidewalks, if provided by the developer or required by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be at least four feet wide and may be either:
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-24 WHITE CODE § 275-25
1:332
§ 275-26. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 275-27. Flood-prone area special regulations. [Added 5-27-1992
by Ord. No. 917]
In any areas of the Township where maps or data prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Flood Insurance
Administration (Flood Hazard Area Maps) indicate a floodplain exists,
development of any kind proposed to take place within such floodplain shall
not be approved, and no building permits for construction shall be issued,
unless requirements of Chapter 149, Floodplain Management, of the Code
of the Township of White have been met.
§ 275-28. Miscellaneous regulations.
(1) Concrete: four inches thick on four inches of crushed stone base,
reinforced with six-inch by six-inch grid No. 8 welded wire fabric;
cut joints at least every six feet and expansion joints every 30 feet
of run.
(2) Bituminous: two inches ID-2 over four inches of crushed stone
meeting current PennDOT specifications.
(3) Cut flagstone. Two inches thick on four inches crushed stone.
F. Sidewalks shall be placed in the street right-of-way or may be in their
own recorded right-of-way.
G. If sidewalks are installed on grades exceeding 10%, steps, step ramps,
landings and suitable railings shall be installed.
A. Before final approval by the Township of any land development, grading
or excavating project, other than the installation of streets, or
preparation of residential lots exceeding 25,000 square feet in area, an
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be provided by the
developers' engineer.
B. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with requirements contained
in the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual published by the
Pennsylvania DER,66 January 1974, as amended, and shall be
acceptable, after review, to the Indiana County Office, Soil
Conservation Service.
A. The Township may require street lights at intersections within a
subdivision or development plan to be furnished and installed by the
developer and maintained by the Township.
B. Street lights shall be on their own standards and shall be served by an
underground conduit or as required by state law.
66.Editor's Note: See now Pennsylvania DEP.
§ 275-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28
1:333
§ 275-28.1. Landscaping. [Added 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
C. Street name signs and posts approved by the Board of Supervisors shall
be placed by the developer at all street intersections within a
subdivision plan and at the intersection of existing streets and streets
entering the plan.
D. The Township Engineer shall inspect all required improvements within
an approved subdivision or development plan as they are installed. He
shall inspect and approve road construction after rough grading is
completed, before subbase is applied and before and after wearing
course or seal coat is put down. He shall also inspect trenches to
receive stormwater drain lines just before the lines are installed and
just before backfilling.
E. Upon completion of all required public improvements in a subdivision
plan or other development, plans and profiles of the improvements as
completed shall be filed with the Township.
A. Areas of development including but not limited to a multifamily or
commercial and industrial development that are not paved or covered
by buildings shall be landscaped and maintained. In those areas that
are visible from a nearby public road, single-family dwellings or any
residentially used property, the developer shall provide a screen along
the common property line. The screen may consist of fencing,
deciduous trees, evergreen trees, dense evergreen hedges, shrubs,
continuous landscaped earth mounding, natural vegetation, natural
change of grade, or any combination with an average height of at least
four feet. If chain link fencing is selected, it shall be used in
combination with landscaping materials. Trees must be at a minimum
four-foot height when planted. If deciduous trees are used for
screening, they shall be planted in combination with lower dense
growing trees or shrubs to maintain the screen. Trees that tend to thin
out at the bottom as they mature, such as scotch pine and red pine,
should be avoided. Mature tree height and the necessary fall zone of the
tree should be considered when planting to protect neighboring
properties. The developer shall agree to replace trees that die. An
existing tree line or wooded area may be used and can remain in its
natural state if located on developer's property.
B. The length, size, positioning and materials used for the screen and
landscape buffer shall be subject to review by the Planning
Commission.
C. Screening and buffering and landscaping plans.
(1) Minimum screening requirements The Township shall review the
adequacy of the material chosen for screening and buffering based
upon Table 275-28.1. Where a proposed buffer is nonwooded, the
governing body may require vegetative screening to be planted, or
that it be managed to encourage natural forest succession through
§ 275-28 WHITE CODE § 275-28.1
1:334
restricted mowing policies and the periodic removal of invasive
plant species. The Township may require an increase in buffering
or screening as a condition of approval.
Table 275-28.1
Screening or
Buffering
Type When Required
Permitted Screening or
Buffering Choices
Total
screening
average at
least six feet in
height from
grade
• Six-foot opaque fence
• Row of evergreen trees at
least six feet high at grade;
planted in a staggered row
and spaced to create a
continuous hedge within
five years
• Earthen mound at least
four feet in height with
single row of evergreen
trees planted at the crest
Required for all
commercial and
industrial
developments
containing more
than 15,000
square feet of
new impervious
surface, outdoor
material storage
yards, heavy
industrial uses,
salvage yards
Any and all other
uses at the
discretion of the
Planning
Commission
• Natural wooded buffer or
no-mow area at least 60
feet in width
§ 275-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28.1
1:335
Table 275-28.1
Screening or
Buffering
Type When Required
Permitted Screening or
Buffering Choices
Total
screening
average at
least six feet in
height from
grade
• Six-foot opaque fence
• Row of evergreen trees at
least six feet high at grade,
planted in a staggered row
and spaced to create a
continuous hedge within 5
years.
• Earthen mound at least
four feet in height with
single row of evergreen
trees planted at the crest
Required for all
commercial and
industrial
developments
including but not
limited to
professional
offices, nursing
homes, churches,
hospital,
educational and
institutional
buildings,
daycare and
senior care
facilities, retail
stores,
restaurants, light
industry, parking
lots of at least
5,000 square feet
Large multifamily
developments
and apartment
complexes
containing five or
more dwelling
units
Any and all other
uses at the
discretion of the
Planning
Commission
• Natural wooded buffer or
no-mow area at least 40
feet in width.
§ 275-28.1 WHITE CODE § 275-28.1
1:336
Table 275-28.1
Screening or
Buffering
Type When Required
Permitted Screening or
Buffering Choices
Regular
screening at
least four feet
in height from
grade
• Four-foot opaque fence
• Row of evergreen trees at
least four feet high at
grade, planted in a
staggered row and spaced
to create a continuous
hedge
• Earthen mound at least
four feet in height with
single row of evergreen
trees planted at the crest
Multiple-family
dwellings
containing fewer
than five dwelling
units
Any and all other
uses at the
discretion of the
Planning
Commission
• Natural wooded buffer or
no-mow area at least 30
feet in width.
Buffer • Mix of evergreen and
deciduous trees at least
four feet in height
• Any mix of shrubbery,
grass, evergreen or
deciduous trees at least
four feet in height
Home-based
business
Any and all other
uses at the
discretion of the
Planning
Commission
• Wooded buffer or no-mow
area at least 25 feet in
width
(2) Landscape plans shall be provided as part of site plan design for all
land developments. It shall be conceived in a total pattern
throughout the site, integrating the various elements of the site
design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site,
promoting water quality through groundwater recharge, and
minimizing stormwater runoff and creating a pleasing site
character. Areas proposed for landscaping shall clearly indicate
their use as screening (as required), bufferyards (when required by
§ 275-18.6), open space or other purposes. Any proposed change to
a landscaped area for other improvements shall require an
amendment to the approved site plan.
(3) Requirements for landscaping plan. Plan must show proposed and
adjacent land uses per categories in Table 275-28.1.
§ 275-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28.1
1:337
(a) The location, general type, and quality of existing vegetation.
Any existing vegetation to be removed shall be noted on the
plan, as well as retained wooded buffers or no-mow areas.
(b) A plant list or schedule, indicating scientific and common
names, required and proposed quantities, spacing, and size of
all proposed landscape materials at the time of planting and at
maturity and any plant symbols used on the plan.
(c) Location of areas proposed to be planted with the selected
species.
(d) Location and description of other landscape improvements
such as earth berms, walls, fences, walkways, raised beds,
sculptures, fountains, lights, and courtyard areas.
(e) Buffers and screening as required in this section.
(f) A note stating; "The applicant guarantees that all required
landscape improvements shall be maintained in a healthy and
sound condition, or otherwise be replaced by equivalent
improvements, for a period of 24 months following Township
inspection/approval."
(g) Solid waste storage areas must be screened with an opaque
fence or wall, for all proposed subdivisions or land
developments, if they include greater than 100 gallons solid
waste storage capacity.
(h) If chain link fencing is selected, it shall be used in combination
with landscaping materials, placed outside of the area to be
fenced, utilizing a bufferyard of at least four feet in width.
Trees must be at the required four-foot height when planted.
The Planning Commission may require chain link to be made
opaque to serve as screening.
(i) The Township may require the removal of turf grass within
areas designated as no-mow areas to speed ecological
succession. In some cases, initial planting of desired species
may be required to avoid exposed soils and accelerate natural
succession.
§ 275-28.1 WHITE CODE § 275-28.1
1:338
ARTICLE VI
Multifamily Residential Development
§ 275-29. Applicability.
The following regulations shall apply when:
§ 275-30. Development standards. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No.
907]
A. An individual townhouse building containing three or more dwelling
units, or a garden apartment building occupies a lot as the sole
occupant; or
B. A group of several or many dwelling buildings, regardless of type, or a
combination of types, are part of a planned multifamily residential
development.
A. The following dimensional standards shall apply to all residential
buildings, whether on their own lots or within a planned residential
development:
(1) Minimum setback from side roads and highways abutting the
property:
(a) Between state highway center line and building line: 75 feet.
(b) Between Township road center line and building line: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum setback: Refer to Article IV, § 275-18. Other
considerations. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1066]
(3) Maximum height: Refer to Article IV, § 275-18. Other
considerations. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1066]
(4) Off-street parking: not less than 1.5 parking spaces for each
dwelling unit containing fewer than two bedrooms and one parking
space per bedroom for each dwelling unit containing two or more
bedrooms. Parking areas and access to them may occupy any part
of the property but shall not be closer than three feet to any
property line or highway right-of-way line. [Amended 12-22-2004
by Ord. No. 1001]
B. The following dimensional standards shall apply, in addition to
Subsection A, to planned multifamily residential developments:
(1) Maximum density: 2,000 square feet of gross property area for
each efficiency or one-bedroom dwelling unit; 2,400 square feet for
each two-bedroom dwelling unit; 2,800 square feet for each
dwelling unit containing three bedrooms; and add 400 square feet
per bedroom for four or more bedrooms. "Gross property area"
shall be considered the total property in the plan less existing and
§ 275-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30
1:339
proposed public road and highway rights-of-way. [Amended
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1066]
(2) Maximum coverage: 25% of the gross property area by residential
buildings.
(3) Minimum distance between buildings on the property:
(a) When the principal walls (those containing at least 1/2 of the
windows opening into dwellings) of two adjacent residential
buildings face each other, they shall be separated by an
average of at least 50 feet. The minimum and maximum
shortest distances between the two structures, or the portions
of them that are opposite each other, shall be divided by two to
determine the average.
(b) In no case shall the walls of two adjacent residential buildings
be less than 20 feet apart.
(c) Each residential building, in addition to conforming to
Subsection B(3)(a) and (b) above, shall be situated to allow
maximum access for emergency vehicles.
(4) Other uses permitted on the property:
(a) Car storage garages and parking lots.
(b) Recreational and social facilities for use of residents, members
and guests.
(c) Property maintenance facilities.
(d) Common open space.
(5) Freestanding structures. Land development plans subject to this
section shall illustrate the location of all freestanding structures
upon the plan submittal. The following subsections must be
complied with pursuant to the land development process to ensure
adequate sight distance, access to light and air, and minimal
uniform standards for proposed improvements. Billboard signs are
considered freestanding structures and shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection B(6) below. [Added 10-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 1026]
(a) The site development plan shall show precisely the location of
all freestanding structures relative to the location of ingress/
egress areas, buildings, parking, rights-of-way, utility
easements, and neighboring property lines.
(b) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, as
well as ensuring safe vehicular sight distances, all freestanding
structures shall be set back from public rights-of-way, utility
easements, and property lines at least 10 feet, plus one foot for
§ 275-30 WHITE CODE § 275-30
1:340
every foot of height over four feet. To prevent interference with
overhead utility lines or traffic controls, as well as preventing
access to light and air, no freestanding structure shall be
erected pursuant to this section in excess of 35 feet in height.
(c) No portion of a freestanding structure pursuant to this section
may be located within 50 feet of a neighboring dwelling unit.
(d) No part of a freestanding structure, regardless of its height,
may block any vehicular line of sight consistent with street
alignment standards of this chapter.
(e) All lighting associated with freestanding structures shall be
aimed, located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to
present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their
ability to safely traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by
projecting or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring
use or property, or onto any public or private roadway or
pedestrianway. Directional fixtures, such as floodlights and
spotlights, shall be so shielded, installed and aimed that they
do not project their output into the windows of neighboring
residences, adjacent uses, past the face of the sign, skyward or
onto a public roadway or pedestrianway. Cutoff fixtures are to
be employed as feasible.
(6) Billboard signs. Billboard signs are considered a type of
freestanding structure and are subject to this chapter as a division
or allocation of space pursuant to land development and/or a
subdivision by lease. Billboard signs shall comply with the
following: [Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026]
(a) A plan shall be prepared to show the site, described by
bearings and distances, within the property from which the site
will be leased and dimensions to the nearest boundary line of
the property from the sign. In addition, a scaled site
development plan shall be prepared to show precisely the
location of the billboard structure relative to the lease site,
ground level support structures, sign surface dimensions,
access to the site and parking area, and any other structures
within the lease area or within 100 feet of the lease area.
(b) No other structure shall be permitted within the leased
property.
(c) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, and
to avoid interference with overhead utility lines or traffic
controls no billboard shall exceed 35 feet in height. The
distance in any direction from the base of the sign to the
boundaries of the lease area shall be no less than the height of
the billboard structure, and no portion of the billboard sign
§ 275-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30
1:341
shall be within 20 feet of any portion of the lease area
boundary or any public right-of-way or utility easement.
(d) One parking space, together with adequate right-of-way to
access the parking space from a public road, shall be provided
for a maintenance vehicle within the lease area. The size of this
space shall be consistent with § 275-35D(2).
(e) No portion of the billboard sign structure may be within 100
feet of a dwelling unit.
(f) No part of the sign structure may block any vehicular line of
sight consistent with street alignment standards of this
chapter.
(g) All lighting related to a billboard structure shall be aimed,
located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a
hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to
safely traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting
or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or
property, or onto a public roadway or pedestrianway.
Directional fixtures, such as floodlights and spotlights, shall be
so shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their
output into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent
uses, past the face of the sign, skyward or onto a public
roadway or pedestrianway. Cutoff fixtures are to be employed
as feasible.
(h) Only one billboard sign or freestanding sign structure shall be
permitted per leased property.
(7) Landscaping. Refer to Article IV, § 275-28.1, Landscaping. [Added
11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1052; amended 12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1076]
(8) Garbage and trash containers. Containers shall be tightly covered
and secured in side or rear yards hidden from public view and from
adjacent properties by means of a solid face fence or wall. [Added
11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1052]
C. The following dimensional standards shall apply to individual
apartment or townhouse buildings on their own lots.
(1) Table of dimensions.
Single-
Family or
Two-Family
Townhouse
Building
Apartment
Building
Minimum Lot
Dimensions
Area in square feet 7,200 10,000 15,000
§ 275-30 WHITE CODE § 275-30
1:342
Single-
Family or
Two-Family
Townhouse
Building
Apartment
Building
Width in feet
measured at front
building line
60 75 80
Maximum Lot
Coverage
As percentage of
total lot area
occupied by
residential buildings
35 35 25
(2) In a townhouse building, or group of buildings approved in one
plan, the average of all the dwelling units shall be not less than
1,800 square feet of lot area and 18 feet of frontage, but individual
units may be no less than 1,400 square feet of lot area with 16 feet
of frontage. In the case of buildings in which the units are not to be
sold individually, the average distance between the center line of
common walls separating units shall be not less than 18 feet and no
wall center lines shall be closer together than 16 feet.
D. Public utilities.
(1) Every building within a planned multifamily residential
development and every townhouse or apartment building on its
own lot connected to a water supply shall also be connected to a
public or community sewage disposal system.
(2) If a community sewage disposal system is used, it shall conform to
all requirements of the State Department of Environmental
Protection for such a system, considering the number of dwellings
to be served, future expansion, the capacity of the stream receiving
treated effluent and the program to monitor and maintain the
system.
(3) If water supply is provided by on-site wells, the source shall be
capable of providing sufficient quantity and quality of water to
meet State DEP requirements for the number of dwellings to be
served.
(4) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the owner(s) of the multifamily
development, applicants shall present written evidence to the
commission that the multifamily development is to be supplied with
water by a certified public utility or by a municipal authority.
E. Street and sidewalk construction.
§ 275-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30
1:343
(1) All roads and sidewalks within a planned multifamily residential
development intended to become public shall be constructed to
meet minimum Township specifications.
(2) Sidewalks meeting the standards of § 275-25E shall be required
between apartment or townhouse buildings and parking areas, and
may be required to provide access to school bus stops and to
recreational or social facilities on the property.
F. Parking lot layout and construction.
(1) Off-street parking areas serving apartment buildings and
townhouse buildings, where parking is grouped, shall be laid out
and constructed to meet the following criteria.
(2) Each parking space shall be at least 10 feet wide and contain 180
square feet of area.
(3) Parking areas where spaces are at right angles to the access lane
shall be at least 42 feet wide for a single row of spaces and access
lane or 62 feet wide across rows on either side of the access lane
plus the access lane. If parking spaces form a forty-five-degree
angle with the access lane, the dimension across a single row of
spaces and lane shall be at least 30 feet and across a double row
and lane 50 feet.
(4) Parking should be located so that no required space is more than
200 feet from the building served.
(5) Parking areas and drives leading to them shall be surfaced with a
stabilized, dust-free, all-weather material placed over at least six
inches of well-compacted and choked base course of crushed
aggregate.
(6) Parking areas shall slope not more than 6% nor less than 1/2%, and
shall drain to a stormwater water sewer or recognized
drainageway.
(7) Where a slope is downhill from the edge of the parking surface and
spaces are at right angles to the edge, stop bars or curbs shall be
placed along the edge of the parking surface.
G. Grading and drainage.
(1) Developers shall design their storm drainage system in accordance
with Chapter 263, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the
Township of White, as amended. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 100167]
(2) Finished graded slopes shall not exceed one-foot vertical rise for
each 1 1/2 feet of horizontal run if created by excavating into earth
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-30 WHITE CODE § 275-30
1:344
§ 275-31. Criteria for review by Township.
In evaluating a multifamily residential development the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors shall consider the following aspects
of the plan before reaching a decision to approve, disapprove or approve
with conditions:
that has laid undisturbed for at least two years before grading. In
all other cases grades shall be not greater than one-foot vertical
rise to each two feet of horizontal run unless the developer can
provide an engineering report prepared and signed by a registered
professional engineer indicating steeper grades, up to a maximum
grade recommended by the engineer, will provide permanently
stable ground surfaces considering the soils involved.
(3) Fill slopes shall be keyed into previously undisturbed earth and
built up in layers not to exceed eight inches in depth. The toes and
tops of slopes shall be drained to a stormwater sewer or recognized
drainageway.
(4) Graded slopes shall be planted immediately upon completion with a
fast-catching vegetative cover. During construction and until cover
is established proper erosion control measures shall be practiced
as recommended by the Indiana County Soil Conservation Service.
H. Recreation. In any planned multifamily residential development
containing dwellings with two or more bedrooms, an area equal to at
least 50 square feet for each two-bedroom unit and at least 100 square
feet for each three-bedroom or larger unit shall be set aside by the
developer for recreational purposes only if such area aggregates to at
least 500 square feet. Such area may be an equipped recreation room
or rooms in one or more of the residential buildings, or an exterior
space or spaces on level ground equipped and maintained for the use of
the residents, or a combination of these. If the developer's interest, or
that of a successor owner ceases, the recreation areas shall pass to a
homeowners' association for maintenance.
I. Commencement of construction. Starting on the date of final approval
of any multifamily residential development, the developer shall
commence construction within five years and continue in a timely
manner. Failure of the developer to start work and/or to move diligently
towards completion within this time limit shall render the original
approval null and void. The developer may reapply for final approval
after the time limit has expired but his project shall be subject to any
amendments to this chapter that may have been adopted in the
meantime.
A. Vehicular access into the site and traffic flow on adjacent properties:
(1) Location of access points relative to maximum sight distances for
entering and leaving traffic on abutting streets.
§ 275-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-31
1:345
§ 275-32. Homeowners' association and common open space.
(2) Ability of abutting streets to handle traffic flow from the
development.
(3) Relationship of entrances to the development on nearby street
intersections.
B. Relationship to adjacent properties. Impact of size, height and location
of buildings in the development upon residential buildings on adjacent
properties.
C. Internal arrangement of the development.
(1) Ease of vehicular circulation through the development and
legibility of the pattern of internal streets.
(2) Relationship of parking areas to internal streets and residential
buildings.
(3) Location of recreational uses in relation to residential areas.
D. Relationship of development to site.
(1) Means used to protect steep slopes and floodplains.
(2) Use of wooded areas on the site to protect the development and to
protect adjacent properties.
(3) Amount of disturbance to existing land surface to be created by the
development.
A. If a developer proposes to sell any or all the dwellings in his plan
individually, he shall establish a homeowners' association, membership
in which shall be a condition of purchasing a dwelling unit. Membership
shall pass from each dwelling owner to each successor owner. The
owner of each dwelling unit shall be entitled to one vote for acting on
association affairs. The text of the bylaws establishing and governing
the association shall be reviewed and found acceptable by the Township
Solicitor as providing adequate safeguards for the Township and for the
plan residents.
B. All land in the plan that is not sold to individual dwelling owners or is
not developed for dwelling buildings and supporting facilities to be
retained by the developer and his successors, shall be recorded as
common open space with its area, and bearings and distances of its
perimeter noted on the recording plan. The developer shall be
responsible for maintenance of the common open space until and unless
he or a successor liquidates his interest by sale of the remaining
dwelling units. In that case the common open space shall be deeded to
the homeowners' association, which shall assume the responsibilities
that were formerly the developer's or his successor's. Until then the
association shall be responsible for a prorated share of the maintenance
§ 275-31 WHITE CODE § 275-32
1:346
§ 275-33. Congregate living facilities. [Added 8-9-1989 by Ord. No.
907]
of the common open space. Maintenance may include taxes, liability
insurance, administrative expenses and upkeep. The developer and
eventually the association, if the developer's interest ceases, shall be
responsible for the maintenance of recreation facilities, access to drives
if not public, parking areas, landscaping, stormwater drainage facilities
and other improvements provided originally by the developer.
A. "Congregate living facilities" shall be considered any residential
building eligible for approval by the State Department of Welfare and
Department of Labor and Industry that is used or intended to be used
for persons who require assistance with normal living functions but are
otherwise ambulatory (a personal care home), for persons who are
moving from institutional to independent living (a transitional dwelling)
or persons who require continuous medical supervision and are mostly
bed ridden (a nursing home).
B. Such facilities shall require approval by the Planning Commission prior
to establishing the use or commencement of any construction or
renovation. A condition of approval shall be the submission of
applications by the operator to the appropriate state agencies. Any
proposed transitional dwelling shall, in addition, provide proof that it is
a responsible organization as evidenced by references from supporting
agencies.
C. The operator shall provide a site plan of the facility showing buildings,
vehicular access, parking areas and signs on the site. At least one
parking space shall be provided for each two persons or fraction thereof
residing in the facility.
§ 275-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33
1:347

ARTICLE VII
Commercial and Industrial Developments
§ 275-34. Applicability. [Amended 10-26-1983 by Ord. No. 867A]
§ 275-35. Development standards. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No.
907; 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 954; 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 965]
A. The following regulations shall apply to the development of any
property for commercial or industrial use or the expansion of a property
or facilities on it for such uses.
B. Any developer proposing a commercial or industrial development shall
submit preliminary plans to the Board of Supervisors for review at least
15 days prior to the regular monthly meeting date of the Planning
Commission.
A. Minimum lot size and maximum height: [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 1066]
(1) Minimum lot size: Refer to Article IV § 275-17, Lots.
(2) Maximum building height: Refer to Article IV, § 275-18, Other
considerations.
B. Minimum frontage on a public street: 60 feet measured at the building
line.
C. Minimum setbacks from road and highway center lines and from other
property lines:
(1) Between state highway center line and building line: 75 feet.
(2) Between Township road center line and building line: 50 feet.
(3) Between wall of nearest building and a property line not abutting
or within a road or highway: minimum 25 feet if abutting property
that is in predominantly residential use, or minimum 15 feet in all
other cases. Refer to Article IV, § 275-18, Other considerations.
[Amended 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 1076]
(4) The Planning Commission may review and approve uses and
activities within the setback areas of commercial or industrial
property abutting a residential or vacant lot, provided the following
are complied with:
(a) Landscaping requirements of § 275-35J(2).
(b) Attachments to a building do not extend more than three feet
into the setback area.
(c) Signs, poles, antennae and flagstaffs are not greater in height
than the distance between the base at ground level and nearest
property line.
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:349
(d) The use does not include an aboveground freestanding
building.
(e) The proposed use is set back at least 10 feet from the nearest
property line, does not occupy more than 15% of the total lot
area and does not exceed, except in the case of Subsection
C(4)(b) and (c) above, a height of four feet at any point above
the ground level.
(f) The proposed use or activity is not, in the Planning
Commission's opinion, likely to be harmful to neighboring
residents.
D. Off-street parking.
(1) Parking spaces shall be provided on the same property as the use
served in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(a) Retail commercial or personal service store or medical or
dental clinic: one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
(b) Restaurant or tavern: one space for each two persons who can
be seated simultaneously.
(c) Restaurant not providing sit-down service or providing carry
out in addition to sit-down service: 20 spaces in addition to
those provided for sit-down customers.
(d) Motel: one space for each sleeping room.
(e) Office not a medical or dental clinic: one space for each 400
square feet of floor areas.
(f) Outdoor retail sales: one space for each 600 square feet of
property area devoted to the business.
(g) Public assembly hall: one space for each 100 square feet of
floor area or one space for each three persons who can be
seated simultaneously, whichever is greater.
(h) Bowling alley: six spaces for each lane.
(i) Manufacturing plants or research facilities: one space for each
employee on the largest shift or one space for each 500 square
feet of enclosed floor area, whichever is greater.
(j) Warehousing, storage, freight terminals, etc., one space for
each employee on the largest shift or one space for each 1,500
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
(2) Each parking space shall be at least nine feet wide, contain at least
180 square feet of area and be marked off in yellow or white traffic
paint, if the surface is paved.
§ 275-35 WHITE CODE § 275-35
1:350
(3) The arrangement of parking spaces and access lanes in a parking
lot shall meet the following standards as a minimum:
Angle of
Parking
Width of
Space
(feet)
Length of
Space
(feet)
Width
of Lane
(feet)
Width of
Lane Plus
Spaces Each
Side
(feet)
90 degrees 10 18 24 60
90 degrees 9 20 22 62
60 degrees 10 20 18 58
60 degrees 9 20 18 59
45 degrees 10 19 13 51
45 degrees 9 20 13 53
(a) "Width of space" means the distance between space marking
lines measured at right angles to the marking lines.
(b) "Angle of parking" means the angle formed by the edge of the
access lane and the space marking lines.
(c) "Length of parking space" means the distance between the
front and rear space marking lines measured at right angles to
the access lane using the point on the rear line closest to the
access lane and the point on the front line furthest from the
access lane.
(d) "Width of lane" means the minimum width of the access lane
between the rear lines or points of the rear line closest to the
access lane of spaces on each side of the access lane.
(e) Parking spaces arranged end to end may be permitted where
such spaces abut along the full length of one side an access
lane at least 12 feet wide and each space is at least 22 feet
long.
(4) Parking lots shall be sloped no more than 4% nor less than 1/2%,
draining to a stormwater control system meeting the requirements
of Chapter 263, Stormwater Management. Drainage shall not be
permitted to flow across neighboring properties if not in a
recognized drainage way or easement created to handle
stormwater water.
(5) Parking lots and access drives leading to them shall be surfaced
with a stabilized, dust-free, all-weather material placed over at
least six inches of well-compacted and choked base course of
crushed aggregate.
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:351
(6) Where grades at the edge of parking lot slope downhill, the edge
shall be curbed if necessary for stormwater control or provided
with stop bars if cars are parked at right angles to the slope. Where
grades slope uphill, a drainage swale shall be provided between the
edge and the grade.
E. Vehicular and pedestrian access in parking lots.
(1) Access to a property shall only be at approved curb cuts.
(2) Only one access point shall be permitted to a property with less
than 100 feet of highway frontage, only two points to a property
with at least 100 feet but not more than 300 feet of frontage, and no
more than three access points for properties with frontages greater
than 300 feet, except that when a property abuts two or more roads
or highways, one curb cut only may be permitted on each
secondary road or highway.
(3) Access points shall be located to provide maximum sight distances
for car drivers entering and leaving the property and those on the
abutting road or highway. Access points shall be as remote as
possible from nearby highway intersections. Obstructions on the
property impeding sight distances shall be removed.
(4) Developers shall provide curbs or other barriers to limit access to
the approved locations. Curb cuts shall be not less than 20 feet in
width nor more than 35 feet, not including curved transition
between highway and access drive.
(5) The Planning Commission may require, at its option, that some
traffic movements be denied at certain access points to assure
maximum public safety and that the access points be designed to
prevent the movements that are denied, which shall also be clearly
posted. Furthermore, the Commission may require, in the case of
large parking areas next to access points, that entering traffic must
proceed at least 90 feet into the property before turning into a
parking lane.
(6) Pedestrian access in parking lots. Advantage shall be given to the
pedestrian in any parking lot. Sidewalks may be required by the
Commission in a parking lot and shall be required abutting the
walls of a building containing public entrances in conformity with
the following standards: [Amended 4-27-2011 by Ord. No.
1042]
(a) All parking lots that contain more than 75 vehicular parking
spaces must include pedestrian walkways designed to allow
pedestrians to safely move from their vehicles to main
entrances. Pedestrians shall be directed through a system of
convenient routes that bring them to central walkways through
the parking lot to the main building entrance or central
location.
§ 275-35 WHITE CODE § 275-35
1:352
(b) Walkways shall be designed to minimize pedestrian vehicular
conflicts and avoid main vehicular entrances. Walkways shall
be a minimum of four feet wide and delineated by raised
sidewalks or walkways designated by paint striping or other
pavement markings. Walkways may be controlled with
landscaping, bollards, paint or paving material which differs
from that of vehicular areas planned to calm traffic and
delineated with small posts or bollards. Signs shall be used as
appropriate to denote pedestrian crossing points such as areas
between building entrances and parking areas.
(c) On small lots compliance with this subsection may be achieved
by providing a sidewalk at the perimeter of the lot or by
designing narrow parking lots (generally no wider than two
rows of stalls and an access lane) that minimize the open areas
accessible to vehicles.
(7) A fire lane at least 20 feet in width shall be maintained, with no
parking permitted, along those sides of a building abutting a
parking area.
F. Truck servicing.
(1) A truck servicing area or areas shall be provided on any
commercial or industrial property in accordance with the following
schedule.
(2) Daily truck servicing:
(a) Up to 5,000 square feet of enclosed floor area: one space.
(b) Five thousand to 20,000 square feet: two spaces.
(c) Over 20,000 square feet: one space for each additional 30,000
square feet or fraction.
(3) Occasional truck servicing:
(a) Up to 15,000 square feet of enclosed floor area: none required.
(b) Fifteen thousand to 40,000 square feet: one space.
(c) Over 40,000 square feet: one space for each additional 60,000
square feet or fraction.
(4) Servicing areas shall be independent from off-street parking areas
and arranged so that trucks may enter and leave moving in a
forward direction. No maneuvering shall be permitted on a public
road or highway.
(5) Servicing areas should be at the sides or rear of a building and
should be at least 10 feet wide by 35 feet long with a clear height of
15 feet.
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:353
(6) When several buildings in the same use share a property, one
building may be designated to receive and ship goods but the
number of servicing spaces shall be based upon the total square
footage of all buildings.
(7) Servicing areas shall be paved, sloped and drained as for parking
areas if they receive daily use and/or abut a residentially used
property. In all other situations they may have a stabilized, dustfree
surface only.
G. Grading and drainage.
(1) Developers shall design their storm drainage system in accordance
with Chapter 263, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the
Township of White, as amended. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 100168]
(2) Finished graded slopes shall not exceed one-foot vertical rise for
each 1 1/2 feet of horizontal run if created by excavating into earth
that has laid undisturbed for at least two years before grading. In
all other cases grades shall be not greater than one-foot vertical
rise to each two feet of horizontal run unless the developer can
provide an engineering report prepared and signed by a registered
professional engineer indicating steeper grades, up to a maximum
grade recommended by the engineer, will provide permanently
stable ground surfaces considering the soils involved.
(3) Fill slopes shall be keyed into previously undisturbed earth built up
in layers not to exceed eight inches in depth and properly
compacted. The toes and tops of slopes shall be drained to a
stormwater sewer, recognized drainageway or diversion ditch.69
H. Freestanding structures. Land development plans subject to this
section shall illustrate the location of all freestanding structures upon
the plan submittal. The following subsections must be complied with
pursuant to the land development process to ensure adequate sight
distance, access to light and air, and minimal uniform standards for
proposed improvements. Billboard signs are considered freestanding
structures and shall comply with the requirements of Subsection I
below. [Added 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1026]
(1) The site development plan shall show precisely the location of all
freestanding structures relative to the location of ingress/egress
areas, buildings, parking, rights-of-way, utility easements, and
neighboring property lines.
(2) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, as well as
ensuring safe vehicular sight distances, all freestanding structures
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Original § 718, Freestanding signs, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001.
§ 275-35 WHITE CODE § 275-35
1:354
shall be set back from public rights-of-way, utility easements, and
property lines at least 10 feet, plus one foot for every foot of height
over four feet. To prevent interference with overhead utility lines
or traffic controls, as well as preventing access to light and air, no
freestanding structure shall be erected pursuant to this section in
excess of 35 feet in height.
(3) No portion of a freestanding structure pursuant to this section may
be located within 50 feet of a neighboring dwelling unit.
(4) No part of a freestanding structure, regardless of its height, may
block any vehicular line of sight consistent with street alignment
standards of this chapter.
(5) All lighting associated with freestanding structures shall be aimed,
located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a
hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property, or
onto any public or private roadway or pedestrianway. Directional
fixtures, such as floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded,
installed and aimed that they do not project their output into the
windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the face of
the sign, skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrianway.
Cutoff fixtures are to be employed as feasible.
I. Billboard signs. Billboard signs are considered a type of freestanding
structure and are subject to this chapter as a division or allocation of
space pursuant to land development and/or a subdivision by lease.
Billboard signs shall comply with the following: [Added 10-10-2007
by Ord. No. 1026]
(1) A plan shall be prepared to show the site, described by bearings
and distances, within the property from which the site will be
leased and dimensions to the nearest boundary line of the property
from the sign. In addition, a scaled site development plan shall be
prepared to show precisely the location of the billboard structure
relative to the lease site, ground level support structures, sign
surface dimensions, access to the site and parking area, and any
other structures within the lease area or within 100 feet of the
lease area.
(2) No other structure shall be permitted within the leased property.
(3) To protect neighboring properties' access to light and air, and to
avoid interference with overhead utility lines or traffic controls no
billboard shall exceed 35 feet in height. The distance in any
direction from the base of the sign to the boundaries of the lease
area shall be no less than the height of the billboard structure, and
no portion of the billboard sign shall be within 20 feet of any
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:355
portion of the lease area boundary or any public right-of-way or
utility easement.
(4) One parking space, together with adequate right-of-way to access
the parking space from a public road, shall be provided for a
maintenance vehicle within the lease area. The size of this space
shall be consistent with § 275-35D(2).
(5) No portion of the billboard sign structure may be within 100 feet of
a dwelling unit.
(6) No part of the sign structure may block any vehicular line of sight
consistent with street alignment standards of this chapter.
(7) All lighting related to a billboard structure shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard to
drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse
and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting
objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property, or onto a
public roadway of pedestrianway. Directional fixtures, such as
floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded, installed and aimed
that they do not project their output into the windows of
neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the face of the sign,
skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrianway. Cutoff fixtures
are to be employed as feasible.
(8) Only one billboard sign or freestanding sign structure shall be
permitted per leased property.
J. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Lighting. Lighting of signs or area lighting in a parking lot shall not
create glare conditions on adjacent roads, highways or properties.
Lighting shall be indirect. Light sources shall not be visible from
nearby roads or properties.
(2) Landscaping. Refer to Article IV, § 275-28.1, Landscaping. [Added
11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1052; amended 12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1076]
(3) Garbage and trash containers. Containers shall be tightly covered
and secured in side or rear yards hidden from public view and from
adjacent properties by means of a solid face fence or wall. On
properties containing businesses selling food in paper containers
for carry out, trash containers shall be conveniently located for
customer use and emptied daily.
(4) Commencement of construction. Starting on the date of final
approval of any commercial or industrial development, the
developer shall commence construction within five years and
continue in a timely manner. Failure of the developer to start work
and/or to move diligently towards completion within this time limit
§ 275-35 WHITE CODE § 275-35
1:356
shall render the original approval null and void. The developer may
reapply for final approval after the time limit has expired but his
project shall be subject to any amendments to this chapter that may
have been adopted in the meantime.
(5) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the owner(s) of the commercial and
industrial development, applicants shall present written evidence
to the commission that the commercial and industrial development
is to be supplied with water by a certified public utility or by a
municipal authority.
(6) Telecommunication towers. Towers shall be considered any
elevated platform exceeding 35 feet in height intended and used to
support electronic or telecommunications equipment.
(a) Towers shall be located so that the minimum distance between
the base of the tower and any edge of the property sold or
leased to the tower owner is at least the height of the tower. No
building, unless needed for the operation of the equipment,
shall be permitted within the sold or leased property.
(b) Before a new tower is approved, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
that he has investigated placing the equipment on an existing
tower or other elevated location, such as a church steeple,
chimney, stack, water tower or similar place. If he proves that
all existing towers and elevated locations within two miles of
his proposed site are not adequate or available, the
Commission may grant permission to erect the tower in
conformance with this section. Reasons for approval shall be
that there is no existing location that can support the weight of
the equipment, that there is no adequate space available on
any elevated location, that the proposed equipment would
cause electronic interference with existing equipment already
in place or that all owners of elevated locations have refuse
permission, in writing, for the use of their premises.
(c) The tower and its foundations shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer who shall supervise installation.
(d) The base of the tower shall be enclosed by a chain link fence at
least six feet high topped by barbed wire, unless the tower is
located on the roof of a building.
(e) The only lighting permitted on the tower shall be that required
by the Federal Aviation Administration, and no signs shall be
placed on the tower.
(f) Even if the tower site is leased, a subdivision plan shall be
prepared to show the site, described by bearings and
distances, within the property from which the site will be sold
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:357
or leased and dimensions to the nearest boundary line of the
property from the tower. In addition, a scaled site development
plan shall be prepared to show precisely the location of the
tower in its site, supporting buildings on the ground, guy
anchors, access to the site and parking area.
(g) If the site does not abut a public road, a minimum ten-foot wide
easement for access shall be provided and improved with a
dust and mud free surface between the public road and the
site.
(h) Any tower that is abandoned, or from which the equipment has
been removed, shall be demolished within one year of
inactivation by the owner. Each owner shall inform the
Township of successor owners in the event of a sale.
(i) Towers erected for federally licensed amateur radio stations
and public emergency service providers shall be exempt from
the requirements of this subsection.
(j) FAA approval and consent of any established airport or
helicopter landing site within two miles of the site.
§ 275-35 WHITE CODE § 275-35
1:358
ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Home Park Regulations
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).70]
§ 275-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which does not have a flush
toilet and a bath or shower enclosed therein.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — Any mobile home which has a flush
toilet and a bath or shower enclosed therein.
MOBILE HOME — A trailer-coach or any other vehicle, which while upon
the public highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is subject to
all traffic laws and regulations of this Commonwealth and it is further
defined and declared to be a residence when parked in any mobile home
park or other area devoted to that purpose or when parked in any other
place, property and/or any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its
being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly
licensable as such and shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled
vehicles as designated, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means
of accessories in such a manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any site, lot, tract or acreage of land upon which
two or more occupied mobile homes are harbored, stored or parked, either
free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any buildings,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of
the equipment or service buildings of such mobile home parks.
MOBILE HOME PARKING SITE or PARKING SITE — A plot of ground
within a mobile home park within or in the vicinity of a mobile home park
designated for the accommodation of or parking space for one mobile home.
§ 275-37. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of
the Township any mobile home park unless such person shall first obtain a
license therefor. All mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date
of this article shall, within 90 days thereafter, obtain such license and in
all other respects comply fully with the requirements of this article, except
that mobile home parks now in existence are relieved from complying with
§§ 275-43 and 275-44 regulating the lot size to the extent of their present
facilities.
70.Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted 9-14-1967 by Ord. No. 9-14-1967 but was
added to this chapter during codification pursuant to the requirements of 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 275-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-38
1:359
§ 275-38. License fees.
The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be in an amount as
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 275-39. Application for license.
§ 275-40. Inspection.
On and after the adoption and approval of this article and thereafter
annually at the regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors in January, one
person duly qualified as a Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed.
§ 275-41. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Application for a mobile home park license shall be filed with and issued
by the Board of Supervisors. Application shall be made by the owner,
proprietor or operator of the mobile home park, shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park showing compliance with the full and
complete terms of this article.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Board of
Supervisors to enable it to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
B. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be
filed in triplicate. The Board of Supervisors, or its duly authorized
designee, shall investigate the applicant and inspect the proposed plans
and specifications. If the plans and specifications of the proposed
mobile home park will be in compliance with all provisions of this
article and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the Board of
Supervisors shall approve the application and upon completion of the
park, according to the said plans and specifications, shall issue the
license. If the application is for a mobile home park, in operation on the
effective date of this article, the license will issue forthwith if not, such
license will be issued when the conditions are corrected to meet such
requirements, which must be within 90 days.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to examine all
mobile home parks within the boundaries of the Township of White from
time to time and, in the event that he shall find any violations of the
provisions of this article at any such inspection after the original
inspection on the application, he shall give a written notice to the
§ 275-38 WHITE CODE § 275-41
1:360
§ 275-42. Location.
All mobile home parks and all mobile homes must be well drained and
located in areas free from swamps, marshes or ponds and in such location
as will be approved by the Board of Supervisors and/or the Department of
Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 275-43. Size and specifications of parks.
Every mobile home park shall contain mobile home sites of at least 5,000
square feet and have a minimum width of 50 feet, except as provided for
transients in § 275-45 following, and each parking site must be clearly
designated on the ground by posts or other similar markings.
§ 275-44. Mobile home parking.
No mobile home or any part thereof shall be parked closer than 20 feet from
the next mobile home when located side by side or end to side, nor 15 feet
from the next mobile home when located end to end. No mobile home shall
set less than 25 feet from the right-of-way line, or less than 75 feet from
the center line of any state or federal highway. No mobile home, accessory
building, or any other structure, in a mobile home park shall set closer than
25 feet from any public right-of- way line used for road or highway purposes,
nor closer than 25 feet from any property line, nor less than 32 feet from
any existing building or structure.
§ 275-45. Vehicle parking.
Vehicles shall not be parked on any streets unless the streets are of
sufficient width to allow 20 feet of clear driving space. A special designed
vehicle parking space for each mobile home parking site shall be provided
with at least one parking space per vehicle allowed for each mobile home
space. No vehicle shall be parked upon a mobile home parking site except
where special parking sites of not less than 30 feet in width and containing
a lot less than 2,000 square feet shall be provided and clearly marked as
aforesaid for overnight transient.
owner, proprietor or operator of such mobile home park setting forth
the said violations and it shall thereupon be the duty of the aforesaid
owner, proprietor or operator of the aforesaid mobile home park to
correct the conditions set forth in the aforesaid notice within 15 days of
the receipt of such notice.
B. In the event that the aforesaid owner, proprietor or operator of any
mobile home park shall neglect, refuse or fail to make the corrections
set forth in such notice from the Code Enforcement Officer within 15
days aforesaid, he shall then be subject to the penalties for the violation
of this article as hereinafter more specifically set forth.
§ 275-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-46
1:361
§ 275-46. Streets and driveways within area.
All streets and driveways in every mobile home park shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet and shall be drained and maintained in a passable and
reasonably dust-free condition at all times.
§ 275-47. Lighting facilities.
Every mobile home park, and every portion thereof, must be lighted at all
times starting one hour after sundown and remaining lighted until one hour
before sunrise; such lighting must be with electric lights of at least 200
watts located every 200 feet apart and such lights must be placed at least 10
feet above ground on a solid post, or such other lights as may be approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 275-48. Distance to accommodations and facilities.
Every mobile home park shall be so laid out that the walking distance from
any parking site housing a dependent mobile home to service buildings will
not exceed 300 feet. At least one water outlet furnishing a safe drinking
supply shall be located within 100 feet of each parking site housing a
dependent mobile home.
§ 275-49. Sewage system approval.
Plans for all sewer systems and disposal fields must be approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer before installing, or, if in operation before the
effective date of this article, and not in conformity with the appropriate
provisions of this article, must be made to conform within 30 days of the
effective date of this article.
§ 275-50. Sewage connections.
It shall be the duty of the owner, proprietor or operator of the mobile home
park to provide a connection or connections from the mobile home for all
liquid waste to the sewer system hereinafter mentioned, and make and
maintain such connections. Sewer connections, or other disposal systems in
unoccupied parking sites, shall be tightly closed.
§ 275-51. Receptacles.
It shall be the duty of the owner, proprietor or operator of every mobile
home park to provide a receptacle of at least 20 gallons capacity for every
mobile home parking site, which said receptacles shall be equipped with a
tight lid and which receptacles must be emptied semiweekly by such owner,
proprietor or operator, or his employees.
§ 275-52. Fire extinguishers.
Where public water is available, adequate fire hydrants shall be provided,
and where public water is not available, fire extinguishers of a type and size
§ 275-46 WHITE CODE § 275-52
1:362
approved by local fire authorities and by the Board of Supervisors shall be
provided and shall be placed so as to be convenient for all parking sites and
shall be maintained in a workable condition at all times.
§ 275-53. Electrical outlets.
An electrical outlet shall be provided for each parking site to which at
least 110 volts of electricity shall be supplied. When an overhead system
of electric distribution is used and the electric current is transmitted by
extension cord from the electric outlet to the mobile home, the extension
cord shall be of weatherproof material and so supported that it will not be
less than 10 feet above ground, except at the ends where it is connected to
the electric outlet and/or the mobile home.
§ 275-54. Service building.
Each mobile home park accommodating or providing space for dependent
mobile homes shall have a service building devoted, wholly or in part, to
house sanitary facilities for the mobile home park.
§ 275-55. Service building requirements.
All buildings or parts of buildings used for service accommodations in
mobile home parks accommodating or providing space for dependent
mobile homes must be well heated, ventilated and lighted, both by natural
and artificial light, and have floors of cement, terrazzo, tile or other
impervious material with a cove base extending six inches above the floor.
All floors shall slope gently to floor drains connected with the sewage
system. Each service building shall provide separate rooms for sanitary
facilities for the male and female sex. Each service room for males and
females shall have at least one private bathroom with a minimum of 35
square feet of floor space equipped with on bathtub or shower bath, two
wash basins and two toilets.
§ 275-56. Toilet; shower facilities.
Each mobile home park accommodating or providing space for dependent
mobile homes shall have sufficient service buildings to provide for and
shall provide one flush toilet, one shower, and one lavatory for men, and at
least one urinal for every 15 dependent mobile homes and one flush toilet
and one lavatory for women for each 10 dependent mobile homes, and, in
addition thereto, there shall be installed one shower or bathtub for each 10
dependent mobile homes. In no case shall there be less than one complete
bathroom and one extra toilet and wash basin for each sex.
§ 275-57. Showers.
Each shower stall in service buildings in mobile home parks accommodating
or providing space for dependent mobile homes shall have a connecting
dressing compartment, equipped with a door to insure privacy; size and
construction of shower stall and dressing compartment to be determined
§ 275-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-57
1:363
by the Township Supervisors regulations. Each shower stall shall have a
separate drain connection to the sewer system. No mats, grids or wooden
racks or cloth or other absorbent material will be permitted for public use
in the shower or on the floor of the dressing compartment.
§ 275-58. Toilets.
All toilets in service buildings in mobile home parks accommodating
dependent trailers shall be enclosed in private compartment, the size of
which shall be designated by the Board of Supervisors or the Department of
Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 275-59. Undesirable practices.
No animal washing, car washing or other waste creating practices shall be
carried on in any building, structure or other place not designated for such
purposes.
§ 275-60. Register of occupants.
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of
all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The register
shall contain the following information:
§ 275-61. Availability of register for inspection.
The park shall keep the register available for inspection, at all times, by law
enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The
register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following
the date of registration.
§ 275-62. Maintenance of facilities; damage.
The management of every mobile home park shall assume full responsibility
for maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary and safety
appliances on such park and shall promptly bring such action as is
necessary to prosecute or eject from said park any person or persons who
A. Name and address of each occupant.
B. The make, model and year of all automobiles and mobile homes.
C. The license number and owner of each mobile home and automobiles by
which it is towed.
D. The state issuing such license.
E. The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home.
F. Whether or not each mobile home is an independent or dependent
mobile home.
§ 275-57 WHITE CODE § 275-62
1:364
willfully or maliciously damage such appliances or any person or persons
who fail to comply with the regulations of this article.
§ 275-63. Sanitary system.
Every mobile home park shall have cesspools or septic tanks and disposal
fields located thereon which shall be of sufficient size and capacity to
adequately and completely dispose of all waste material from all mobile
homes parked in the park and from all service buildings located therein,
and there shall be watertight connections from the same to each parking
site with adequate traps in each of the same to prevent any escape of odors.
There shall be no overflow from any such cesspool, septic tank or disposal
field.
§ 275-64. Compliance with county and state regulations.
Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, all
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the County of
Indiana with respect to the existence of and operation of mobile homes and
mobile home parks with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and within the
County of Indiana are deemed to be regulations and requirements of this
article and are incorporated herein by reference and specifically made a
part hereof.
§ 275-65. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable, in
a summary proceeding commenced before any Magisterial District Judge,
to a fine or penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day on which a violation of this article shall
continue and each section of this article which shall have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 275-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:365

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 275-66. Modifications. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001]
§ 275-67. Amendments. [Amended 8-9-1989 by Ord. No. 907]
A. The Planning Commission may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The modification, if authorized, will represent the minimum deviation
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
D. The condition leading to the request for modification shall not have
been created by the applicant.
E. The Planning Commission shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modification.
F. The specific wording of the modification shall be written in ink upon the
recording tracing and signed and dated by the Chairman of the
Planning Commission, if the modification is granted. If the modification
is denied, the owner and/or developer may not again submit the same
application for modification for a least one year after such rejection.
A. The provisions of this chapter may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed or repealed in accordance with the following
procedure and with the current regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
B. A proposal for an amendment may be initiated in any of the following
ways:
(1) A request of the Planning Commission by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) A proposal by the Planning Commission.
(3) A petition presented to the Planning Commission by a property
owner in the municipality or by a prospective owner who has
entered into an agreement to purchase property in the
municipality.
§ 275-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-67
1:367
§ 275-68. Unlawful recording and sale of lots.
C. Procedures for consideration.
(1) Upon receiving a request or petition for an amendment or upon
making a proposal, the Planning Commission shall prepare a report
on the proposal with a copy sent to the Board of Supervisors, who
shall schedule a public hearing to consider the proposed
amendment.
(2) The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
local circulation at least once in each of two consecutive weeks, the
first notice appearing not more than 30 days and the second notice
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. The
notice shall indicate the date, time and place of the hearing, a
synopsis of the amendment, and the place within the Township
where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or
examined.
(3) When the Board of Supervisors proposes an amendment, it shall
allow the Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing to
review and make recommendations on the proposed amendment.
Additionally, regardless of who prepared the amendment, at least
30 days prior to the public hearing the proposed amendment shall
be submitted to the County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
(4) The Board of Supervisors shall hold the public hearing and shall
vote approval or disapproval within 90 days after conclusion of the
public hearing. If approved, within 30 days after adoption, the
Board of Supervisors shall forward a certified copy of the
amendment to the County Planning Commission.
(5) If a proposed amendment is substantially changed after public
hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall hold an additional public
hearing before voting for or against adoption.
(6) If a proposed amendment is changed after public hearing, the
Board of Supervisors shall hold an additional public hearing before
voting for or against adoption.
(7) Appeal from decisions of the Board of Supervisors on amendments
shall be to the County Court of Common Pleas.
(8) A proposed amendment, once finally denied, may not again be
considered for adoption in its original form for at least one year
after such denial unless new circumstances, such as a major
revision in the proposed text, would warrant such reconsideration.
A. No plan of a subdivision or land development proposed for White
Township shall be recorded in the Indiana County Recorder of Deeds
§ 275-67 WHITE CODE § 275-68
1:368
§ 275-69. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which being the owner or
agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, who lays out or
subdivides any lot, tract or parcel of land, constructs, opens or dedicates
any street, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main or other
improvement for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who sells, transfers or
agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or
land development whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such
subdivision or land development, or erects any building thereon, without a
final plat having been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and without having recorded the plan as provided herein, shall be
guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction thereof
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the governing body, such
person or member of such partnership or the officers of such corporation, or
the agent or any of them responsible for such violation shall pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. Each lot or parcel
within a subdivision on which a violation is found may be considered a
separate offense. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over
to the municipality. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties.
§ 275-70. Enforcement.71
office unless or until that plan shall bear the certified approval of the
Planning Commission.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade or otherwise convey or
offer to sell, trade or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part
of or in conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or
land development unless and until said plan, plat or replat shall have
been first recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer duly appointed. He may be reimbursed at the
discretion of the Board and may hold other appointive but not elective
positions in the Township.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review proposals for subdivision
and land development plans and submit them with recommendations to
the Planning Commission for action in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; shall enter upon, at his discretion,
subdivision and land development plans in the process of construction
to evaluate compliance with the terms of approved plans; shall point out
to the developer discrepancies in the development and demand
remedial action to guarantee compliance within 30 days of noting the
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-70
1:369
§ 275-71. Fees. [Amended 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1001; 4-12-2006
by Ord. No. 1018]
§ 275-72. Injunctive and other proceedings.
Notwithstanding the imposition of any penalties hereunder, the Township
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to require compliance
with or to enjoin violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
administrative orders or determinations made pursuant to this chapter.
discrepancy; and shall otherwise act as the Township's agent in the
enforcement of this chapter.
C. No developer, owner or agent or employee of them shall deny entrance
of the Code Enforcement Officer to any subdivision or planned
development in his official capacity of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Fees for subdivision plans and/or land development plans shall be
established by the White Township Board of Supervisors. Such
administrative, filing, review, and inspection fees may be separate for
various alternative forms of subdivision and/or land development.
Review fees shall include the review of subdivision plans, land
development site plans, mobile home park plans and stormwater
management plans. Fees may also include the field inspection of such
plats, plans or site plans or their final inspection. The fees charged shall
be in accordance with § 503(1), 509 and 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. Fees for the review and administrative
processing of subdivision and land development plans will be charged
at the time of application. These fees may be amended from time to time
by resolution of the White Township Board of Supervisors.
B. The applicant shall reimburse the Township of White for the reasonable
and necessary charges by the Township's professional consultants or
engineers for review and report thereon to the municipality, for the
inspection of improvements, and/or for administrative expenses. Such
reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule of fees established by
resolution of the White Township Board of Supervisors. Such schedule
of fees may be amended or changed from time to time by resolution of
the White Township Board of Supervisors. If, within 45 days of the date
of billing, the applicant disputes the amount of the expense, the
disputed matter shall be subject to the procedures established in
§ 503(1) and/or § 510(g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.72
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503 and 10510.
§ 275-70 WHITE CODE § 275-72
1:370
Chapter 282
TAXATION
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:371

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-26-1972 by Ord. No. WT-1-72]
§ 282-1. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession, or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership,
association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commission, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or
his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
through an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including,
however, periodic payments for sickness and disability or payments
arising under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts
and similar legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age
benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from
service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of
employment or payments commonly known as "public assistance," or
unemployment compensation payments made by any governmental
agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments made by
employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplement programs,
including, but not limited to, programs covering hospitalization,
sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment benefits,
strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 282-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-1
1:373
§ 282-2. Imposition of tax.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER — Person, public employee or private agency
designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White to
collect and administer the provisions of this article (hereinafter
referred to as "Officer").
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for
all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined
either on a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting
system used in such business, profession, or other activity, but without
deduction of taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association, or other entity
domiciled outside the Township of White.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association, or other entity
domiciled in the Township of White.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or
to pay a tax thereon.
B. In this article the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes of 1/2 of 1% is hereby imposed on
the following:
(1) Earned income received on or after January 1, 1973, by individual
residents of the Township of White and earned income earned on or
after January 1, 1973, by individual nonresidents of the Township of
White in the Township of White.
(2) Net profits earned on or after January 1, 1973, by residents of the
Township of White and net profits earned on or after January 1,
1973, in the Township of White by nonresidents of the Township of
White.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(1) herein shall relate to and be
imposed upon earned income paid by an employer or on his behalf to a
person who is employed by him. The tax levied under Subsection A(2)
herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business,
profession or other activity.
§ 282-1 WHITE CODE § 282-2
1:374
§ 282-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
C. The tax levied by this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned in the period beginning January 1
and ending December 31, 1973.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making any net profits shall, as the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of White elects:
(a) Pay to the Officer an annual payment of tax due on or before
April 15 of the succeeding year for the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year.
(b) On or before April 15 of the current year, make and file with
the Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current
year, and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments
the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at the time
of filing the declaration, and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Where the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White elects to
require the filing of a declaration and quarterly payments, a
taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after April 15 of the
current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Where the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White requires
a declaration of estimated net profits and quarterly payments of tax
due on such profits, every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of
the succeeding year, make and file with the Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing the
amount of net profits earned during the period beginning January 1
of the current year, and ending December 31 of the current year,
the total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid
thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay
to the Officer the balance of tax due or shall make demand for
refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in
lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax,
elect to make and file with the Officer on or before January 15, of
the succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove required.
§ 282-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-3
1:375
(4) The Officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer, who has filed the declaration hereinabove required,
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. At the election of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of White, every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year, and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions of § 282-4 of this
article relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax
due. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in
the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
of § 282-4 of this article relating to collection at source shall, as the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of White elects:
(a) Make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, an annual return setting forth the
aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding
by him during the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the current year, and such other information
as the Officer may require, and pay to the Officer the amount of
tax shown as due thereon on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year.
(b) Make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a quarterly return on or before April
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31
of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding year,
setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of
§ 282-3 WHITE CODE § 282-3
1:376
§ 282-4. Collection at source.
the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together
with such other information as the Officer may require. Every
taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof,
pay to the Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer within the Township of White who employs one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, other
than domestic servants, who has not previously registered, shall, within
15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Officer his name
and address and such other information as the Officer may require.
B. Every employer within the Township of White who employs one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, other
than domestic servants, shall deduct at the time of payment thereof the
tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his employee or
employees, and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31
of the current year, October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of
the succeeding year, file a return of taxes deducted on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, and pay to the Officer the amount
of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30
of the current year, and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Every employer, at his election, may pay to the Officer monthly the
amount of taxes withheld. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made
to the Officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the
month for which the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 15 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer on forms prescribed or approved by him:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current
year, and ending December 31 of the current year, and such other
information as may be required.
(2) A return for each employee employed during all or any part of the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, setting forth the employers name,
address and social security number, the amount of earned income
paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax
deducted, the amount of tax paid to the Officer, and such other
information as the Officer may require. Every employer shall
furnish a copy of the individual return to the employee for whom it
is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
§ 282-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-4
1:377
§ 282-5. Powers and duties of Officer.
§ 282-6. Compensation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation as determined by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White except that in no case
shall such compensation be based on a percentage or commission.
E. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person paying
the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Officer is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this article, and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce, rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article
or including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, and to prescribe
forms necessary for the administration of this article. No rule or
regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been approved
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of White. A copy of such
rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
C. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or supposed
employer, or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer or supposed employer,
and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and
required to give the Officer or to any agent designated by him the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
D. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Township of White as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
E. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Officer shall have the right to
appeal as provided by law.
§ 282-4 WHITE CODE § 282-7
1:378
§ 282-7. Audit.
The Income Tax Officer shall have at least an annual examination of his
books, accounts and records by a certified public accountant, a firm of
certified public accountants, a competent independent public accountant,
or a firm of independent public accountants appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. The reports of the audit shall be presented to the Board of
Supervisors. No further or additional audit shall be performed by elected or
appointed auditors.
§ 282-8. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 282-9. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Township of White for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer,
there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the Board of Supervisors
from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by
the Act of June 25, 1947 (P.L. 1145), as amended.
§ 282-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-10
1:379
§ 282-10. Payment under protest and refunds.
The Officer is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the
amount of tax claimed by the Township of White in any case where any
person disputed the validity or amount of the claim of the Township of
White. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that there has been overpayment to the Officer, the amount of
the overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid under protest.
§ 282-11. Exceptions.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
§ 282-12. Violations and penalties.
A. To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Township
of White to impose the tax herein provided for under the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
B. To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious,
educational or charitable purposes; to institutions or organizations not
organized or operated for private profit; or to trusts and foundations
established for any of the said purposes.
C. The income of any corporation. This subsection shall not be construed
to exempt any person who is an employer from the duty of collection the
tax at source from his employees and paying the amount collected to
the Officer under the provisions of § 282-4 of this article.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, any
person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent designated by
him to examine his books, records, and papers, and any person who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or
attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs to be imprisoned in the Indiana County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.73
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of § 282-5D of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs to be
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-10 WHITE CODE § 282-12
1:380
§ 282-13. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective January 1, 1973, and
shall be regarded in a continuing tax and will not be reenacted or
readvertised on an annual basis hereafter, although it will be effective on a
calendar year basis beginning January 1, 1973, and continuing thereafter.
imprisoned in the Indiana County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days.74
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-13
1:381

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 899]
§ 282-14. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of White
Township."
§ 282-15. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situate within the
Township of White, Indiana County, Pennsylvania, regardless of where the
documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where
the actual settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article
XI-D, "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 282-16. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meaning subscribed to them in this section, except where the contents
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 282-15 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 282-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-16
1:383
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the state of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township of White,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 282-16 WHITE CODE § 282-16
1:384
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 282-17. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate,
or perpetual leasehold.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason or the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, and exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 282-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-17
1:385
§ 282-18. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 282-19. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,75 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then the tax levied by the Township of White under
the authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the
tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate
and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Township of White; provided, however, that the Township of
White and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the
same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the "Local Tax Enabling Act."
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 282-17 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 to 6924.312.
§ 282-17 WHITE CODE § 282-19
1:386
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township of White is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
§ 282-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-19
1:387
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration agent or straw
party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth
that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the
benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttal presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Township of White reasonably determines that
the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 282-19 WHITE CODE § 282-19
1:388
§ 282-20. Documents evidencing transfer.
Except as otherwise provided in § 282-19, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 282-21. Acquired company.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agriculture or
open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of issuance or
transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are
devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.
§ 282-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-21
1:389
§ 282-22. Credits against tax.
§ 282-23. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 282-24. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 282-21 WHITE CODE § 282-24
1:390
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 282-25. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 282-26. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 282-27. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Township
of White based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township of White.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township of White all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the County, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 282-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-27
1:391
§ 282-28. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of White, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Indiana County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 282-29. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 282-30. Regulations.
The Township Manager of the Township of White is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 282-31. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on the 10th day of February 1988, and shall
be regarded as a continuing tax, and will not be reenacted or readvertised
on an annual basis hereafter unless otherwise required by law, although it
will be effective on a calendar year basis beginning on January 1, 1989, and
continuing thereafter.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 282-27 WHITE CODE § 282-31
1:392
ARTICLE III
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 2-24-1999 by Res. No. R-1-99]
§ 282-32. Adoption.
A. The Board of Supervisors hereby generally adopts the provisions of the
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights76 and hereby mandates that Pennsylvania
Municipal Service Company shall take all appropriate action to be in
compliance with the provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
when carrying out its duties as earned income and occupational
privilege tax collector for the Township of White.
B. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White does hereby adopt
the form of disclosure statement of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
attached hereto and made part hereof, as amended from time to time in
order to be in compliance with applicable law, providing an explanation
of taxpayer rights and the obligations of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of White.
C. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White hereby adopts and
establishes the Act 50 Administrative Appeals Procedures, attached
hereto and made a part hereof, as amended from time to time in order
to be in compliance with applicable law, providing for the right of
taxpayers to receive determinations on petitions pertaining to the
assessment, determination or refund of eligible taxes.
D. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White hereby appoints and
designates Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company as Hearing
Officer to adjudicate all taxpayer petitions pertaining to the
assessment, determination or refund of the eligible taxes.
E. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of White hereby appoints and
designates Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company as the Taxpayer
Rights Coordinator to act as a liaison between the taxpayer and the
local taxing authority in any disputes or with regards to any complaints.
F. The reimbursement basis fee of PAMS, as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees, (Intro. pg. xv), for the additional services to be rendered by it for
purposes of taking all appropriate actions to be in compliance with the
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, acting as Hearing Officer and acting as
Taxpayer Rights Coordinator is hereby approved.
G. All prior resolutions of the Township of White which are inconsistent
with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 282-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-32
1:393

ARTICLE IV
Attorney Fees For Delinquent Accounts
[Adopted 10-10-2003 by Ord. No. 989]
§ 282-33. Approval of statement of collection policies.
The Township hereby approves the statement of collection policies, for
delinquent unpaid taxes, user charges and other items covered by the
Municipal Claims Act.
§ 282-34. Approval of schedule of fees.
A. The Township hereby approves the following schedule of attorneys' fees
for services in connection with the collection of accounts, which is
hereby determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for the
services set forth below, all in accordance with the principles set forth
in Section 3(a.1) of the Municipal Claims Law, as added by Act No. 1 of
1996 (the "Act"):77
Legal Services Fee for Service
Initial review and sending first demand
letter
$50
File lien and mailing second demand letter $50
Prepare writ of scire facias $75
Obtain reissued writ $50
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P.
§ 237.1
$50
Prepare motion for alternate service $50
Prepare motion for summary judgment and
related judgment
$75
Prepare writ of execution $75
Attendance at sale; review schedule of
distribution and resolve distribution issues
$100
Services not covered above $175 per hour, hourly
rate equal to Solicitor's
regular charges to
Township
B. There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses of counsel in connection with each of these services, as
itemized in the applicable counsel bills which shall be deemed to be
part of the fees.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the
Township's claim in each account.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106(a.1).
§ 282-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-35
1:395
§ 282-35. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with Act No. 1:
§ 282-36. Related action.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered
to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate
to implement this article.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys' fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account
(the "account debtor").
B. If within 30 days after mailing the notice in accordance with Subsection
A, the certified mail to any account debtor is refused or unclaimed or
the return receipt is not received, then at least 10 days prior to the
assessing or imposing such attorneys' fees, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by first-class mail, a second notice to such account
debtor.
C. All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Township, or such other address as it may be
able to obtain from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of
Taxes.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorneys'
fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice, or within 10
days after the mailing of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorneys'
fees may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Township official designated as responsible for
collection matters.
§ 282-35 WHITE CODE § 282-36
1:396
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-28-2007 by Ord. No. 1027]
§ 282-37. Title.
This article and any supplements and amendments thereto shall be known
and may be cited as the "White Township Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 282-38. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the White Township Board of Supervisors to collect and administer the
tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Township of White.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of White, County of Indiana, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 282-39 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 282-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-38
1:397
TOWNSHIP OF WHITE — Township of White, County of Indiana,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 282-39. Levy of tax.
§ 282-40. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Township of White during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be
used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by
the Board of Supervisors from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include fire services, emergency
medical services, and/or police services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township of White.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
§ 282-38 WHITE CODE § 282-40
1:398
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine
Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the Township of
White and with the person's employer affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Township of White of less than $12,000 in the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. In the
event the Township of White utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall
provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that officer. The
exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
Township of White for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt
of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the
Township of White, except as required by Subsection B(2) of this
section, the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person
during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure
that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Township of White or the Collector, that the person
has received earned income and net profits from all sources within
the Township of White equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to
the person of earned income within the municipality in an amount
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer
shall withhold the local services tax from the person under
Subsection B(3) of this section.
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2) of this section, the employer shall withhold the tax
for the remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall
withhold from the person, for the first payroll period after receipt
of the notification under Subsection B(2) of this section, a lump sum
equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person
due to the exemption claimed by the person under this subsection,
plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
§ 282-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-40
1:399
§ 282-41. Duty of employers to collect.
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld
for other employees who are subject to the tax. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this
clause is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the person
shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the
Township of White may pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) of this section, it is the intent
of this subsection that employers shall not be responsible for
investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption
eligibility or exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township of White, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township of White or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Employer charged to collect tax. Each employer within the Township of
White, as well as those employers situated outside the Township of
White but who engage in business within the Township of White, is
hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his
employees engaged by him or performing for him within the political
subdivision and making a return and payment thereof to the Collector.
Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each
employee in his or her employ, whether said employee is paid by salary,
wage or commission and whether or not all such services are performed
within the Township of White.
B. Pro rata assessment of tax. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed
by the employer a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in
which the person is engaging in an occupation. The pro rata share of
the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the
number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar
year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall
round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the
nearest 1/100 of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a
payroll-period basis for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this
section. For purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean
§ 282-40 WHITE CODE § 282-41
1:400
§ 282-42. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 282-43. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
the aggregate annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and
the municipality.
C. Limit on collection. No person shall be subject to the payment of the
local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
D. Principal employer. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer
shall refrain from withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent
pay statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax
withheld and a statement from the employee that the pay statement is
from the employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify
other employers of a change in principal place of employment within
two weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be
provided on the form approved by DCED.
E. Maximum tax payment. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each
person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political
subdivisions within which a person maybe employed. The political
subdivision shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request
by the taxpayer.
F. Employer nonliability. No employer shall be held liable for failure to
withhold the tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to the
Township of White if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed. Further, an employer shall not be
liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the
amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the
provisions of § 282-40B of this article and this section and remits the
amount so withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Remitting tax. Employers shall be required to remit the local services
taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 282-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-43
1:401
and paid over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 282-44. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 282-45. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 282-46. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the Township of White
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 282-47. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 282-43 WHITE CODE § 282-47
1:402
§ 282-48. Suits for collection.
§ 282-49. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
A. Duties of Collector. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the
political subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and
receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer of self-employed person,
together with the date the tax was received.
B. Administration and enforcement by Collector. The Collector is hereby
charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is
hereby charged and empowered, subject to municipal approval, to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector
shall have the right to appeal consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights under Act 50 of 1998, locally identified as Chapter 282, Article
III, of the Code of the Township of White Township, adopted February
24, 1999, as amended.
C. Collector's right to examine records. The Collector is hereby authorized
to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed
and required to give the Collector the means, facilities and opportunity
for such examination.
A. Unpaid taxes. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or
unpaid 30 days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may
sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article,
together with interest and penalty.
B. Penalties and interest for nonpayment. If for any reason the tax is not
paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of such tax
shall be calculated beginning with the due date of the tax and a penalty
of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax or other appropriate
remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 282-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-49
1:403
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 282-50. Interpretation.
§ 282-51. Repealer.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation privilege
tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2005 and all
prior calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal services tax, plus
applicable penalties and interest, for calendar years 2006 and 2007, as the
same exist prior to this amendment.
§ 282-52. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all
calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
Township of White.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township of White to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 282-49 WHITE CODE § 282-52
1:404
Chapter 295
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 299.
§ 282-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-52
1:405

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 295-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 295-2. Adoption of traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 295-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 295-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, as amended,78 except that in this chapter the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Township Manager, or his designee, shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
78.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 295-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-4
1:407
§ 295-5. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township of White where, for a
period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate and no person shall move, remove, destroy
or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution, provided the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Township of White relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 295-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 295-4 WHITE CODE § 295-6
1:408
§ 295-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Township Secretary, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one
week in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Township Secretary, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two
weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be
held, but in any case where the state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 295-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-7
1:409

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 295-8. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Acorn Street (TR 850) From its intersection with SR
4032 to its terminus
25
Barclay Road SR 422 and LR 32044 35
Cambridge Street Located within the Monticello
plan of lots
25
Clairvaux Drive Cool Springs Road (T407) and
the White Township-Indiana
Borough boundary
25
Clairvaux Drive From Coolsprings Road to
Borough line
25
Clover Lane (TR 774) From its intersection with
Harvest Lane (TR 772) to its
intersection with Country Lane
(TR 751)
25
Coates Lane (TR 724) 25
Coates Lane (T-724) From Stutzman Road (T-721) to
Stonegate Road (T-820)
25
Concord Street (TR
672)
Mansfield Avenue and Heritage
Run Road
25
Concord Street Located within the Monticello
plan of lots
25
Courtland Road (TR
413)
From its intersection with
Shady Drive (TR 415) to its
intersection with Shady Drive
(TR 415)
25
Dawn Drive From Stonegate Road (T-820) to
cul-de-sac
25
Eagle Avenue Hamill Road and Wren Street 25
Easy Street (TR 766) 25
Easy Street (T-766) From Coates Lane (T-724) to
Coates Lane (T-724)
25
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:411
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Edgewood Avenue (TR
919)
White Township boundary line
to its terminus
25
Elkin Avenue Marion Road and North Avenue 25
Ferguson Road (TR
604)
SR 32036 northeasterly for a
distance of 2,000 feet
35
Fifth Avenue Knox Street and LR 63 25
Fifth Avenue Knox Street north to SR 63 35
Forest Ridge Road (TR
975)
From the White Township
boundary line, through its
intersection with Edgewood
Avenue (TR 919), to its
intersection with Edgewood
Avenue (TR 919)
25
Fulmer Road SR 4032 and terminus 25
Grandview Avenue
(TR623)
From its beginning at the White
Township-Indiana Borough
boundary line which is located
on the west side of an unnamed
alley between Fifth Street and
Sixth Street to its intersection
with Twolick Drive (TR556)
25
Hamill Road LR 63 and SR 286 30
Hamilton Street Located within the Monticello
plan of lots
25
Harvest Lane (TR
772)
From its intersection with
Barclay Road (TR 480) to its
intersection with Clover Lane
(TR 774)
25
Heritage Run Road
(TR 200)
Entire length 25
Home Farm Road
(T-900)
From Coates Lane (T-724) to
Indian Springs Road (SR 4005)
25
Huckleberry Road (TR
990)
From its intersection with SR
2023 (Lucerne Road) through
its full circular length
25
Jackson Street Located within the Monticello
plan of lots
25
Josephine Avenue Clinton Street and Lincoln
Avenue
25
§ 295-8 WHITE CODE § 295-8
1:412
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
LaVista Drive (TR765) 25
LaVista Drive (T-765) From Coates Lane (T-724) to
dead end
25
Laurel Street (TR561) Intersection with Warren Road
(TR3024) to its intersection with
High Street
25
Lilac Street SR 0286 (Oakland Avenue) and
SR 3024 (Warren Road)
30
Lilac Avenue Warren Road and Jackson Street 25
Lisa Drive Lilac Street (T-663) and SR 3024
(Warren Road)
25
Lower Twolick Drive
(TR 543)
From its intersection with South
Sixth Street (SR 0954) to its
intersection with Waterworks
Road (TR 878)
25
Lucerne Road South Sixth Street extension
westerly to Station 105+00
35
Lynn Way (T-963) From Stonegate Road (T-820) to
cul-de-sac
25
Mabon Drive (TR 920) From its intersection with SR
0110 to its terminus at the
Township boundary line
25
Maple Street (TR 371)
[Amended
11-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 1064]
Entire length 25
Marion Road (TR 550) From its intersection with
Lincoln Avenue (TR 545) to its
intersection with Old Route 119
(SR 4005)
25
Martin Road (TR 488) ST 32053 and TR 477 45
McHenry Road 35
McHenry Road (TR
552)
Left off ST 119 north, distance
of 1.08 miles
25
McKnight Road (TR
482)
SR 286 north to its intersection
with Warren Road
Meadowlark Road Hamill Road and Oriole Road 25
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:413
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Meadow Wood Road
(TR 414)
From its intersection with
Warren Road (SR 3024) to its
intersection with Courtland
Road (TR 413)
25
Melloney Lane (TR
717)
LR 32046 and Debbie Drive 25
Metz Road(TR 621
and TR 604)
South Sixth Street extension
easterly to Township line
45
Miller Street (TR 422) From its intersection with
Sunset Road (TR 421) to its
terminus
25
Morningside Drive
(T-811)
From Stutzman Road (T-721) to
cul-de-sac
25
Muller Road (TR 548) From its intersection with ST
110 a distance of .47 miles
northwesterly
25
North Sixth Street (TR
484)
Indiana Borough line north to
its intersection with North
Ninth Street
25
North Avenue (TR
891)
From its intersection with
Oakland Avenue (SR 0286) to its
intersection with High Street
25
Oriole Road From Meadowlark Street to
Hamill Road
25
Pinecrest Drive (TR
680) [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 1084]
25
Pond Street (TR 423) Entire length of road with its
intersection with Miller Avenue
on both ends
25
Risinger Road (TR
621) [Added
4-23-2014 by Ord.
No. 1057]
Entire length 25
Robin Street Whippoorwill Street and Eagle
Avenue
25
Rustic Lodge Road Indian Springs Road to SR 228 35
Rustic Lodge Road Indian Springs Road and ST 286 40
§ 295-8 WHITE CODE § 295-8
1:414
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Saddlebrook Drive From its intersection with
Harvest Lane (TR 772) to its
intersection with Saddlebrook
Drive
25
St. Clair Road (TR
486) [Added
7-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 1059]
From its intersection with
Fulton Run Road (SR 0954) to
the intersection with Martin
Road (TR 488)
35
Saltsburg Avenue Rustic Lodge Road and Rose
Street
30
Shady Drive (TR 415) From its intersection with
Meadow Wood Road (TR 414) to
its intersection with Meadow
Wood Road (TR 414)
25
Shelly Drive (TR 416) Ben Franklin Road and ST 422,
distance of .49 miles
25
Shelly Drive (TR 416) LR 32046 and Debbie Drive 25
South 13th Street SR 3043 (Rose Street) and
Township boundary line
25
Strawberry Lane (TR
773)
From its intersection with
Harvest Lane (TR 772) to its
intersection with Country Lane
(TR 751)
25
Stonegate Road
(T-820)
From Valley Road (T-812) to
Valley Road (T-812)
25
Stuntman Road (TR
721)
25
Stutzman Road
(T-721)
From Ben Avon Street (T-500) to
Winchester Drive (T-723)
25
Sue Anne Lane (T-965) From Valley Road (T-812) to
Valley Road (T-812)
25
Sunset Road (TR 421) From its intersection with
Marion Road to Sunset Drive
25
Valley Road (T-812) From Morningside Drive (T-811)
to cul-de-sac
25
Whippoorwill Street Wren Street and Oriole Road 25
White Farm Road (TR
481) [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 1084]
25
§ 295-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-8
1:415
§ 295-9. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures.
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
Wide Road From its intersection with SR 63
for a distance of 2,000 feet
25
Wide Road A point 2,000 feet north of Wida
Road/SR 0110 intersection to
Township line
35
Wide Road Its intersection with SR 0110 to
a point 1,000 feet north of ST
0110 intersection
25
Wilson Avenue (TR
748)
Intersection with North Avenue
(TR891) to its intersection with
Cambridge Street (T731)
25
Winchester Drive (TR
723)
25
Winchester Lane
(T-723)
From Stutzman Road (T-721) to
cul-de-sac
25
Windsor Avenue Located within the Monticello
plan of lots
25
Wren Street Whippoorwill Street and Eagle
Avenue
25
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 295-8 WHITE CODE § 295-10
1:416
§ 295-10. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
§ 295-11. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 295-12. Traffic signals at certain locations.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township
of White, except in the following locations, where the lower maximums,
as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Ben Franklin Road south and Shelly Drive Traffic light
Ben Franklin Road south and Route 422 West Traffic light
Ben Franklin Road south and Townfair Centre
Drive 1
Traffic light
§ 295-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-12
1:417
§ 295-13. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 295-14. One-way streets established.
Location Type of Signal
Ben Franklin Road south and Townfair Centre
Drive 2
Traffic light
Ben Franklin Road south and Warren Road Traffic light
Indian Springs Road and Rustic Lodge Traffic light
Indian Springs Road and South Sixth Street Traffic light
Intersection of US Highway Route 119 and L.R.
32046
Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Indian Springs Road Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Indiana Mall Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Plaza Drive Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Regency Mall Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Rustic Lodge Road Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Trader Horn Access Drive Traffic light
Oakland Avenue and Warren Road Traffic light
Philadelphia Street and Shelly Drive Traffic light
Route 286 and Trader Horn Traffic light
Route 286 and 422 Bypass Traffic light
School signals Traffic light
Warren Road and Lilac Street Traffic light
Wayne Avenue and Indian Springs Road Traffic light
Wayne Avenue and Hospital Road Traffic light
Wayne Avenue and Old Rt. 119 South Traffic light
Wayne Avenue and Rose Street Traffic light
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 295-12 WHITE CODE § 295-14
1:418
§ 295-15. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 295-16. Right turns prohibited at certain intersections.
§ 295-17. U-turn prohibited at certain locations.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make
Turn Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable To
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a left turn, at any
time stated, both right turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not To Make Right
Turn Into or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
§ 295-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-17
1:419
§ 295-18. No passing zones established.
§ 295-19. Through highways established.
§ 295-20. Stop intersections established.
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by §§ 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway
until he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the
law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 295-19) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
§ 295-17 WHITE CODE § 295-20
1:420
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Acorn Street (TR 850) West Point Circle (TR
851)
North and south
(three-way)
Andrew Circle Debbie Drive
Ben Avon Street Orchard Street South
Ben Avon Street Plum Street Both
Bradley Court Debbie Drive
Cambridge Street Lilac Avenue West
Carter Avenue (TR
388)
South Second Street (TR
372)
Four-way
Center Street Fifth Avenue Northwest
Center Street Fourth Avenue Northwest
Center Street Fourth Avenue Southeast
Chevy Chase
Clinton Streets Fifth Avenue Southeast
Coates Lane Winchester Road East and west
Coates Lane Stuntman Road Northwesterly
Concord Street (TR
672)
Heritage Run Road (TR
200)
Northerly
Concord Street Windsor Avenue Southwester
Concord Street Windsor Avenue West
Concord Street Windsor Avenue Westerly
Concord Street Mansfield Avenue Easterly
Concord Street Mansfield Avenue Northeast, threeway
Day Drive Lazor Street Both
Day Drive Hampton Court
Debbie Drive (TR 716) Bradley Court North and south
Easy Street Coates Lane Southeaster
Elkin Avenue Lincoln Avenue Easter
Evergreen Drive (TR
662)
Lockard Street (TR 661) Three-way
Fairview Avenue Center Street Northeast
Fairview Avenue Center Street Southwest
§ 295-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-20
1:421
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Fairview Avenue Knox Street Southwest
Fifth Avenue Center Street Southwest
Fifth Avenue Spring Street Four-way
Fifth Street Maple Street North and south
Fifth Street Grandview Avenue Four-way
Fourth Street Maple Street South
Fourth Street (TR
388)
Grandview Avenue Four-way
Getty Avenue (TR 559)
[Added 5-14-2014
by Ord. No. 1058]
Laurel Street (TR 561) Four-way
Getty Avenue Rose Street Northeast
Gompers Avenue Rose Street East
Grandview Avenue Fifth Street Four-way
Grandview Avenue
(TR 623)
Fourth Street Four-way
Hamilton Street Mansfield Avenue Three-way
Hamilton Street Mansfield Avenue East
Hancock Circle Mansfield Avenue Four-way
Heritage Run Road
(TR 200)
Concord Street (TR 672) Both
Heritage Run Road
(TR 200)
Eastwood Court (TR 201) Three-way
Horseshoe Drive (TR
206) [Added
1-8-2014 by Res.
No. R-2-14]
Warren Road (SR 3024) East
Jackson Street Lilac Avenue West
Jackson Street Mansfield Avenue East
Jackson Street Mansfield Avenue Northeast, threeway
Jackson Street Windsor Avenue Southwest
Josephine Avenue Center Street Northeast
Josephine Avenue Center Street Southwest
Josephine Avenue Clinton Street Southwest
Josephine Avenue Lincoln Avenue Northeast
Josephine Avenue Spring Street Four-way
§ 295-20 WHITE CODE § 295-20
1:422
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Knox Street Fifth Avenue Southeast
La Vista Drive Coates Lane South
Lafayette Circle Mansfield Avenue North
Laurel Street
[Amended
5-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 1058]
Getty Avenue Four-way
Laurel Street Gompers Avenue North
Laurel Street (TR561) High Street North and west
Laurel Street Saltsburg Avenue Southeast
Laurel Street SR 286 Northwest
Laurel Street Warren Road Southwest
Lincoln Avenue Center Street Northeast
Lincoln Avenue Center Street Southwest
Lincoln Avenue Fairview Avenue Northeast
Longview Avenue (TR
555)
Pleasant Hill Street (TR
551)
Northeast
Lower Twolick Drive
(TR 543)
Waterworks Road (TR
878)
South
Madison Circle Hancock Circle Four-way
Mansfield Avenue Concord Street Both, three-way
Mansfield Avenue Hamilton Street Three-way
Mansfield Avenue Hancock Circle Four-way
Mansfield Avenue Jackson Street Both, three-way
Mansfield Avenue Lafayette Circle East
Mansfield Avenue Madison Circle Four-way
Mansfield Avenue Quincy Circle Both, three-way
Marion Road (TR 554) Sunset Drive (TR 421) Both
Marion Road Sunset Drive Both
McNally Circle Mansfield Avenue
Melloney Lane Debbie Drive East and west
Melloney Lane Perry Street East and west
Morningside Drive
(TR 811)
Valley Road (TR 812) Both
Nicola Lane Debbie Drive
North Street Warren Road Southeast
§ 295-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-20
1:423
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Oak Street (TR 417) First Street East and west
Orchard Street Ben Avon Street East
Pine Street Getty Avenue Northwest
Pine Street Getty Avenue South
Pine Street Gompers Avenue North
Pine Street Saltsburg Avenue Southeasterly
Pleasant View Avenue
(TR 553)
Pleasant Hill Street (TR
551)
Both
Plum Street Ben Avon Street East
Quincy Circle Mansfield Avenue
Quincy Circle Mansfield Avenue South, three-way
Rose Street Saltsburg Avenue Southeast
Rose Street SR 286 Northwest
Saddlebrook Drive T-intersection of
Saddlebrook Drive
West
Second Street Grandview Avenue North
Second Street Maple Street North and south
Shelly Drive Debbie Drive West
Shelly Drive Perry Street East and west
Shryock Avenue (TR
891)
First Street West
South Second Street
(TR 372)
Carter Avenue (TR 388) Four-way
Spring Street Fairview Avenue Northwest
Spring Street Fifth Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Spring Street Josephine Avenue Four-way
Stonegate Road (TR
820)
Morningside Drive in the
Brookwood Estates plan
of lots
Sunset Drive (TR 421) Marion Road (TR 554) East
Third Street Grandview Avenue North
Third Street Maple Street North and south
Thirteenth Street
Extension (TR 601)
At the entrance to Indiana
University of PA
Maintenance Building
North
§ 295-20 WHITE CODE § 295-20
1:424
§ 295-21. Yield intersections established.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Town View Drive (TR
743)
South Second Street in
Oak Hill Estates
Valley Road (TR 812) Morningside Drive (TR
811)
Both
Valley Road (TR 812) Morningside Drive in the
Brookwood Estates plan
of lots
West
Waterworks Road (TR
878)
Lower Twolick Drive (TR
543)
West
Weatherly Way Morningside Drive (TR
811)
North
Weatherly Way Valley Road (TR 812) South
Wilson Avenue Cambridge Street Northwest
Wilson Avenue Laurel Street Southeast and
northwest
Wilson Avenue (TR
748)
Laurel Street (TR 561) Four-way
Wilson Avenue (TR
748)
North Avenue (TR 891) Three-way
Wilson Avenue North Street Southeast
Winchester Road Stuntman Road South
Windsor Avenue Jackson Street Northeast
Windsor Avenue Lilac Street Northeast
Wren Street (TR 912)
[Added 1-8-2014 by
Res. No. R-2-14]
Whippoorwill Street (TR
388) and Mary Ellens
Place (TR 979)
West
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 295-19) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
§ 295-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-21
1:425
Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 295-21 WHITE CODE § 295-21
1:426
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 295-22. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:79
Road Number Road Name
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons)
T-214 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Crystal Drive 10
T-215 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Sterling Hills Drive 10
T-216 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Angie Lane 10
T-217 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Amber Circle 10
T-221 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Bennett Drive 10
T-222 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Alex Drive 10
T-362 Hill Top Road 10
T-371 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Maple Street 10
T-372 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
South Second Street 10
T-383 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
South Third Street 10
79.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 270, Article III, Hauling; Excess Maintenance Agreement.
§ 295-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-22
1:427
Road Number Road Name
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons)
T-388 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Carter Avenue (east and west
portions)
10
T-407 Coolsprings Road 10
T-411 Ben Franklin Road 10
T-412 Fleming Road 10
T-414 Meadowood Street 10
T-415 Shady Drive 10
T-416 Shelly Drive from SR 4032
(Philadelphia Street) to SR
4422 (N. Ben Franklin Road)
10
T-425 White Street 10
T-426 Claypoole Street 10
T-427 View Street 10
T-428 Shearer Street 10
T-430 Moretti Road 10
T-431 Kauffman Road 10
T-438 Bash Road 10
T-472 Fyock Road 10
T-473 Brown Road 10
T-474 Geesey Road 10
T-475 Fenton Road 10
T-480 Barclay Road 10
T-481 White Farm Road 10
T-486 St. Clair Road 10
T-488 Martin Road 10
T-543 Lower Twolick Road 10
T-547 Thompson Road 10
T-548 Wida Road 10
T-549 Muller Road 10
T-552 McHenry Road 10
T-554 Hamill Road 10
T-556 Twolick Road 10
T-558 Ramsey Run Road 10
T-561 Laurel Street 10
§ 295-22 WHITE CODE § 295-22
1:428
Road Number Road Name
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons)
T-600 Johnson Road 10
T-604 Ferguson Road 10
T-621 Risinger Road 10
T-623 Gandview Avenue 10
T-658 Ellenberger Road 10
T-663 Lilac Street 10
T-711 Geesey Road 10
T-712 Deerfield Lane 10
T-713 Mary Ann Hill Road 10
T-714 Zehner Road 10
T-715 Metz Road 10
T-721 Stutzman Road 10
T-724 Coates Lane 10
T-725 Campbell Lane 10
T-730 Mansfield Avenue 10
T-731 Cambridge Street 10
T-740 Raymond Drive 10
T-771 Clairvaux Drive 10
T-801 Mill Run Drive 10
T-811 Morningside Drive 10
T-812 Valley Road 10
T-813 Rustic Lodge Road 10
T-840 Saltsburg Avenue 10
T-842 Mclain Road 10
T-850 [Added
12-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 1077]
Acorn Street 10
T-878 Waterworks Road 10
T-891 North Avenue 10
T-900 Home Farm Road 10
T-920 Mabon Drive 10
T-940 Windt Ridge Road 10
T-941 Plaza Road 10
T-943 Beck Road 10
§ 295-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-22
1:429
§ 295-23. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 295-24. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges.
§ 295-25. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
Road Number Road Name
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons)
T-958 Ober Road 10
T-980 Lawer-Henck Road 10
T-983 Sexton Road 10
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g) through (l) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150
plus $ 150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000
pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g) through (l) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and
costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g) through (l) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 and not more than $100 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets,
§ 295-22 WHITE CODE § 295-25
1:430
provided nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or
from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
Street Between
Fairman Avenue Entire length
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 295-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-25
1:431

ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 295-26. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 295-27. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Ben Avon Street (TR 500)
[Amended 10-22-2014
by Ord. No. 1063]
Both From its intersection with Stutzman
Road (TR 721) to its terminus at the
cul-de-sac
Ben Avon Street (TR 500) West Stuntman Road distance of 375 feet
northerly to the intersection with Ben
Avon Street with Plum Street
Carter Avenue (TR 388)
[Added 10-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 1063]
Both From its intersection with South Sixth
Street (SR 0954) 750 feet east to the
dead end
Christy Park Drive (TR
863)
Both From its intersection with SR 4032,
Philadelphia Street to and including
the cul-de-sac at the roads terminus
Fairview Avenue West Its intersection with Knox Street to its
intersection with Clinton Street
Getty Avenue (TR 559) Both From its intersection at Laurel Street
to its intersection with Vine Street a
distance of 700 feet
Grandview Avenue (TR
623)
Both From the White Township-Indiana
Borough boundary line to its
intersection with Twolick Drive (TR
556)
Grandview Avenue South Sixth Street west to the intersection of
Third Street
Hospital Road (SR 4017) Both From the northern intersection with
Wayne Avenue (SR 4005) to the
southern intersection with Wayne
Avenue (SR 4005)
Knox Street North Its intersection with Fifth Avenue to
the western terminal of said street
§ 295-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-27
1:433
Street Side Between
Knox Street South Its intersection with Fifth Avenue to
the westerly terminal point of said
street
Lilac Street (TR 663)
[Added 7-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 1060]
East From its intersection with Oakland
Avenue (SR 0286) in a northerly
direction to the intersection of Warren
Road (SR 3024)
Lisa Drive (TR 733) South
Maple Street Both Beginning at the joint Township-
Borough line to its intersection with
Fifth Street
Maple Street (TR371)
[Added 5-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 1078]
South Between Fourth Street and Fifth
Street
North Fifth Street (SR
4007)
East From the intersection with the Indiana
Borough line (intersection of North
Avenue) in a northerly direction to the
intersection of McGregor Street
(T-536)
North Ninth Street (SR
32053)
Both Indiana Borough line to the
intersection with North Sixth Street
North Sixth Street (TR
484)
Both Indiana Borough line to the
intersection with North Ninth Street
Plaza Road Both Its intersection with Oakland Avenue a
distance of 1,400 feet
Sexton Road, TR No. 983 West From its intersection with SR 0286, a
distance of 1,000 feet in a southerly
direction along Sexton Road
Shelly Drive Both Intersection with Ben Franklin Road
North to SR 422
South Fifth Street (TR
385)
Both From Maple Street (TR 371) to
Grandview Avenue (TR 623)
SR 32046 North Station 49+00 to Station 54+00
SR 228 North From its intersection with Lilac Street
for a distance of 300 feet northeasterly
Stutzman Road (TR 721) Both Intersection with ST 68 a distance of
700 feet easterly
Townview Drive, TR 743 Both From its beginning at the boundary
line of White Township and Indiana
Borough to its intersection with Vista
Drive (TR 742), a distance of 200 feet
along Townview Drive
§ 295-27 WHITE CODE § 295-28
1:434
§ 295-28. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours.
A. Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Clinton
Street
Both Intersection with
Fairview Avenue
to its intersection
with Fifth Avenue
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
Fairman
Avenue
Both Intersection with
North Sixth
Street to its
intersection with
North Ninth
Street
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
Fairview
Avenue
East Intersection with
Knox Street to its
intersection with
Spring Street
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
Fairview
Avenue
West Its intersection
with Clinton
Street to its
intersection with
Spring Street
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
Josephine
Avenue
Both Intersection with
Knox Street to its
intersection with
Spring Street
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
Township
Road No.
681 (aka
Kathryn
Street
Both Intersection with
State Route 0954
(North Ninth
Street) to its
terminus at a culde-
sac
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
White Farm
Road
Both Intersection with
North Sixth
Street for a
distance of 1,000
feet in a northerly
direction
Jan. 2 to June
15; Sept. 1 to
Dec. 24; Monday
through Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
p.m.
B. Upon request, the Township may authorize and issue special purpose
parking permits to affected property owners or their assigns for a term
not to exceed a seven-day period. Said permit, when properly posted on
the vehicle, shall permit parking in the "no parking" areas designated in
§ 295-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-28
1:435
§ 295-29. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 295-30. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 295-31. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose or
Vehicle
(Reserved)
§ 295-32. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 295-33. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
Subsection A above. The Township may rescind said permit, without
notice and for just cause, at the sole discretion of the Township.
§ 295-28 WHITE CODE § 295-33
1:436
§ 295-34. Parking prohibited on portions of certain highways
during street sweeping hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked, at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any of
the following portions of the highways of the Township of White on the days
hereby respectively designated for street sweeping purposes:
Street Between Day
(Reserved)
§ 295-34.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-22-2014 by Ord. No.
1063]
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically stated in this Code for a parking
violation, violation of any parking restriction shall result in a parking
violation fine being issued in the amount of $15 which is immediately
due and shall be paid at the White Township Municipal offices within
five days of the violation date. If not paid within the five-day period, the
Township shall file for a summary proceeding, as set forth in Subsection
B hereof.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection A above shall
upon summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before
any magistrate magisterial district judge be fined, upon conviction, in
an amount of not less than $25 nor more than $300, plus costs of
prosecution, or in default thereof be sentenced and committed to the
Indiana County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days and be directed
to pay the cost of the prosecution.
§ 295-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-34.1
1:437

ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 295-35. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle Code,
and gives authority to the Township of White to remove and impound those
vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking
regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined
by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere
with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 295-36. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township of White shall have authority to remove and impound, or
to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or
otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 295-35 of this article, provided no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 295-37. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township of White parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 295-38. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance
in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board of
Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under
this article, and, when the schedule is approved by Board of Supervisors,
those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no
different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any
person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any
approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall delete from its list
§ 295-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-38
1:439
of approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge
in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 295-39. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 295-40. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 295-41. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township of White shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 295-42. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 295-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq., (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 295-44. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of The Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as
amended).
§ 295-38 WHITE CODE § 295-44
1:440
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 295-45. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 295-47 of
this article, the Township Manager, or his designee, in his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency shall be
given by the Township of White through radio, newspaper or other available
media, and information on the termination of the emergency may be given
by use of the same media.
§ 295-46. Restrictions on snow emergency routes.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 295-47. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 295-48. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 295-47 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 295-45 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 295-45 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 295-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-48
1:441

ARTICLE VII
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 295-49. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Township of White where official traffic-control signals
are installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 295-50 of this article, shall obey the
directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 295-50. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 295-51. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway;
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Location
(Reserved)
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone. Any
pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of
this article.
§ 295-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-51
1:443

ARTICLE VIII
Recreational Vehicle Regulations
§ 295-52. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGINE-POWERED VEHICLES — All-wheeled vehicles driven by belt,
chain or direct drive, powered by internal combustion engines, including,
but not limited to, motorcycles, motor bikes, trail bikes, motor scooters,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, etc., but shall not be construed to include
properly licensed motor vehicles operated upon the public highways,
streets, roads and private driveways in accordance with law, agricultural
equipment used in the course of farming or commercial equipment being
properly used in the trade or business of the owner or by such owner's
employees or agents.
OFFICER — Any uniformed policeman authorized to act within the
Township of White, any game warden, any constable and any officer
appointed by the Board of Supervisors to act hereunder.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — All houses, apartments, mobile homes and other
permanent structures occupied by one or more persons as their primary
home and residence; but shall not include the temporary vacation housing
or any motor-powered vehicle operated upon the land of such owner.
§ 295-53. Unregistered engine-powered vehicles.
A. On and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate, cause to be operated or to participate in the
operation of any engine-powered vehicle upon the public roads, streets,
highways, sidewalks, alleys, Township-owned property, Township and
recreational parks and private residences other than that of the
operator (unless the operator has first secured written permission from
the owner of said private residence) situate within the Township of
White.
B. On and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate, cause to be operated or to participate in the
operation of any engine-powered vehicle between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. prevailing time, within a distance of 1/2 mile of any
private residence situate in the Township of White without first
obtaining the prior written consent of the owner or owners of such
private residence or residences, whether for pleasure or profit.
C. Subsections A and B of this section shall not be construed to prohibit
the use of engine-powered vehicles in other areas of the Township when
such use is either incidental to demonstration for sale by a commercial
vendor; incidental to moving or transporting the vehicles to or from a
private residence and confined to the operator's private residence; or
attendant to operation in a public park where such use is expressly
§ 295-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-53
1:445
§ 295-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
authorized or permitted. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
to prohibit the use of power-mowers, garden tractors, snow blowers,
or similar instruments or vehicles when such use is incidental to home,
lawn or garden work or maintenance.
§ 295-53 WHITE CODE § 295-54
1:446
Chapter 299
VEHICLES, JUNKED
[The Junked Vehicles Ordinance of the Township of White was under
review at the time of completion of this volume. Upon adoption by
the Board of Supervisors, the Junked Vehicles Ordinance will be
inserted here.]
Chapter 311
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment permits — See Ch. 92.
Construction — See Ch. 120.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
275.
§ 295-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-54
1:447

ARTICLE I
Indiana County Municipal Services Authority
[Adopted 11-10-1976 by Ord. No. 849]
§ 311-1. Connection required. [Amended 12-23-1987 by Ord. No.
898]
Every owner of property in the Township of White whose property abuts
upon any portion of the public water supply and distribution system to be
constructed by the Indiana County Municipal Services Authority (herein
called the "Authority") in the near future shall pay the tap fee and purchase
a tap permit at their own costs for any house, building or other structure
located on said property with the aforementioned public water system, but
shall not be required to pay any other fee or assessment except payment
for water actually used which shall be payable at the prevailing rates of the
Authority.
§ 311-2. Notice; granting of extension.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or the authorized
representative of the Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
each structure covered hereunder, in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to connect the same to said public water
system, as herein provided, within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provisions of this article as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the
Township Secretary or Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made on
a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary or the Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which
the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly water
bill immediately even though actual connection to the public water system
will not be accomplished until some later date within the said six-month
extension period.
§ 311-3. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation not presently connected to the public water
system shall make or cause to be made any connection with the public water
system until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
A. He shall make application to the Township Secretary or the Authority as
the Township's agent, upon a permanent form to be formulated and
supplied by the Township Secretary or the Authority, for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public water system. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located on his property.
§ 311-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-3
1:449
§ 311-4. Construction specifications.
The construction of all connections between the building and the public
water system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its water system rules and
regulations, as the same may be from time to time published and amended,
copies of which will, upon adoption of the Authority, be maintained on file
with the Township Secretary.
§ 311-5. Failure to comply.
If the owner or owners of any houses, buildings or structures in the
Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provision of this article
or the written notice as prescribed in § 311-2 hereof, the Township or the
Authority may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor and
furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such
owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof on all charges and
expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner
or owners for the use of the Township or the Authority as debts are by law
collectible, or the Township or the Authority may, by its proper officer, file a
municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by law.
§ 311-6. Violations and penalties.80
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
B. He shall pay the required tap connection fee as provided under the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the
connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of the
property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all water
system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over, or in any way
concealed, until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-3 WHITE CODE § 311-6
1:450
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 311-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-6
1:451

ARTICLE II
1992 PennVest Loan - White Township/Center Township Water
Renovation Project VI
[Adopted 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 311-7. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of White (herein called the
"Township") which property has now or hereafter shall have a house,
building or other structure located thereon, which house, building or other
structure presently uses or in the future will use water for human
consumption and which property abuts and which house, building or other
structure is located within 150 feet of any portion of the public water supply
and distribution system (1992 PennVest Loan — White Township/Center
Township, Water Renovation Project VI, as now approved or hereafter
incorporated or added to said project) to be constructed on East Pike (SR
1002), Airport Road (SR 1006), Warren Road (SR 3024), Geesey Road and
Stormer Road (SR 1001), Hood School Road (SR 1008), Greendale Drive
(TR 435), Apache Drive (TR 857), Raymond Drive (TR 740), Brown Road (TR
743) and Barclay Road (TR 480) and such other state and Township roads as
are now approved or hereafter incorporated or added to said project in the
Township by the Indiana County Municipal Services Authority (hereinafter
called the "Authority") in the near future shall provide a connection at
the owner's cost to the house, building or other structure located on the
property with the aforementioned public water system.
§ 311-8. Compliance.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property to which the provisions of
§ 311-7 of this article apply to fail to provide the means of connection to the
public water system by way of a service line and a tap to the Authority's
distribution system and/or to fail to comply with the provisions of this
article, including the payment of the tap fee and the monthly service fee to
the Authority.
§ 311-9. Notice; granting of extension.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or the authorized
representative of the Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
each structure covered hereunder, in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to connect the same to said public water
system, as herein provided, within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provisions of this section as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the
Township Secretary or Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made on
a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary or the Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which
the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly water
§ 311-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-9
1:453
bill immediately, even though actual connection to the public water system
will not be accomplished until some later date within the said six-month
extension period.
§ 311-10. Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
public water system to connect to or permit the connection by any other
person, firm or corporation of any other source of water supply for human
consumption to the public water system.
§ 311-11. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation not presently connected to the public water
system shall make or cause to be made any connection with the public water
system until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
§ 311-12. Construction specifications.
The construction of all connections between the building and the public
water system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its water system rules and
regulations, as the same may be, from time to time, published and amended,
copies of which will, upon adoption of the Authority, be maintained on file
with the Township Secretary.
A. He shall make application to the Township Secretary or the Authority as
the Township's agent, upon a permanent form to be formulated and
supplied by the Township Secretary or the Authority, for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public water system. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located on his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection fee as provided under the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the
connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of the
property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all water
system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over, or in any way
concealed, until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
§ 311-9 WHITE CODE § 311-13
1:454
§ 311-13. Failure to comply.
If the owner or owners of any house, buildings or structures in the Township
shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article or
the written notice as prescribed in § 311-9 hereof, the Township or the
Authority may perform or cause to be performed such material as may
be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and
expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof on
all charges and expense incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected
from said owner or owners for the use of the Township or the Authority as
debts are by law collectible, or the Township or the Authority may, by its
proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises
as provided by law.
§ 311-14. Mobile homes.
If one or more mobile homes, located in a mobile home park, are subject to
the provisions of this article by reason of being located within 150 feet of
the public water system of the Authority, all mobile homes in such mobile
home park shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of
whether or not located within 150 fee of the public water system of the
Authority.
§ 311-15. Violations and penalties.81
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make the proper connection with the time specified,
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 311-9 hereof, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-15
1:455

ARTICLE III
Water Renovation Project VII
[Adopted 4-26-1995 by Ord. No. 929]
§ 311-16. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of White (herein called the
"Township") which property has now or hereafter shall have a house,
building or other structure located thereon, which house, building or other
structure presently uses or in the future will use water for human
consumption and which property abuts and which house, buildings or other
structure is located within 150 feet of any portion of the public water supply
and distributions system (Water Renovation Project VII, as now approved
or hereafter incorporated or added to said project) to be constructed on a
portion of North Ben Franklin Road (T-411), a portion of Airport Road (LR
32054), a portion of Route 286 North (LR 54) and a portion of Campbell
Lane (T-725), all as depicted on Map A, which shall be attached hereto and
become a part hereof,82 and such other state and Township roads as are now
approved or hereafter incorporated or added to said project and approved
by the White Township Board of Supervisors in the Township by the Indiana
County Municipal Services Authority (hereinafter called the "Authority") in
the near future shall provide a connection at the owner's cost to the house,
building or other structure located on the property with the aforementioned
public water system.
§ 311-17. Compliance.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property to which the provisions of
§ 311-16 of this article apply to fail to provide the means of connection to
the public water system by way of a service line and a tap to the Authority's
distribution system and/or fall to comply with the provisions of this article,
including the payment of the tap fee and the monthly service fee to the
Authority.
§ 311-18. Notice; granting of extension.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or the authorized
representative of the Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
each structure covered hereinunder, in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to connect the same to said public water
system, as herein provided, within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provisions of this section as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the
Township Secretary or the Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made on
a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary or the Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which
82.Editor's Note: Map A is on file and available for review at the Township office.
§ 311-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-18
1:457
the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly water
bill immediately, even though actual connection to the public water system
will not be accomplished until some later date within the said six-month
extension period.
§ 311-19. Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
public water system to connect or permit the connection by any other
person, firm or corporation of any other source of water supply for human
consumption to the public water system.
§ 311-20. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation not presently connected to the public water
system shall make or cause to be made any connection with the public water
system until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
§ 311-21. Construction specifications.
The construction of all connections between the building and the public
water system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its water system rules and
regulations, as the same may be, from time to time, published and amended,
A. He shall make application to the Township Secretary or the Authority as
the Township's agent, upon a permanent form to be formulated and
supplied by the Township Secretary or the Authority, for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public water system. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located on his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection fee as provided under the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the
connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of the
property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all water
system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over or in any way
concealed until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
§ 311-18 WHITE CODE § 311-21
1:458
copies of which will, upon adoption of the Authority, be maintained on file
with the Township Secretary.
§ 311-22. Failure to comply.
If the owner or owners of any houses, buildings or structures in the
Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article
or the written notice as prescribed in § 311-18 hereof, the Township or
the Authority may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor
and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such
owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof on all charges and
expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner
or owners for the use of the Township or the Authority as debts are by law
collectable or the Township or the Authority may, by its proper officer, file a
municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by law.
§ 311-23. Mobile homes.
If one or more mobile homes, located in a mobile home park, are subject to
the provision of this article by reason of being located within 150 feet of the
public water system of the Authority, all mobile homes in such mobile home
park shall be subject to the provisions of this article regardless whether or
not located within 150 feet of the public water system of the Authority.
§ 311-24. Violations and penalties.83
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make the proper connection with the time specified,
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 311-18 hereof, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-24
1:459

ARTICLE IV
Indiana County Municipal Services Authority Water Renovation
Project VII
[Adopted 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 936]
§ 311-25. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of White (herein called the
"Township") which property has now or hereafter shall have a house,
building or other structure located thereon, which house, building or other
structure presently uses or in the future will use water for human
consumption and which property abuts and which house, building or other
structure is located within 150 feet of any portion of the public water supply
and distribution system (Indiana County Municipal Services Authority
Water Renovation Project VII as now approved or hereafter incorporated
or added to said project) to be constructed on Mary Ann Hill Road (TR
713), a portion of College Lodge Road (SR 4003), a portion of St. Clair
Road (TR 486) and a portion of Fulton Run Road (SR 0954) all as depicted
on Map A which shall be attached hereto and become a part hereof,84 and
such other state and Township roads as are now approved or hereafter
incorporated or added to said project and approved by the White Township
Board of Supervisors in the Township by the Indiana County Municipal
Services Authority (hereinafter called the "Authority") in the near future
shall provide a connection at the owner's cost to the house, building or other
structure located on the property with the aforementioned public water
system.
§ 311-26. Compliance.
In shall be unlawful for any owner of property to which the provisions of
§ 311-25 of this article apply to fail to provide the means of connection to
the public water system by way of a service line and a tap to the Authority's
distribution system and/or fail to comply with the provisions of this article,
including the payment of the tap fee and the monthly service fee to the
Authority.
§ 311-27. Notice; granting of extension.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or the authorized
representative of the Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
each structure covered hereinunder, in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to connect the same to said public water
system, as herein provided, within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provisions of this section, as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the
Township Secretary or Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made
84.Editor's Note: Map is on file and available for review at the Township office.
§ 311-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-27
1:461
on a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary or the Authority and
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which
the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly water
bill immediately, even though actual connection to the public water system
will not be accomplished until some later date within the said six-month
extension period.
§ 311-28. Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
public water system to connect to or permit the connection by any other
person, firm or corporation of any other source of water supply for human
consumption to the public water system.
§ 311-29. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation not presently connected to the public water
system shall make or cause to be made any connection with the public water
system until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
§ 311-30. Construction specifications.
The construction of all connections between the building and the public
water system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its water system rules and
A. He shall make application to the Township Secretary or the Authority as
the Township's agent, upon a permanent form to be formulated and
supplied by the Township Secretary or the Authority, for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public water system. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located on his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection fee as provided under the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the
connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of the
property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all water
system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over, or in any way
concealed, until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
§ 311-27 WHITE CODE § 311-30
1:462
regulations, as the same may be, from time to time, published and amended,
copies of which will, upon adoption of the Authority, be maintained on file
with the Township Secretary.
§ 311-31. Failure to comply.
If the owner or owners of any houses, buildings or structures in the
Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article
or the written notice as prescribed in § 311-27 hereof, the Township or
the Authority may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor
and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such
owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof on all charges and
expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner
or owners for the use of the Township or the Authority as debts are by law
collectable, or the Township or the Authority may, by its proper officer, file
a municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by law.
§ 311-32. Mobile homes.
If one or more mobile homes, located in a mobile home park, are subject to
the provision of this article by reason of being located within 150 feet of the
public water system of the Authority, all mobile homes in such mobile home
park shall be subject to the provisions of this article regardless of whether
or not located within 150 feet of the public water system of the Authority.
§ 311-33. Violations and penalties.85
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make the proper connection with the time specified,
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 311-27 hereof, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-33
1:463

ARTICLE V
Indiana County Municipal Services Authority Water Renovation
Project II
[Adopted 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 1029]
§ 311-34. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Township of White (herein called the
"Township") which property has now or hereafter shall have a house,
building or other structure located thereon, which house, building or other
structure presently uses or in the future will use water for human
consumption and which property abuts and which house, building or other
structure is located within 150 feet of any portion of the public water
supply and distribution system (to be constructed by the Indiana County
Municipal Service Authority, titled: Water Renovation II and depicted on
pages 1 through 14 and pages 34 through 39 of ICMSA Contract 1-2008),
and such other state and Township roads as are now approved or hereafter
incorporated or added to said project in the Township by the Indiana County
Municipal Services Authority (hereinafter called the "Authority") in the near
future shall provide a connection at the owner's cost to the house, building
or other structure located on the property with the aforementioned public
water system.
§ 311-35. Compliance.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property to which the provisions of
§ 311-34 of this article apply to fail to provide the means of connection to
the public water system by way of a service line and a tap to the Authority's
distribution system and/or to fail to comply with the provisions of this
article, including the payment of the tap fee and the monthly service fee to
the Authority.
§ 311-36. Notice; granting of extension.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or the authorized
representative of the Authority to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of
each structure covered hereunder, in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to connect the same to said public water
system, as herein provided, within 90 days after receipt of such notice.
Any owner, lessee or occupier of a structure who cannot comply with the
provision of this section as to connection within the ninety-day period
stipulated above due to causes beyond his control shall apply to the
Township Secretary or Authority within said ninety-day period for a time
extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be made on
a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary or the Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which
the applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly water
bill immediately even though actual connection to the public water system
will not be accomplished until some later date within the said six month
extension period.
§ 311-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-37
1:465
§ 311-37. Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
public water system to connect to or permit the connection by any other
person, firm or corporation of any other source of water supply for human
consumption to the public water system.
§ 311-38. Conditions for connection.
No person, firm or corporation not presently connection to the public water
system shall make or cause to be made any connection with the public water
system until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
§ 311-39. Construction specifications.
The construction of all connections between the building and the public
water system shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its water system rules and
regulations, as the same may be from time to time published and amended,
copies of which will, upon adoption of the Authority, be maintained on file
with the Township Secretary.
A. He shall make application to the Township Secretary or the Authority as
the Township's Agent, upon a permanent form to be formulated and
supplied by the Township Secretary or the Authority, for permission to
connect to the aforementioned public water system. Among other
things, the applicant must state the character and use of each structure
located on his property.
B. He shall pay the required tap connection fee as provided under the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
C. No work shall commence before the payment of the aforesaid tap
connection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection permit.
D. He shall give the designated inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval of the
connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
E. At the time of the inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
the property shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all
water system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the
property. No water connection line shall be covered over, or in any way
concealed, until after it has been inspected and approved by said
inspector.
§ 311-37 WHITE CODE § 311-40
1:466
§ 311-40. Failure to comply.
If the owner or owners of any houses, buildings, or structures in the
Township shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article
or the written notice as prescribed in § 311-36 hereof, the Township or
the Authority may perform or cause to be performed such work and labor
and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such
owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof on all charges and
expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner
or owners for the use of the Township or the Authority as debts are by law
collectible, or the Township or the Authority may, by its proper officer, file a
municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by law.
§ 311-41. Mobile homes.
If one or more mobile homes, located in a mobile home park, are subject to
the provision of this article by reason of being located within 150 feet of the
public water system of the authority, all mobile homes in such mobile home
park shall be subject to the provisions of this article regardless of whether
or not located within 150 feet of the public water system of the Authority.
§ 311-42. Violations and penalties.86
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation failing to make the proper connection within the time specified,
after receipt of proper notice as provided in § 311-36 hereof, shall, upon
conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine or penalty
of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, upon default of
payment of either thereof, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-42
1:467
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1055 9-11-2013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 1056 12-4-2013 Street vacation NCM
Res. No.
R-2-14
1-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1057 4-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1058 5-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1059 7-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1060 7-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1061 NCM
Ord. No. 1062 10-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1063 10-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1064 11-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1065 NCM
Res. No.
R-4-15
4-8-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 275
Ord. No. 1066 6-24-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 275
Ord. No. 1067 6-24-2015 Sewers and sewage disposal Ch. 235
Ord. No. 1068 8-12-2015 Animals: control of animals
amendment; harboring and
attracting nuisance animals
Ch. 88, Arts. I
and II
Ord. No. 1069 9-9-2015 Property maintenance:
bamboo
Ch. 210, Art. II
Ord. No. 1070 9-23-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 196
§ 311-42 WHITE CODE § DL-1
1:468
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1071 10-28-2015 Recycling amendment Ch. 257, Art. I
Ord. No. 1072 12-16-2015 Salaries and compensation:
Board of Supervisors
amendment
Ch. 63, Art. I
Ord. No. 1073 1-18-2016 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 275
Ord. No. 1074 5-25-2016 Official Map Ch. 46
Ord. No. 1075 9-28-2016 Nuisance gatherings Ch. 176
Ord. No. 1076 12-7-2016 Subdivision and Land
Development amendment
Ch. 275
Ord. No. 1077 12-7-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1078 5-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 295
Ord. No. 1079 1-24-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Obstructions
amendment
Ch. 270, Art.
IV
Ord. No. 1080 1-24-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Driveways
Ch. 270, Art. V
Res. No.
R-6-18
1-24-2018 Fees Schedule NCM
Ord. No. 1081 6-27-2018 Alarm Devices: Key Lock
Boxes
Ch. 81, Art. II
Ord. No. 1082 9-24-2018 KOEZ Parcel Extension NCM
Ord. No. 1083 3-13-2019 Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 263
Ord. No. 1084 3-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 295
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:469