8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 1/483
Township of Wilkins, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners as indicated in article histories. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code by Board of Commissioners
[Adopted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class Township Code, the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of Wilkins, County of Allegheny,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 177, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the
Township of Wilkins, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of
Wilkins," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins, and it is the intention of said Board of
Commissioners that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township of
Wilkins and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 2/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 27, 1998.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the
township prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the township or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
township.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the township or other
instruments or evidence of the township's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 3/483
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date
given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of
the Code and shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances and
resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions
of the township for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical
and style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention
of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Obsolete nomenclature, such as "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate," shall be updated
to refer to "District Justice."
References to the "county workhouse" in penalty provisions shall be amended to refer to the
county jail.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above, the
following changes and revisions of a substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances
and resolutions included in the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of the Board of
Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so
changed have been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions
shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6D, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, deleted) 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917." A complete description of all changes is
on file in the township offices.
Chapter 3. At-Will Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 11-8-1999 by Ord. No.
925. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 3-1. Department created.
There is hereby created a department to be called the "Township of Wilkins At-Will Employees
Department."
§ 3-2. Employees.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 4/483
A.
B.
Employees of the At-Will Employee Department shall be persons employed to provide services as
directed by the Township Manager.
§ 3-3. Powers and duties.
The services may include but shall not be limited to:
Participation in organizing, directing and performing duties in township recreational activities, such
as Community Day, hayrides, art shows, Halloween and other societal celebrations as may be
adopted and authorized by the Township Commissioners.
Participation in organizing and performing ties in other township-authorized programs, such as
road refuse clean-up and planting beautification programs.
§ 3-4. Compensation.
Persons duly registered in the At-Will Employee Department shall receive compensation of $1 per
year.
§ 3-5. Workers' compensation insurance.
Persons duly registered in the At-Will Employee Department shall be certified as employees with the
township workers' compensation insurance carrier.
§ 3-6. Other benefits prohibited.
Except for the yearly $1 compensation and registration with the township workers' compensation
insurance carrier, no person registered in the At-Will Employees Department shall be eligible for or
receive any other benefit arising from the status of at-will employee.
§ 3-7. Liability.
The township, by attempting to provide workers' compensation coverage to at-will employees, shall not
be liable for any claims arising from the denial of workers' compensation benefits by the township
workers compensation insurance carrier.
§ 3-8. Documents required.
No person shall be an employee in the At-Will Department unless that person has completed and filed
with the township an at-will employee application and other documents required by local, state and
federal law or regulation.
§ 3-9. Appointment required.
No person shall be authorized to provide services of any nature for the township unless that person is
a duly appointed at-will employee.
§ 3-10. Authority.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 5/483
[1]
An at-will employee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 5. Auditor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 12-11-1989 as Ord.
No. 790. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 156.
§ 5-1. Audit of township accounts.
Audit of township accounts as provided in the First Class Township Code shall hereafter be done by an
independent auditor who shall be either a certified public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a firm
of certified public accountants so registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of
public accountants.
§ 5-2. Appointment of independent accountant.
The independent accountant shall be appointed annually by resolution of the Board of Township
Commissioners.
§ 5-3. Powers and duties of independent accountant.
The independent accountant shall have and possess all the powers and perform all the duties provided
by the First Class Township Code for elected auditors.
Chapter 8. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 8, Code Enforcement Appeals, Board of, adopted 7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 945, as
amended, was repealed 2-29-2016 by Ord. 1062, which ordinance provided for the Township to
enter into an agreement with other members of the Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments
for the establishment of a Property Maintenance Code Joint Board of Appeals.]
Chapter 15. Local Government Investment Trust
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 10-12-1981 as Ord.
No. 678. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 15-1. Entrance authorized.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act[1] by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the trust) and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed
with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter was adopted.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 15-2. Purchase of shares; redemption.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 6/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from time to time with available
municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those shares from time to time as funds are needed for
municipal purposes. These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this chapter.
§ 15-3. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this municipality's funds which are
invested by the purchase of shares in the trust.
§ 15-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,[1] the following matters are specifically found
and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 15-1.
This municipality's participation in the trust shall be terminable at any time by ordinance.
The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the purpose of investing this
municipality's funds in obligations which are otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled
arrangement with other governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages of
pooled investments.
It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from municipal funds except
through the purchase of shares in the trust.
The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the Declaration of Trust and the
bylaws provided for therein.
Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this municipality may determine to
be necessary or appropriate to meet its cash investment requirements.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
Chapter 20. Manager and Assistant Manager
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 28.
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
Retirement — See Ch. 45.
Article I. Manager
[Adopted 5-4-1964 by Ord. No. 329]
§ 20-1. Office created.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of Wilkins.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 7/483
[1]
[1]
A.
(1)
B.
§ 20-2. Appointment; removal.
[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 818]
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all members of the Board of
Commissioners. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners, and he/she
may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days before such
removal is to become effective, the Board of Commissioners shall furnish the Manager with a written
statement setting forth its intention to remove him/her and the reasons therefor. The Manager shall
give the Board of Commissioners at least 30 days' notice of his intention to resign. The Board of
Commissioners may enter into employment contracts concerning the position of Township Manager for
a definite term in accordance with applicable law.
§ 20-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative abilities, with
special reference to the duties of his office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of
the Township of Wilkins or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but
during the tenure of his office he/she may reside outside the Township of Wilkins only with the approval
of the Board of Commissioners. If the Board of Commissioners fails within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 60 days after the appointment, to approve the Manager's residence outside the Township of
Wilkins, he/she must immediately become and during his tenure remain a resident of the Township of
Wilkins.
§ 20-4. Bond.
[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 818]
The Manager shall give a bond to the Township of Wilkins with a bonding company as surety in an
amount to be approved by the Board of Commissioners, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Township of Wilkins.
§ 20-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by ordinance.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 20-6. Powers and duties.
Subsequent to his appointment and after assuming office, the Manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Township of Wilkins. He/she shall be responsible to the Board of
Commissioners as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township
of Wilkins. The powers and duties of administration of all township business shall be vested in the
Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other township officers.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, the powers and duties of the
Township Manager shall include the following:
He/she shall be Ordinance Enforcement Officer as provided in Chapter 28, Ordinance
Enforcement Officer, and Zoning Officer under any zoning ordinance enacted from time to
time.
[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 818]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 8/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
[2]
(14)
(15)
He/she shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal departments.
He/she shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall suspend any
employee under his supervision, provided that persons covered by Chapter 33, Personnel,
and the civil service provision of the Township Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged
in accordance with such provisions; and provided, further, that the Manager shall report, at
the next meeting thereafter of the Board of Commissioners, any action taken by authority of
this subsection.
He/she shall have the power to fix wages and salaries of all personnel under his supervision
within a range previously determined by the Board of Commissioners or as mandated by
collective bargaining agreements.
[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 818]
He/she shall prepare and submit to the Board, before the close of each fiscal year, an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager shall obtain from the
head of each department, agency or board or any qualified officer thereof estimates of
revenues and expenditures and such other supporting data as he/she requires. The Manager
shall review such estimates with the Finance Committee Chairman and may revise them
before submitting the budget to the Board of Commissioners.
He/she shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by the
Board of Commissioners.
He/she shall, with the Finance Committee and in conjunction with the preparation of the
yearly budget, develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to be presented
annually to the Board of Commissioners for its review and adoption.
He/she shall hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal departments as the
Board of Commissioners may from time to time direct.
He/she shall attend meetings of the Board and, upon request, its committees with the right to
take part in the discussions, and he/she shall receive notice of all special meetings of the
Board and its committees.
He/she shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of Commissioners and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
He/she shall keep the Board informed as to the conduct of township affairs, submit periodic
reports on the condition of the township finances and such other reports as the Board
requests and make such recommendations to the Board as he/she deems advisable.
He/she shall submit to the Board of Commissioners as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and the administrative activities of the township
for the preceding year.
He/she shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges granted
by the township are observed.
He/she may employ, by and with the approval of the Board, experts and consultants to
perform work and to advise in connection with any of the functions of the township.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
He/she shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he/she shall supervise
the performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as such duties are
expressly imposed by statute upon some other township officer.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 9/483
(16)
(17)
(18)
[3]
(19)
[1]
He/she shall see that all money owed the township is promptly paid and that proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the township's claims.
He/she shall be the Purchasing Officer of the township, and he/she shall purchase in
accordance with the provisions of the Township Code all supplies and equipment for the
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the township. He/she shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board, make a
full written report thereof. He/she shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to the
approval of the Board, governing the procurement of all municipal supplies and equipment.
All complaints regarding township services shall be referred to the office of the Manager.
He/she or any department head designated by him/her shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to the Board of Commissioners.
He/she shall be the chief administrative officer of Act No. 205 (pensions).[3]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Also,
see 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 20-7. Procedural limitations on the Board of Commissioners.
Neither the Board, its members, nor its committees shall dictate or influence or attempt to dictate or
influence the hiring of any person to or his discharge from municipal employment by the Manager or in
any manner take part in the hiring, suspending or discharging of employees in the administrative
service of the township except as required by the civil service provisions of the First Class Township
Code. Other than for the purposes of inquiry, the Board of Commissioners or any of its members or
any of the Board's committees or its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through
the Township Manager, and neither the Board nor any of its members, nor any of the Board's
committees nor its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the Manager.
§ 20-8. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 20-8, Disability or absence of Manager, was repealed 4-10-2000 by Ord. No.
929. For current provisions, see § 20-15.
Article II. Assistant Manager
[Adopted 4-10-2000 by Ord. No. 929]
§ 20-9. Office created.
The Office of Assistant Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of Wilkins.
§ 20-10. Appointment; removal.
The Board of Commissioners may appoint and remove an Assistant Manager in the manner provided
for appointment and removal of the Township Manager.
§ 20-11. Qualifications.
The qualifications of the Assistant Manager shall be the same as those for the Township Manager.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 10/483
[1]
[1]
§ 20-12. Compensation.
The bond and compensation of the Assistant Manager shall be as provided for the Township Manager.
§ 20-13. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Assistant Manager shall be the same as those provided for the Township
Manager.
§ 20-14. Procedural limitations.
The procedural limitations on the Board of Commissioners shall apply to the office of Assistant
Manager.
§ 20-15. Absence of Manager.
When there is a vacancy in the office of Township Manager or during the absence of the Township
Manager, the Assistant Manager shall act for the Township Manager.
Chapter 23. Meetings
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 2-14-1977 as Ord. No.
612. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 50.
§ 23-1. Meeting days and times.
Regular stated meetings are scheduled for the second and last Mondays of every month at 7:00 p.m.
prevailing time or at such other time as designated by resolution adopted by the Board of
Commissioners and advertised under applicable law.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 23-2. Special and emergency meetings.
Special meetings and emergency meetings may be held in accordance with applicable law.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 23-3. Location.
Public meetings will be held in the Municipal Building, 110 Peffer Road, Wilkins Township, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 23-4. Holidays.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 11/483
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
In the event that the aforementioned date falls on one of the holidays observed by the township, the
meeting shall be held on the following business day.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 25. Municipal Claims
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Attorney's Fees for Cost of Collections
[Adopted 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 993[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as an amendment to Ch. 156, Taxation, Art. III, Local
Services Tax, Art. IV, Business Tax, and former Art. V, Mercantile License Tax (superseded 1-12-2009
by Ord. No. 994).
§ 25-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Cost of Collections Ordinance."
§ 25-2. Collection of fees, charges and expenses.
Hereinafter, for every delinquent claim, charge, tax assessment, levy or obligation owed to the
Township of Wilkins, there shall be added to such claim, charge, tax, assessment, levy or obligation
such attorney's fees, charges, and expenses incurred in the collection process subsequent to proper
notification to taxpayers of the intent to impose attorney's fees on delinquent obligations. Such
additional charges shall further be collected in the same manner and with the full authority as other
municipal claims of any nature and shall be deemed to be a municipal claim for purposes of collection
and obtaining a lien on property.
§ 25-3. Fee rate.
Such fees shall be reasonable and the same are hereby established in a fee rate as attached hereto
and made a part hereof as Schedule A.[1] Said schedule of fees is hereby deemed to be reasonable,
fair and necessary in order to allow the Township of Wilkins to collect such amounts due. This
schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance.
Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 25-4. Authority to collect.
Any person or entity empowered to collect amounts on behalf of the Township of Wilkins is directed to
add such fees as are incurred to the extent allowed and set forth on Schedule A.[1]
Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 25-5. Notice required.
Attorney's fees incurred to the extent set forth on Schedule A[1] shall be added to all unpaid municipal
claims of any nature arising or imposed subsequent to the effective date of this article. Prior to the time
when such fees are added to any underlying claim, the Tax Collector shall first give the taxpayer such
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 12/483
[1]
[2]
[1]
notice as required by law. The Tax Collector or other collector shall so notify the taxpayer by sending
such notice to the taxpayer's last known address by mailing notices in substantially the forms of notice
as are attached as Exhibits B and C[2] in accordance with the statutes cited herein.
Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: Exhibits B and C are on file in the Township offices.
Chapter 26. Narcotics Task Force
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 9-30-1996 by Ord. No.
887. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 38.
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
§ 26-1. Intent to participate.
The Township of Wilkins has evidenced its intent to participate in the Tactical Narcotics Task Force
designed to combat the illegal possession and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal or controlled
drugs within its municipal boundaries as well as within the boundaries of other near or adjacent
communities through cooperation with the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General and other signatory
municipalities.
§ 26-2. Adoption of agreement.
The Township of Wilkins hereby adopts the agreement, together with the Task Force Guidelines, which
provide a framework for intergovernmental police cooperation with various signatory municipalities
under the terms of which police officers of each such municipality shall be and are granted the
authority to officially act as police officers in any other signatory municipality, subject to the terms and
conditions of the agreement and the Task Force Guidelines, copies of which are attached hereto, made
a part hereof and marked Exhibits A and B, respectively.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the township offices and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 26-3. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the agreement shall be indefinite, subject to termination as provided in the agreement.
§ 26-4. Responsibility for expenses.
Each municipality shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by reason of action taken by its police
officers pursuant to this agreement with the assistance of funds supplied by the Pennsylvania Office of
Attorney General.
§ 26-5. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement, to the extent that it is not set forth
in the agreement and/or the Task Force Guidelines, shall be covered by directives, procedures and
guidance from the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General and other area police departments from
municipalities which are signatories to said agreement.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 13/483
[1]
[1]
§ 26-6. Management of real or personal property.
All property, real or personal, which may be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of pursuant to
the agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the agreement and the Task Force
Guidelines, as well as the directives, procedures and guidance of the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney
General.
§ 26-7. Responsibility for employees.
The municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, direction and control of its employees
with assistance, financial or otherwise, from the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General.
§ 26-8. Power to enter into contracts.
The entity created by this chapter shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group life
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its employees.
Chapter 27. Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and
Revitalization
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 11-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1036.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 78.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 124.
Editor's Note: This chapter was originally adopted as Ch. 29 but was renumbered in order to maintain
the alphabetical organization of the Code.
§ 27-1. Adoption of Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and
Revitalization Act.
The Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq., is hereby
adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins for the purpose of regulating,
governing and safeguarding life and property from deteriorated properties as a result of neglect by their
owners and, furthermore, regulating deteriorated properties that create public nuisances which have an
impact on crime and the quality of life of the residents of the Township; and each and every one of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and
Revitalization Act hereby referred to are adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this
section, and as attached hereto and marked as Exhibit A.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
Chapter 28. Ordinance Enforcement Officer
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 12-8-1980 as Ord. No.
662. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 14/483
[1]
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Driveways — See Ch. 79.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 131.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 144.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 28-1. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
§ 28-2. Appointment; compensation.
One or more persons may be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as
Ordinance Enforcement Officer, and the compensation and emoluments for such office shall be
established by resolution or motion of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 28-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer to enforce all ordinances of the Township of
Wilkins, and, for this purpose, the Officer shall inspect the lands, buildings, structures, roads, streams
and any other areas and activities within the township which are subject to regulation by any ordinance
or the First Class Township Code;[1] the Officer shall inspect public work projects when so directed by
the Township Manager and shall, when qualified, act as rodent control officer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 28-4. Issuance of orders and citations.
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall have the power to issue orders for abatement of violations of
any ordinance and to issue citations against those persons, corporations, associations or other legal
entities found to be in violation of any ordinance, said citations to be issued in accordance with
applicable law.
Chapter 33. Personnel
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 5.
Manager — See Ch. 20, Art. I.
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 28.
Retirement — See Ch. 45.
Article I. Personnel Policies
[Adopted 6-1-1964 by Ord. No. 334]
§ 33-1. Title; intent.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 15/483
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
[1]
(1)
D.
A.
B.
This article shall be known as the "Personnel Ordinance of Wilkins Township," and its declared intent is
that employment in the Township government shall be based entirely on merit and personal fitness and
shall be free of personal, religious, racial and political considerations. This article shall be uniformly,
equitably and fairly administered to the end that high employee morale is maintained, the deserving
employee's career in the Township's service is enhanced, the unfit employee is not maintained on the
Township payroll and the interests and rights of the public and the Township are properly preserved
and protected.
§ 33-2. Scope; applicability.
All offices and positions of the Township are divided into the classified service and the exempt
service.
The exempt service shall include the following:
The Board of Commissioners, Township Manager, Township Solicitor, Township Engineer and
all elected officials.
Members of boards, commissions and committees.
Police, auxiliary police, special police, volunteer firemen and volunteer personnel who serve
without pay.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421]
Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
Temporary positions of less than six consecutive months' duration.
The classified service shall include all Township government offices and positions not specifically
placed in the exempt service by this article.
The following provisions of this article shall apply only to the classified service unless otherwise
specifically provided:
Any provision of this article in conflict with provisions of the First Class Township Code.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917[1]]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 33-3. Administration.
The personnel program established by this article shall be administered by the Township Manager or,
in his absence, the President of the Wilkins Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 33-4. Classification and pay plan.
The Township Manager shall recommend to the Board of Commissioners at or prior to submission
of each annual budget whether the rates of pay and compensation of employees should remain
unchanged, be increased or be decreased for the next fiscal year, all to the end that all positions in
the Township service requiring similar qualifications and having similar duties and responsibilities
are equally compensated.
Compensation to be paid positions covered by classified employees shall be set by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners annually.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 16/483
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
(a)
(1)
B.
Compensation to be paid emergency, seasonal, temporary and part-time personnel not covered
by this article and whose compensation has not been specifically set by the Board of
Commissioners shall be determined by the Township Manager. The rate of pay so determined
shall not be greater than the rate of pay in the area for similar work.
The Chief of Police shall have general supervision of the Township Police, and the Chief of Police
shall enforce rules and regulations approved by the Board of Commissioners. Discipline,
suspension and removal shall be administered by the Board of Commissioners and the Chief of
Police in accordance with Article VI, Subdivision (d), et seq. of the First Class Township Code[1]
(civil service for police and firemen).
[Added 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421; amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55625 et seq.
§ 33-5. Appointments; promotions; separations.
Appointments to, promotions in and separations from all classified positions in the Township
service coming under the jurisdiction of the Township Manager, except full-time police personnel,
shall be by action of the Township Manager. No appointment or promotion shall be made to a paid
office or position not previously created by the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Appointments to all classified positions shall be solely on the basis of merit, which shall be
determined by evaluation of the person's training, experience and personal fitness, oral interview
and, whenever practicable, a written examination. Preference shall be given to residents of Wilkins
Township in cases where all other considerations are equal.
The Township Manager shall enforce this article and may suspend employees for just cause with
employees having a right of appeal to the Board of Commissioners. Appeals must be filed, in
writing, to the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners within 10 days after written notice of
suspension has been given.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
§ 33-6. Residence requirements; exceptions; enforcement and
reporting.
[Amended 3-31-1997 by Ord. No. 899]
Residence requirements. All employees serving in the classified and exempt services of the
Township, as defined in Ordinance No. 334, adopted June 1, 1964, as amended, as an express
condition of employment or continued employment, must be residents of the Township of Wilkins,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, as hereafter provided. Any person appointed or employed by the
Township shall, if not a resident at the time of appointment, establish their residence within the
Township within one year of their date of appointment or employment or within one year of the
date of adoption of this section. Employees who are initially employed on a probationary status
shall establish their residence within one year of the date upon which their status as a
probationary employee ends. The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to grant
extensions of time, for good cause shown, to any employee who has not complied with the
provisions of this section.
Exceptions to residence requirements. The following employees and appointed officials shall be
exempt from the provisions of the preceding subsection:
Current full-time employees who:
Are employees as of the date hereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 17/483
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
Are authorized under the existing ordinance(s) or existing written negotiated agreement
to reside outside the Township.
Now reside outside the Township.
The Township Manager.
The Township Solicitor.
The Township Engineer.
Other officers appointed in their professional capacities.
Part-time employees and various short-term employees, including summer and seasonal parttime
employees and interns.
Full-time members of the Wilkins Township Maintenance Employees Association with 10 or
more years of full-time service may reside within three air miles of the Wilkins Township
Municipal Building.
[Added 1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 1039]
Enforcement and reporting. The Township Manager shall, from time to time, require employees of
the Township to complete such forms and affidavits as are determined to be necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this section.
§ 33-7. Hours of work.
Hours of work shall be set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Department heads shall schedule their work and the hours of work of their respective employees,
subject to approval of the Township Manager.
The Township Manager is authorized and shall, in cases of emergency and/or instances where the
protection, convenience or welfare of the public may be of substantial concern, alter any of the
hours of work heretofore specified to cope with such contingency.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Sec. VIII, entitled "Holidays," which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
§ 33-8. Employee benefits.
[Added 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Permanent full-time employees shall receive compensation and other benefits as designated in written
agreements. Employees without written agreements shall receive compensation and benefits as
determined from time to time by the Board of Commissioners; and, if no Board determination of
benefits other than compensation has been made, then benefits shall be equivalent to those benefits
received by the Township Road Department.
§ 33-9. Vacation.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
The Manager and department heads shall determine the time of year at which such annual leave
may be taken.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 18/483
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
No employee shall be permitted to waive annual leave for the purpose of receiving double pay.
Annual leave shall be computed from the day a person becomes an employee of the Township,
but the employee shall not take any paid annual leave before completing 12 months' service.
Additional vacation weeks earned by service anniversary cannot be taken until after the
anniversary employment date. Anniversary weeks may be combined with previous earned
vacation weeks.
Paid holidays falling in an employee's vacation period shall not count as a part of the annual
leave.
§ 33-10. Sick leave.
[Amended 2-7-1966 by Ord. No. 377; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Sick leave, unlike annual leave (vacation), is not something to which the employee is automatically
entitled but is provided by the Township in an attempt to keep the employee from being seriously
handicapped financially if he/she is unable to work because of illness. For the purpose of this
article, "personal illness" shall include disability due to sickness, injury or accident which is not
compensable under the Workmen's Compensation Laws of Pennsylvania.
To be entitled to the benefits of this article, employees who are off-duty sick more than three
days shall file with the Manager a physician's certificate certifying to the illness of such
employee, the nature thereof, its cause and such additional information as may be required.
In the event that an employee is hospitalized, the three-day waiting period for sick-leave
benefits shall be waived.
In the event that an employee is absent from work due to an illness as defined in this article
for a period in excess of 10 days, the three-day waiting period shall be waived.
No employee of the Township shall be entitled to the benefits of this article for any disability which
shall result form any of the following:
The use of drugs or intoxicants.
Illness or injury intentionally self-inflicted.
Illness or injury which shall be the result of the employee's own misconduct or gross
negligence.
Disability which existed and which was known to the employee at the time of his employment.
Disability or illness which shall occur while an employee is on leave of absence, furlough or
suspension from work, other than on regularly earned vacation.
Sick-leave time shall be computed from the day a person becomes an employee of the Township,
but the employee shall not receive any paid sick-leave time before completing six months'
Township service.
Saturdays and Sundays occurring during an employee's illness shall not count as a part of the
sick-leave time. Holidays occurring during a sick-leave period shall not be compensated for
separately.
The Manager shall require an employee to file competent written certification that his absence was
for an authorized reason. If he/she has been incapacitated for the period of his absence or a major
part thereof, he/she shall be required to provide evidence that he/she is again physically able to
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 19/483
F.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
C.
perform his duties. Claiming sick leave or benefits under any conditions other than those permitted
by this article may be cause for disciplinary action, including suspension, demotion or dismissal.
The falsification of any sick-leave certificate by an employee of the Township shall constitute
grounds for dismissal of such employee, and he/she shall be subject to all actions and remedies at
law for the recovery of all moneys paid to such employee by reason of said false certificate or
certificates.
Editor's Note: See also Art. II of this chapter.
§ 33-11. Training and conferences.
Training and conference-attendance expenses incurred in the development of an employee's skills,
knowledge and abilities to assist him/her in staying abreast of his field and to better perform the duties
of his position in the Township government shall be paid by the Township, subject in all cases to
Township Manager approval and budget appropriations.
§ 33-12. Political activity.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421]
No Township employee shall run for a Township office while employed as such.
No elected Township official shall require or demand that any Township employee engage in
political activity, directly or indirectly, nor shall continued employment be dependent upon any
political activity by Township employees.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to abridge the right of voluntary political expression.
Township police may hold the office of Constable as provided by Section 1401 of the First Class
Township Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56401.
§ 33-13. Discrimination.
There shall be no discrimination because of religious or political opinions, beliefs or affiliations or
because of race, color, creed or national origin in the recruitment, promotion, disciplining, treatment or
dismissal of employees nor in the furnishing or failure to furnish any municipal service to the residents
of the Township.
§ 33-14. Outside employment.
No regular full-time employee in the classified service shall accept outside full-time employment
where the hours of work are equal to or greater than the scheduled hours for the Township of
Wilkins.
No regular full-time employees in the classified service shall accept outside employment, whether
it is part-time, temporary or permanent, without the Township Manager's prior written approval.
Each change in outside employment shall require separate approval.
The test in all cases as to whether approval shall or shall not be given for outside employment is
whether or not such outside employment conflicts or interests with or is likely to conflict or interfere
with the employee's usefulness to the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 20/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
[1]
§ 33-15. Rules and regulations.
The Township Manager, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, shall make
administrative rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law or the ordinances of the Township of
Wilkins, that he/she deems desirable for the good of the service and to effectively carry out the
intent and purposes of this article and shall make available to all present and future Township
employees a copy of this article, rules and regulations and any other information he/she considers
essential for the proper guidance and information of the employee.
Employees of the Township serve the citizens of Wilkins Township. It is their obligation to be
courteous, efficient and loyal at all times. They are Township taxpayers as well as Township
employees. They will serve their own best interests by helping to maintain a high standard of
public service.
Township employees shall not disseminate or issue any official information to newspapers, public
officials or anyone without direct consent of the Township Manager. At no time will employees
discuss official business with anyone not previously authorized.
Before any employee presents a formal or informal speech concerning Township government and
activities to an organized group, the Township Manager shall be notified.
§ 33-16. Jury duty.
Any employee who serves on jury duty or in court in the interests of Wilkins Township shall be
compensated in the amount which will be necessary to equal the difference between the employee's
regular pay and the compensation he/she receives for jury duty.
§ 33-17. Active military service.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421]
Any employee called into the active service of any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States
shall be granted a leave of absence for the period of such service. He/she shall be reinstated without
loss of service continuity to his former position, provided that he/she applies for reinstatement within 90
days after honorable discharge. The application for reinstatement shall be addressed to the Manager
or Board of Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Sec. XVIII, entitled "Leave of Absence," which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
§ 33-18. Separation.
Any employee wishing to leave the service of the Township in good standing shall file with the
Manager, at least 14 days before leaving, a written resignation stating the effective date of resignation
and the reason for leaving. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may be considered
cause for denying such employee future employment and for denying him/her such benefits as have
been made available. Unauthorized absence from work for a period of three working days may be
considered as a resignation without benefits.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Sec. XX, entitled "Effective Date," which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
§ 33-19. Disciplinary action.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 21/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Violation of any provisions of this article or of the rules and regulations established by the
Township Manager with the approval of the Board of Commissioners shall be subject to
disciplinary action by the Township Manager, including reprimand, demotion, suspension or
dismissal.
Any employee who feels that the disciplinary action is unwarranted may appeal such action to the
Board of Commissioners. Appeals must be filed, in writing, to the Chairman of the Board of
Commissioners within 10 days after notice of disciplinary action.
[Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 421]
§ 33-20. Physical examination.
[Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 807]
All applicants for positions in the classified service shall, as a condition of employment, take a
physical examination administered by a physician retained and paid by the Township.
A detailed description of each classified position shall be prepared by the Township Manager, and
this description shall be provided to the examining physician, together with a request that the
physician note and job-related medical or mental condition which will prevent the applicant from
performing in an efficient and able manner the work described in the job description.
A physician's report stating that the applicant will be unable to perform the work in an efficient and
normal manner shall be cause for disqualification of the applicant.
The Township may, by resolution adopted from time to time, determine specific medical or mental
conditions as job-related guidelines likely to affect the applicant's acceptance.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the right of any handicapped or disabled
person to receive an appointment to any of the classified positions when such person is otherwise
qualified for the position.
Article II. Leaves of Absence; Disability
§ 33-21. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this article, the following words will have the meaning
or meanings hereby ascribed to them:
EMPLOYEE
Any person who renders service to the Township for pay, excluding persons who work under a
professional service contract. Employee includes persons in probationary, regular, casual or
temporary status.
[Added 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1035]
MATERNITY LEAVE
Absence caused by pregnancy of a female employee.
PERMANENT DISABILITY
Any disability which renders an employee unable to perform his duties and which on the basis of
medical opinion, is permanent or which has rendered an employee unable to perform his duties for
an uninterrupted period of eight calendar months from the first day of disability.
SICK LEAVE
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 22/483
A.
B.
C.
Any absence caused by nonoccupational illness or injury suffered by an employee rendering
him/her unable to perform his duties, except absence caused by pregnancy.
TEMPORARY DISABILITY LEAVE
Any absence caused by occupational illness or injury, including but not limited to injuries caused
by injury within the meaning of the Workmen's Compensation Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, illness caused by diseases within the scope of the Occupational Disease Act and,
as to policemen and firemen, disabilities or incapacity incurred in the performance of duties and
subject to Section 1 of the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 477, as amended.
TRANSITIONAL WORK/MODIFIED DUTY
Work restrictions (modifications of work duties or tasks) determined and recommended by a
Township-approved physician or practitioner who has been rendering treatment to the employee
or who is qualified to render an opinion on the employee's physical abilities.
[Added 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1035]
§ 33-22. Sick leave allowed.
Sick leave shall be allowed at the rate set forth in collective bargaining agreements, arbitration awards
or resolutions of the Board of Township Commissioners which may now be in effect or hereafter
become effective.
§ 33-23. Validation.
The Township may require any evidence reasonable under the circumstances to validate claimed sick
leave and also to establish the fitness of an employee to return to duty. Such evidence may include a
certification by a physician and also, as to fitness to return to duty, an examination by a physician
selected by the municipality.
§ 33-24. Temporary disability.
Temporary disability for policemen. Temporary disability suffered by a policeman or fireman
coming within the scope of the Act of 1935, June 28, P.L. 477, as amended, shall entitle such
temporarily disabled policeman to the benefits provided for in said Act.
Temporary disability for other employees. Temporary disability suffered by any employee not
coming within the scope of said Act of 1935, June 28, P.L. 477, as amended shall entitle such
temporarily disabled employee to a continuation of his regular salary or wages during the period of
such disability but not in excess of 60 working days.
Workmen's compensation benefits. If any such temporarily disabled employee is entitled to
benefits under the Workmen's Compensation Act or the Occupational Disease Act as they are in
force, such benefits shall be deducted from any salary or disability compensation to which such
employee shall otherwise be entitled.
§ 33-25. Maternity leave.
Maternity leave. Leaves of absence will be provided for any employee of the Township whose absence
from duties will be required because of disability from childbirth or pregnancy. Such leaves shall be
governed by considerations for the health of the employees, the need for continuity in Township
operations and the maintenance of a qualified staff.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 23/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
While on a maternity leave, the employee shall be entitled to use accumulated sick leave for
disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth and recovery
therefrom. The Township shall require that such requests for sick leave be supported by
completion of the Township's Certification of Maternity Disability form.
If for any reason the employee does not intend to return to her position upon the termination of the
leave, the employee is obligated to submit her resignation at least 60 calendar days prior to the
expiration of the leave.
Prior to an employee's return to work from a maternity leave, a physician must certify that she is
physically able to resume her duties on a full-time basis.
Failure to resume work after becoming physically able to do so shall be grounds for discharge,
and permanent disability arising under this section shall be grounds for discharge under § 33-26B.
§ 33-26. Permanent disability.
Permanent disability.
Any employee who becomes permanently disabled and is entitled to pension benefits either as a
disability pension or for age and service shall be retired on such pension as affords him/her the
larger benefits. The pension shall become payable as of the day following the day for which
he/she last receives salary or wages from the Township after becoming eligible for such pension
benefits.
Any employed who becomes permanently disabled and is entitled to no pension benefits either for
age and service or for disability shall be discharged forthwith from the service of the Township.
§ 33-27. Manager empowered to promulgate suitable regulations.
The Township Manager is empowered hereby to promulgate by executive order suitable regulations for
the administration and supplementation of this article as it affects all employees. Such regulations shall
cover, inter alia, the following:
Disciplinary measures to be taken in the event of abuse by an employee of the sick leave privilege
provided for by this article.
Forms and procedures for processing claims for sick leave, temporary disability and permanent
disability benefits as provided for or contemplated by this article.
Procedures for the furnishing of physician costs, physical examinations and medical opinions
required hereby or which facilitate the administration and enforcement hereof.
Such other regulations governing the implementation and administration of the provisions of this
article and not inconsistent herewith as the Manager shall determine.
§ 33-28. Word usage.
For the purposes of construing this article, the use of the singular shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter. Words
used in the present or past tense shall include the future.
§ 33-29. Conflicts with collective bargaining agreements.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 24/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
B.
If the provisions of this article become inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of any collective
bargaining agreement hereafter entered into applying to some or all of the municipal employees of the
Township, which collective bargaining agreement is duly authorized by an ordinance, such ordinance
authorizing such collective bargaining agreement shall be deemed to amend this article to the extent of
such conflict or inconsistency.
§ 33-30. Transitional work assignments/modified duty policy.
[Added 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1035]
Applicability.
This policy applies to all employees of the Township, including those employees covered by
collective bargaining agreements.
These policies and procedures apply to any situation where an employee is being treated for
an injury or illness and is determined fit by a Township-approved physician or practitioner to
return to work on a temporary basis with modified duties.
Transitional or modified duty assignments are based on the availability of work. This policy
does not guarantee that an injured employee will be assigned to a modified duty position.
Statements of policy.
It is the policy of the Township, with the cooperation of all departments, to locate and assign
modified duty, when feasible, to employees who are temporarily disabled from their regular
job. All such modified duty assignments are to be within the limitations as recommended by a
Township-approved physician or practitioner.
This policy shall only be applicable to employees who are temporarily disabled. For the
purpose of this policy, "temporary disabilities" are defined as those disabilities that apparently
will last for less than six months. If an employee is projected to be disabled for a period of
more than six months, the Township shall not be required to follow this policy.
The Township shall not be required to create a new position to implement this policy. If the
Township determines that there is temporary work available, for a temporarily disabled
employee, the Township may utilize this policy. Also, if a temporarily disabled employee is
working on a temporary job and such job ends, the Township may reassign the temporarily
disabled worker to another temporary job or if no job is available, the employee may return to
disabled status and may collect workers' compensation benefits.
The Township-approved physician/practitioner shall be encouraged to release temporarily
disabled employees to modified duty work status and to describe the employee's physical
limitations in sufficient detail to enable the Township to identify a suitable work
assignment or to modify the tasks of the regular assignment which may be eliminated or
adjusted.
The department in which the employee works shall attempt to locate a work assignment
or modify the work duties of the regular assignment within the limitations recommended
by the physician or practitioner.
If no suitable assignment is available with the department, the Township administration
shall be contacted immediately in order to consider other alternatives. The Township
administration will attempt to coordinate, where feasible, a temporary reassignment of the
employee on an interdepartment basis. The department to which the employee is
regularly assigned will continue to be charged for the employee's wages and benefits.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 25/483
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
The employee will be responsible for reporting to his immediate supervisor following each
medical appointment providing that person with the appropriate medical status slip from
the authorized treating physician/practitioner. The employee shall cooperate to the fullest
extent possible by performing the tasks and duties within the modified assignment to the
best of his ability.
Employees will be advised of the Township's policy of mandatory modified duty in
accordance with the employee's work restrictions. Employees refusing to accept an
appropriate modified duty assignment provided by the attending physician/practitioner
and offered by the Township shall forfeit their workers' compensation benefits and any
available supplemental salary benefits. Also, such refusal to accept an appropriate
modified duty assignment may result in other discipline, up to and including discharge.
The immediate supervisor will be responsible for monitoring the employee's performance
during the period of modified duty.
Employees shall be entitled to earn their usual base salary while on modified duty. It is
the Township's policy that no overtime will be authorized unless the employee is
expressly given permission by the department director. All overtime assignments must be
approved in advance by the Township Manager and/or department director, and must be
in accordance with the work restrictions set forth by the attending physician/practitioner.
Upon release to regular work without restrictions, the employee shall be returned to his
regular work unit in the usual work assignment.
Procedures.
Each department shall be responsible for implementation of this policy within its unit.
Department directors shall instruct their employees on the Township's modified duty policy.
The department director shall inform the treating physician or practitioner and employee of the
Township's policy on modified duty.
Supervisors shall contact the department director and the Township Manager to confirm the
employee's return to work on modified duty.
The employee's time card shall be maintained by the department director to whom the
employee is temporarily assigned.
In the event a work unit cannot reasonably accommodate a modified work assignment due to
operational difficulties of the employee's work restrictions, the Township Manager is to be
notified within 24 hours or by the next business day.
The Township Manager shall coordinate alternative assignments on an interdepartment basis
for employees whose home departments cannot accommodate them. In the event that the
Township Manager cannot locate an assignment, the employee will remain off work and will
be provided compensation in accordance with applicable state law and in conformance with
any labor agreement.
The Township Manager is authorized and directed to develop and implement any forms to be
used in this modified duty program.
Chapter 35. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 26/483
[1]
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 35-1. Commission created.
There is hereby created a Planning Commission for the Township of Wilkins, to consist of five
members appointed by the Board of Commissioners for terms of four years each, in accordance with
Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.).
§ 35-2. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall consider plans for proposed subdivisions and land development and
shall make its recommendations thereon to the Board of Commissioners and shall have such other
powers and duties as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and as determined by
the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 37. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 11-8-1976 by Ord. No.
606. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement — See Ch. 45.
§ 37-1. Composition.
[Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 933]
The Police Department of the Township of Wilkins shall consist of a Chief of Police, one Sergeant and
at the option of the Board of Commissioners a second Sergeant and such number of patrolmen as
shall be determined by action of the Board of Commissioners from time to time.
§ 37-2. Powers and duties.
The general authority, responsibilities and duties of the various ranks shall be as set forth in a
resolution adopted by the Board of Commissioners and as amended from time to time.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Secs. III and IV, which immediately followed this section and dealt with the rank
of Corporal, were deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
Chapter 41. Records
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Open Records Policy
[Adopted 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 41-1. Purpose.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 27/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
[2]
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
The purpose of this policy is to assure compliance with Act 3 of 2008, the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know
Law,[1] as amended; to provide access to public records of the Township of Wilkins; to preserve the
integrity of the Township of Wilkins' records; and to minimize the financial impact to the residents of the
Township regarding the resources utilized in the receipt and processing of public record requests and
the retrieval and copying of public records.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 41-2. Designated Open Records Officer; requests for access.
It is the policy of the Township to require the presence of a designated employee when public records
are examined and inspected and to charge reasonable fees for duplication of public records of the
Township. The Township of Wilkins designates the Township Secretary as the Open Records Officer,
responsible for assuring compliance with the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law,[1] in accordance with
the following guidelines.
The Township Secretary may designate certain employee(s) to process public record requests.
The Township Secretary is responsible for minimizing, where possible, the financial impact to the
Township regarding the resources utilized in the receipt and processing of public record requests
and the retrieval and copying of public records.
All requests for public records of the Township under this policy shall be specific in identifying and
describing each public record requested. In no case shall the Township be required to create a
public record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public record in a
manner in which the Township does not currently compile, maintain, format or organize the public
record. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing and include the date of the
request; requestor's name, address and telephone number; certification of United States
residency; signature of requestor; and, if duplication is requested, appropriate payment.
The designated employee shall make a good faith effort to determine whether each record
requested is a public record.
The Township shall facilitate a reasonable response to a request for the Township of Wilkins'
public records. In no case is the Township expected to provide extraordinary staff to respond to
the request, but will respond in a manner consistent with the Township's administrative
responsibilities and consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.[2]
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
The designated employee shall respond to the requestor within five business days from the date
of receipt of the written request. If the Township does not respond within five business days of
receipt thereof, the request is deemed denied.
The response provided by the Township shall consist of approval for access to the public record;
review of the request by the designated employee; or denial of access to the record requested.
If access to the public record requested is approved, the public record shall be available for
access during the regular business hours of the Township. The designated employee shall
cooperate fully with the requester, while also taking reasonable measures to protect Township
public records from the possibility of theft and/or modifications. The presence of a designated
employee is required when public records are examined and inspected.
Fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by the Commonwealth's Office of
Open Records. The Township may, at its discretion, waive fees.
In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted under this policy is expected to
exceed $100, the designated employee(s) shall obtain the expected cost in advance of fulfilling
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 28/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
K.
[3]
L.
M.
N.
O.
[1]
the request to avoid unwarranted expense of Township resources.
If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the Township shall be in writing and
include the reason for the review and the expected response date, which shall be within 30 days
of the notice of review. If the Township does not respond within 30 days thereof, the request is
deemed denied.
Review of the request is limited to situations where:
The record requested contains information which is subject to access, as well as
information which is not subject to access that must be redacted prior to a grant of
access. The redacted information is considered a denial as to that information;
The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing limitations;
A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record requested is a public record;
The requester has failed to comply with the Township's policy and procedure
requirements;
The requestor refuses to pay the applicable fees; or
The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the required time period.
Upon a determination that one of the factors listed above applies, the Township shall send
written notice to the requester within five business days of receipt of the request for access.
The notice shall include a statement notifying the requester that the request for access is
being reviewed, the reason for the review, a reasonable date that a response is expected to
be provided and an estimate of applicable fees owed when the record becomes available. If
the date that a response is expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days, following the five
business days allowed for, the request for access shall be deemed denied unless the
requester has agreed, in writing, to an extension to the date specified in the notice. If the
requester agrees to the extension, the request shall be deemed denied on the day following
the date specified in the notice if the agency has not provided a response by that date.
If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by the Township shall be in writing
as indicated on the form, attached hereto, entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate
the Township of Wilkins Records."[3]
Editor's Note: Said form is on file at the Township office.
If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an appeal with the
Commonwealth's Office of Open Records within 15 business days of the mailing date of the
Township's notice of denial or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The appeal shall state the
grounds upon which the requester asserts that the record is a public record and shall address any
grounds stated by the agency for delaying or denying the request.
Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the appeals officer, the requester or
the Township may file a petition for review or other document as required by rule of court with the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County. The decision of the court shall contain findings of
fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole. The decision shall clearly and
concisely explain the rationale for the decision. A petition for review under this section shall stay
the release of documents until a decision is issued.
This policy shall be available for review at the Township office.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 29/483
[1]
Chapter 42. (R E S E R V E D)
[Former Ch. 42, Recreation Board, adopted 3-6-1967 as Ord. No. 399, was repealed 3-11-1996 by
Ord. No. 882. Section 2 of Ord. No. 882 provided that such powers as re now or may hereafter be
provided by statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by ordinances of the Township of Wilkins
relating to the development and oepration of recreation systems, public parks and playgrounds be
vested in the Board of Commissioners, to be exercised by said Board subject to any and all restrictions
contained in such powers, ordinances or statute.]
Chapter 45. Retirement
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 20.
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 28.
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Article I. Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 939[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Police Pension Plan, adopted 3-1-1965 by
Ord. No. 355, as amended. Ordinance No. 939 also provided that the plan be effective 11-1-2001.
§ 45-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this plan, shall have the meaning set forth in this article
unless a different meaning is otherwise clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT
As of any given date, the benefit determined under § 45-4B calculated on the basis of final
monthly average salary as of the date of determination and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator
of which shall be the participant's aggregate service determined as of such date and the
denominator of which shall be the projected aggregate service of the participant as if the
participant continues in employment until attainment of normal retirement age. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, in no event shall the fraction exceed 1.0. The accrued
benefit shall include any service increment benefit determined pursuant to § 45-4D attributable to
the participant's aggregate service as of the determination date. The accrued benefit shall not
exceed the maximum limitation, determined as of the date of computation, provided under § 45-
4G. All accrued benefits are subject to all applicable limitations, reductions, offsets, and actuarial
adjustments provided pursuant to the terms of the plan prior to the actual payment thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS
The total amount contributed by any participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll
deduction or otherwise, plus interest credited at 3% per annum. Interest shall be credited in the
form of a compound interest rate from the midpoint of the plan year during which the contributions
were paid through the date that a distribution of accumulated contributions under § 45-6D or 45-
7B shall be paid or payment of benefits shall commence.
ACT
The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act which was enacted as Act 205
of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 30/483
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT
Two forms of payment of equal actuarial present value on a specified date. The actuarial present
value shall be determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and 7% interest unless otherwise
specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY
The person, partnership, association or corporation which at any given time is serving as actuary,
provided that such actuary must be an approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE
The total period or periods of the participant's employment with the employer, whether or not
interrupted. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant receive a
distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period of employment for which
employee contributions are required, such period of employment shall not be included in
aggregate service thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next period of employment, the
participant repays to the fund the amount of such distribution with interest. For purposes of this
definition, interest shall accrue as of the date the employee receives a distribution of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same manner as described in the
definition of "accumulated contributions." Aggregate service shall be calculated in completed years
and shall not include any period of a voluntary leave of absence without pay.
ATTENDING COLLEGE
The eligible children are registered at an accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying
a minimum course load of seven credit hours per semester.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
BENEFICIARY
The person or entity designated by the participant to receive a distribution of the participant's
accumulated contributions should the participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement
benefit. In the event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary does not
survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving spouse, or if there is no surviving
spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there is no surviving issue, the estate; but if no personal
representative has been appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had died intestate and a
resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
The person designated by the Township who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE
The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMITTEE
The Police Pension Committee as determined pursuant to § 45-8B.
COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION
The total remuneration of the employee, whether salary or hourly wages, including overtime pay,
holiday pay, longevity pay and any other form of compensation paid by the employer for police
services rendered. Compensation shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for
government plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 31/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
DISABILITY DATE
The date when a participant is determined by the plan administrator to be incapacitated due to
total and permanent disability or the date when the participant's employment terminates due to
such total and permanent disability, if later.
EMPLOYEE
Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, full-time basis as a police officer of the
employer's police force.
EMPLOYER
The Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT
For the purpose of determining aggregate service:
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly compensated or entitled to
compensation by the employer for the performance of duties as a police officer;
Any period of time for which an employee is paid, either directly by the employer or through a
program to which the employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee, a fixed,
periodic amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other than the
performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness, entitlement to benefits under
workers' compensation or similar laws);
Any period during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits under this plan, provided
that the employee returns to employment within three months of the date on which it is
determined that the employee is no longer totally and permanently disabled if such
determination occurs prior to the date a participant attains normal retirement age;
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the Armed Forces of the United
States of America, provided that the participant has been employed as a regular full-time
member of the employer's police force for a period of at least six months immediately prior to
the period of military service and the participant returns to employment within six months
following discharge from military service or within such longer period during which
employment rights are guaranteed by applicable law or under the terms of a collective
bargaining agreement with the employer;
Military service credit.
[Amended 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 998]
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the requirements of Chapter
43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided that the participant returns to employment
following such period of qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to
the plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would otherwise have
been paid to the plan during such period of qualified military service. The amount of
participant contributions shall be based upon an estimate of the compensation that would
have been paid to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during the 12 months
immediately preceding the period of qualified military service. The amount of participant
contributions calculated must be paid into the plan before the end of the period that
begins on the date of reemployment and ends on the earlier of the dates that end the
period that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military service or the date
that is five years after the date of reemployment;
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the Armed Forces of the
United States of America, not to exceed a total of three years, which occurred prior to the
date on which a participant first became employed as an employee of the employer,
provided that the participant shall purchase such credit and that such participant is not
entitled to receive, eligible to receive or is receiving retirement benefits for such military
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 32/483
F.
A.
B.
C.
service under a retirement system administered and wholly or partially paid for by any
other governmental agency except military retirement pay earned by a combination of
active and nonactive duty with a Reserve or National Guard component of the armed
forces which is payable upon the attainment of a specified age and period of service
under 10 U.S.C. § 67 (relating to retired pay for nonregular service). The purchase price
for such service shall be computed by multiplying the average normal cost rate for the
plan as certified by the Public Employee Retirement Commission and not to exceed 10%
times the participant's average annual rate of compensation during the first three years of
employment and multiplying the result times the number of years and fractions thereof
being purchased. Interest shall be paid at a rate of 4.75%, compounded annually from
the first date of employment to the date of payment.
Employment shall not mean, for purposes of determining aggregate service: Any period of
disability for a participant who was disabled as a result of a non-service-related disability.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE SALARY
The average monthly salary earned by the participant and paid by the employer during the
final 36 months immediately preceding termination of active employment. Salary shall include
the regular gross pay of the employee, whether salary or hourly wages, including, overtime
pay, holiday pay, longevity pay and other types of additions to compensation by the employer
for police services rendered. Salary shall exclude for this purpose any single sum or
extraordinary payments made which are not directly attributable to active employment during
the averaging period, including but not limited to payment for accumulated sick leave,
payment of a longevity bonus, or payment of a back pay damage award.
Final monthly average salary shall be calculated by taking into account only those periods
during which an employee receives salary, as that term is defined in this definition. Therefore,
for example, the final monthly average salary for a participant who receives disability benefits
from this plan or who is voluntarily or involuntarily serving in the United States Armed Forces
during the final 36 months of aggregate service shall be based on the period during which the
employee last received salary (as defined in Subsection A) from the employer.
Salary used to determine final monthly average salary shall be limited on an annual basis to
the amount specified for government plans in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17), as
adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY
A legal reserve life insurance company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE
The first day of the month coincident with or next following the date on which the participant retires
from employment on which the payment of retirement benefits pursuant to this plan shall
commence.
MEMBER'S SALARY AT TIME OF DEATH
The last month of basic salary before the date of death.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION
The minimum obligation of the municipality as determined by the actuary pursuant to the
provisions of the Act.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE
The date on which the participant has completed 25 years of aggregate service with the employer
and has attained age 55.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 33/483
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE
The first day of the month coincident with or next following the date on which the participant
attains normal retirement age.
NOTICE OR ELECTION
A written document prepared in the form specified by the plan administrator. If such notice or
election is to be provided by the employer or the plan administrator, it shall be mailed in a properly
addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the person entitled thereto, on
or before the last day of the specified notice or election period. If such notice or election is to be
provided to the employer or the plan administrator, it must be received by the intended recipient on
or before the last day of the specified notice or election period.
PARTICIPANT
An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to participate in the plan as provided in
§ 45-2A and who has not for any reason ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND
The Police Pension Fund administered under the terms of this plan and which shall include all
money, property, investments, policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN
The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time and designated as the "Township of
Wilkins Police Pension Plan."
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR
The committee or the individual appointed for the purpose of supervising and administering the
provisions of the plan. In the event that no such appointment is made, the plan administrator shall
be the Board.
PLAN YEAR
The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT
A retirement annuity or retirement income endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any
other form of insurance contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE
November 1, 2001, the date upon which this amendment and restatement of the plan becomes
effective.
SERVICE INCREMENT
The amount calculated pursuant to § 45-4D on behalf of a participant for each completed year of
service in excess of 25 years, not to exceed $100.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY
A condition of physical or mental impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the
usual and customary duties of employment and which is reasonably expected to continue to be
permanent for the remainder of the participant's lifetime. For purposes of this definition and § 45-5,
a condition shall not be treated as a total and permanent disability unless such condition is a direct
result of and occurs in the line of duty of employment. Therefore, an employee whose physical or
mental impairment does not occur in the line of duty or which is the result of alcoholism, addiction
to narcotics, perpetration of a felonious criminal activity or is willfully self-inflicted is not entitled to
receive disability benefits under the plan.
§ 45-2. Participation in plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 34/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Eligibility requirements. Each employee who is employed as a regular, full-time permanent
member of the Police Department of the employer shall participate herein as of the date on which
such employee's employment first commences or recommences, provided all prerequisites to
participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled, including but not limited to completion of all
forms required by the plan administrator. Each employee who was a participant in the plan on the
day prior to the restatement date shall continue to be a participant on and after the restatement
date subject to the terms and conditions of the plan as set forth herein.
Participation requirements. The Board shall furnish the plan administrator with written notification
of the appointment of any new full-time permanent employee who is eligible for participation
hereunder. Each participant hereunder shall be required to make contributions to the plan, as
provided in § 45-3A hereof, and shall execute and complete any enrollment or application forms
as required by the plan administrator.
Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a participant hereunder
shall provide a written notice in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator which designates
a beneficiary at the time participation commences. The participant's election of any such
beneficiary may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of the beneficiary, at any time,
provided the participant provides the written notice of the changed designation to the plan
administrator in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any designation of a beneficiary
made in any manner other than one acceptable to the plan administrator shall be null and void and
have no effect under the terms of this plan.
Change in status. A participant who remains in the service of the employer but ceases to be an
employee eligible for participation hereunder or ceases or fails to make any contributions which
are required as a condition of participation hereunder shall have no further benefit accruals occur
until the individual again qualifies as a participant hereunder eligible to resume such accrual of
benefits.
Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the plan administrator with such information as will aid
the plan administrator in the administration of the plan. Such information shall include all pertinent
data on employees for purposes of determining their eligibility to participate in this plan.
§ 45-3. Contributions.
Participant contributions. Each participant shall, as a requirement of participation, pay regular
contributions to the pension fund in an amount equal to 5% of the participant's compensation.
Each participant shall complete the necessary forms to authorize the payment of participant
contributions by way of payroll deduction, if necessary.
Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding Subsection A, if an actuarial
study performed by the actuary shows that the condition of the pension fund is such that payments
into the pension fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum percentages prescribed
in Subsection A or may be eliminated, and that if such payments are reduced or eliminated,
contributions by the employer will not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially sound, the
employer may, by ordinance or resolution, reduce or eliminate payments into the pension fund by
participants.
Employer contributions. The actuary, in accordance with the Act, shall determine the minimum
municipal obligation of the employer. The employer shall pay into the pension fund, by annual
appropriations or otherwise, the contributions necessary to satisfy the minimum municipal
obligation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall preclude the employer
from contributing an amount in excess of the minimum municipal obligation.
State aid. General municipal pension system state aid or any other amount of state aid received
by the employer in accordance with the Act from the commonwealth may be deposited into the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 35/483
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
pension fund governed by this plan in amounts determined by the Board and shall be used to
reduce the amount of the minimum municipal obligation of the employer.
Gifts. The Board is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or otherwise any money or property,
real or personal, for the benefit of the plan and cause the same to be held as a part of the pension
fund. The care, management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be vested in the
Board or its delegate, the plan administrator, subject to the direction of the donor and not
inconsistent with applicable laws and the terms of the plan.
Employer reversion. At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to be used for, or diverted
to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries,
including payment of any reasonable plan expenses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if the contribution was made
due to a mistake and the contribution is returned within one year of the date on which the
discovery of the mistaken payment of the contribution was made or reasonably should have been
made or the plan is terminated, as provided in § 45-10.
§ 45-4. Retirement benefits
Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to a normal retirement benefit after retirement
on or after the participant has attained normal retirement age.
Normal retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to
Subsection A shall receive a benefit paid monthly in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's
final monthly average salary as determined herein.
Late retirement. A participant may continue in employment beyond the attainment of normal
retirement age subject to the employer's rules and regulations regarding retirement age. If a
participant who has met the requirements of Subsection A continues in employment beyond
normal retirement age, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until employment ceases and the
participant's retirement actually begins. The retirement benefit of a participant who continues
employment after attainment of normal retirement age shall be calculated in accordance with
Subsection B on the basis of the final monthly average salary as of such participant's actual
retirement and shall commence on the participant's late retirement date.
Service increment benefit. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, each
participant who shall retire upon completion of the 26th anniversary of aggregate service or
thereafter may be entitled to receive a monthly service increment benefit. Such service increment
benefit shall only be available to a participant who shall retire on a retirement date after attainment
of normal retirement age and whose aggregate service for purposes of this subsection shall only
include periods of time when the participant actively renders service in employment and shall not
include any period of time during which the participant received a disability benefit under the terms
of this plan or was not otherwise in active employment. Such service increment benefit shall be an
amount equal to $100 and shall be paid monthly in addition to the amount of normal retirement
benefit calculated pursuant to Subsection B.
Payment of benefits. Retirement benefit payments shall be payable as of the first day of the month
coincident with or next following, the participant's retirement date and the first day of each month
thereafter during the participant's lifetime. A participant must complete an application for benefit in
the manner prescribed by the plan administrator and deliver such application to the plan
administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which benefit payments shall commence.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, no retirement benefit payments nor any
other payments shall be due or payable on or before the date that is 30 days after the date the
plan administrator receives the application for benefits. Payment of benefits hereunder shall cease
as of the date of death of the participant.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 36/483
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
G.
H.
Cost-of-living adjustments. Each participant who shall retire and receive a retirement benefit
determined pursuant to Subsection B hereunder shall be entitled to receive annual cost-of-living
increases to the amount of benefit payable to such participant under Subsection B. Such cost-ofliving
increases shall not exceed any of the following limits: the percentage increase in the CPI-W
for the year in which the participant was last employed as an employee of the employer; the total
retirement benefits payable under this plan shall not exceed 75% of the participant's final monthly
average salary; the total cost-of-living increase shall not exceed 30% of the participant's original
retirement benefit under this plan; and the cost-of-living increases shall not impair the actuarial
soundness of the pension fund.
Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, no benefit
provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the employer shall exceed, as an annual
amount, the amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), as adjusted pursuant to Code Section
415(d), assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits). The
limitations described in this subsection shall be governed by the following conditions and
definitions:
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits)
or where the employee contributes to the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be
adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with applicable regulations to
determine the limitation contained herein;
In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of age 62 by the participant,
the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount
determined pursuant to this subsection commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a
qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a period of at least 15 years of
service, including applicable military service, as a full-time employee of a police or fire
department is taken into account in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation
contained herein shall not apply;
In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age 65 by the participant, the
limitation herein shall be adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with
applicable regulations to the amount determined commencing at age 65;
Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer expressed as an annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed
the limitation of this subsection, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained a
defined contribution plan in which the participant has participated; however, in the case of a
participant who is not receiving a disability retirement benefit pursuant to § 45-5B or a
survivor benefit pursuant to § 45-6B or E with fewer than 10 years of participation, the
limitation expressed in this Subsection G(4) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
participation less than 10 but in no event shall this limitation be less than $1,000;
The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for calculation purposes,
shall be applied to all defined benefit plans maintained by the employer as one defined benefit
plan and to all defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one defined
contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted consistent with Code Section 415 and
regulations thereunder as applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
In the case of a Survivor Benefit under § 45-6B or E or a disability retirement benefit under
§ 45-5B, the adjustment under Subsection G(2) hereof shall not apply, and the applicable
limitation shall be the limitation contained herein without regard to the age of the benefit
recipient.
Required distributions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 37/483
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
I.
J.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit of any participant who
becomes entitled to benefits prior to death shall be distributed either:
Not later than the required beginning date; or
Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning date and extending over
the life of such participant or over the lives of such participant and a designated
beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such participant
or the joint life expectancies of such participant and a designated beneficiary).
If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior to the date when the entire
interest has been distributed after distribution of the benefits has begun in accordance with
Subsection H(1)(b) above, the remaining portion of such benefit shall be distributed at least
as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used under Subsection H(1)(b) as of the
date of the death.
If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before distribution of the benefit
has begun, the entire interest of such employee shall be distributed within five years of the
death of such employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any portion of the
employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated beneficiary, such portion
shall be distributed over the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending
beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such distributions begin not later than
one year after the date of the employee's death or such later date as provided by regulations
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury, then for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the
preceding sentence, the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed on
the date on which such distributions begin. Provided, however, that notwithstanding the
preceding sentence, if the designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant,
then the date on which distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than the date
upon which the employee would have attained age 70 1/2 and, further provided, if the
surviving spouse dies before the distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be
applied as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
For purposes of this section, the following definitions and procedures shall apply:
"Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar year following the later of
the calendar year in which the employee attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which
the employee retires.
The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual designated by the
employee under this plan according to its rules.
Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been paid to the surviving spouse
if such amount will become payable to the surviving spouse upon such child's reaching
majority (or other designated event permitted under regulations issued by the Secretary
of the Treasury).
For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee and/or the employee's
spouse (other than in the case of a life annuity) may be redetermined, but not more
frequently than annually.
Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not be subject to attachment,
execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall be payable only to the participant or
designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer.
Retired participants. Any participant who shall have retired prior to the restatement date shall not
have the benefit altered in any way by the provisions of this amended and restated plan except
where otherwise expressly provided herein. Such retired participants shall continue to have their
benefits governed by the terms of the plan in effect on the day preceding the restatement date.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 38/483
K.
L.
M.
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
O.
Any participant who shall have terminated employment and elected to receive a deferred
retirement benefit under § 45-7C shall have such benefit determined based upon the provisions of
the plan in effect as of the date of such termination of employment and shall not have the benefit
altered by the provisions of this amended and restated plan.
Limitation of liability. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the employer, the plan administrator,
any fiduciary or any agent or representative of any of the foregoing to provide any retirement or
other benefit to any participant or beneficiary which cannot be provided from the assets available
in the pension fund, whether such benefits are in pay status or otherwise payable under the terms
of the plan. The Board retains the right to amend or terminate this plan consistent with applicable
law at any time, with or without cause and whether or not such action directly or indirectly results
in the suspension, reduction or termination of any benefit payable under the plan or in pay status,
and without liability to any person for any such action.
Personal right of participant. The right to receive any benefits under this plan is a personal right of
the participant and shall expire upon the death of the participant. No heir, legatee, devisee,
beneficiary, assignee or other person claiming by or through a participant shall have any interest in
any benefits hereunder unless clearly and expressly so provided by the terms of this plan or the
provisions of applicable law. A participant's election, failure to make an election or revocation of an
election hereunder shall be final and binding on all persons.
Nonduplication of benefit. To avoid any duplication of benefits, a participant who is receiving a
retirement benefit under the plan and who shall resume employment shall have benefit payments
suspended until the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date such
employment shall cease. Upon resumption of benefit payments, such participant shall receive the
greater of the amount of the suspended benefit or the amount of benefit based upon final monthly
average salary and aggregate service as of the date that such period of resumed employment
shall cease.
Incorporation of Code Section 415 by reference. Notwithstanding anything contained in
Subsection G to the contrary, the limitations, adjustments, and other requirements prescribed in
Subsection G shall at all times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415 and the regulations
thereunder (as such apply to governmental plans), the terms of which are specifically incorporated
herein by reference.
Direct rollovers.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
This section applies to distributions made on or after December 31, 2001. Notwithstanding
any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election
under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the
plan administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution that is equal to at
least $500 paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct
rollover.
This section shall apply to distributions made on or after January 1, 2006. Notwithstanding
any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election
under this section, if a distributee does not make an election under Subsection A(1) and does
not elect to receive the distribution directly, the plan administrator shall make such transfer to
an individual retirement plan of a designated trustee or issuer pursuant to § 45-8C(1)(i). The
plan administrator shall notify the distributee, in writing, within a reasonable period of time and
as otherwise prescribed by law, that the distribution may be transferred to another individual
retirement plan.
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECT ROLLOVER
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 39/483
(a)
(b)
A.
B.
C.
A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee or the
plan administrator, if the distributee does not make an election.
DISTRIBUTEE
Includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former
employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former
spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined
in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or
former spouse.
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN
A qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account
described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in Code
Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), an annuity contract
described in Code Section 403(b), an eligible deferred compensation plan described in
Code Section 457(b), which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan.
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION
Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee,
except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is
one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than
annually) made for the life or (life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or
joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of 10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such
distribution is required under Code Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any
distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities).
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section of the plan, a portion of
the distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the
portion consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not includible in gross
income. However, such portion may only be paid to an individual retirement account
or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to
separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for
the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion
which is not includible.
§ 45-5. Disability retirement.
Disability retirement. A participant who shall incur a total and permanent disability before attaining
normal retirement age shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit as of the disability date.
Disability retirement benefit. A participant who retires due to a total and permanent disability,
pursuant to Subsection A, shall be eligible for a disability retirement benefit in an amount equal to
50% of the participant's final monthly average salary determined as of the disability date; however,
the disability benefit shall be no less than 50% of the member's salary at the time the disability
was incurred, as defined pursuant to § 45-1, determined as of the disability date. Any member
who received benefits for the same injuries under social security disability shall have the
participant's disability benefits offset or reduced by the amount of such benefits.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
Payment of disability benefits.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 40/483
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
Disability payments shall commence as of the first day of the month following the participant's
disability date and continue until the earliest of the death of the participant, cessation of total
and permanent disability, or attainment of normal retirement age (such a participant who
attains normal retirement age shall thereafter receive a normal retirement benefit pursuant to
§ 45-4B).
A participant who shall fail to return within three months to employment as an employee of the
employer upon cessation of total and permanent disability prior to attainment of normal
retirement age shall be deemed to have terminated employment as of the disability date, shall
not be entitled to any distribution of accumulated contributions pursuant to § 45-7B to the
extent that the total amount of disability payments exceeds the value of the participant's
accumulated contributions as of the disability date, and shall not be entitled to any other
benefits under the plan on account of any aggregate service as of the disability date.
Verification of disability. The plan administrator shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether a
participant shall have incurred a total and permanent disability. The plan administrator shall rely on
the report of a physician acceptable to the plan administrator. If the plan administrator shall
determine that a participant who is totally and permanently disabled has recovered sufficiently to
resume active employment as a police officer or if a participant refuses to undergo a medical
examination as directed by the plan administrator (such a medical examination may not be
required more frequently than once in any given twelve-month period), the payment of disability
retirement benefits shall cease.
Cessation of disability. A participant who is receiving payment of disability retirement benefits
under this plan must notify the plan administrator of any change which may cause a cessation of
entitlement to receipt of such benefits hereunder. If a participant fails to provide immediate notice
to the plan administrator of any such change in status and continues to receive payment of
benefits hereunder to which the participant is not entitled, then the plan may take whatever action
is necessary to recover any amount of improperly paid amounts, including legal action or offsetting
such amounts against any future payments of retirement or other benefits under the plan,
including the costs of such actions.
§ 45-6. Death benefits.
Death of participant. Upon the occurrence of the death of a participant, there shall be benefits
payable in accord with the following subsections of this section.
Survivor benefit. If a participant shall die after commencement of retirement or disability benefit
payments or after becoming eligible to receive retirement benefit payments under § 45-4A and
before retirement benefit payments commence, a survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving
spouse or dependent child(ren), if any, of the participant pursuant to Subsection C in an amount
equal to 50% of the benefit the participant was receiving or was eligible to receive as of the date of
death.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
Payment of survivor benefit. The survivor benefit commences as of the first day of the month
coincident with or immediately following the date of death of the participant. The survivor benefit
shall be paid monthly to the surviving spouse of the participant, if any, until the date of death of the
surviving spouse. Upon the death of the surviving spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, the
survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in equal shares to the surviving dependent child(ren) of the
deceased participant until attainment of age 18 or, if attending college, under or attaining the age
of 23. The shares payable to the surviving dependent child(ren) shall be adjusted as each child
ceases to be eligible to receive a share of the benefit hereunder.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 41/483
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Death of participant prior to retirement. If a participant shall die before payment of a benefit has
commenced and without eligibility for payment of a survivor benefit under § 45-6B or E, the
beneficiary shall be eligible to receive a distribution in an amount equal to the accumulated
contributions of the participant as of the date of death hereunder; the amount of distribution of
accumulated contributions shall be reduced by the amount of disability retirement benefits
hereunder.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
Killed-in-service death benefit.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970; amended 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 1003]
In the event a participant dies as a result of the performance of his duties, a survivor benefit
shall be payable. A participant is presumed to be killed in service if he/she dies due to a fatal
heart attack or stroke while on duty or not later than 24 hours after participating in a physical
training exercise or responding to an emergency.
In the event such a benefit becomes payable, the surviving spouse or dependent child(ren), if
any, of the participant shall receive a benefit pursuant to § 45-6C in an amount equal to 100%
of the member's salary at the time of death as defined pursuant to § 45-1. The benefit is
funded directly by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the benefit is offset by any
pension benefits payable and any workers' compensation that is payable. The benefit is
adjusted annually for changes in the Consumer Price Index.
§ 45-7. Termination of employment.
Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an employee except as
otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all interest and rights under this plan limited to those
contained in the following subsections of this section.
Distribution of accumulated contributions. A participant whose employment with the employer shall
terminate for any reason other than death or total and permanent disability prior to attainment of
normal retirement age shall be entitled to receive a distribution of accumulated contributions. Upon
receipt of such accumulated contributions, said participant and beneficiary shall not be entitled to
any further payments from the plan.
Deferred retirement benefit. A participant who shall have completed at least 12 years of aggregate
service and whose employment shall terminate for any reason other than due to death or total and
permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall be entitled to elect by filing
a written notice of the intention to vest with the plan administrator within 90 days of the date
employment ceases to receive a deferred retirement benefit in lieu of a distribution of accumulated
contributions under Subsection B. Such a deferred retirement benefit shall be equal to the
participant's accrued benefit as of the date employment terminates and shall commence after
application pursuant to § 45-5E and not earlier than the date which would be the participant's
normal retirement date under the plan if the participant remained in employment until such date.
§ 45-8. Administration.
Plan administrator. The plan administrator shall be the committee or the individual appointed by
the Board who shall have the power and authority to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and
deliver all instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this plan. The plan
administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf to any persons it deems appropriate. If a
plan administrator is not appointed, the Board shall be the plan administrator.
Police pension committee. The Board may appoint a Police Pension Committee to administer the
affairs of the plan. The Board shall delegate such authority as it shall deem appropriate to the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 42/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Committee. The Committee, if one is appointed, shall consist of not more than five members, one
of whom, shall be a representative of the Wilkins Police Association. Each member of the
Committee shall serve in that capacity until death, resignation, removal or otherwise. Each
member may resign by delivering written notice to the Board and other members of the
Committee. Vacancies on the Committee shall be filled in the same manner as the position was
originally filled by the Board; provided, however, that the remaining members of the Committee
shall have full power to act pending the filling of such vacancies.
Authority and duties of the plan administrator.
The plan administrator shall have full power and authority to do whatever shall, in its
judgment, be reasonably necessary for the proper administration and operation of the plan.
The interpretation or construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by the plan
administrator or any action of the plan administrator taken in good faith shall, upon the
Board's review and approval thereof, be final and conclusive upon all parties hereto, whether
employees, participants or other persons concerned. By way of specification and not limitation
and except as specifically limited hereafter, the plan administrator is authorized:
To construe this plan;
To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any employee to participate herein;
To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable hereunder to any participant
or beneficiary;
To authorize any and all disbursements;
To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant or other person in filing any
application or election;
To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required by law or as the plan
administrator deems appropriate, information explaining the plan;
To require from the employer or any participant such information as shall be necessary
for the proper administration of the plan; and
To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the administration of the plan, including
such legal, clerical, accounting and actuarial services as may be required by any
applicable law or laws.
To select an individual retirement plan provider (either the state or a federally regulated
financial institution) and invest funds in connection with the rollover of mandatory
distributions as described in § 45-4O(2).
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 970]
The plan administrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from or modify the terms of the
plan or change or add to any benefits provided by the plan or to waive or fail to apply any
requirements of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the plan administrator shall
have no power to adopt, amend, or terminate the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to
determine or require any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively reserved to
the Board.
Police Pension Committee organization. The Committee may organize itself in any manner
deemed appropriate to effectuate its purposes hereunder, provided that it shall operate and act by
a majority of its members at the time in office either by vote at a meeting or in writing without a
meeting. The Committee shall appoint a Chairman, a Secretary who may, but need not be, a
Committee member, and such other agents as it may deem advisable. The Committee may
authorize any one or more of its members to execute any document or documents, including any
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 43/483
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or direction, and shall notify the Board, in
writing, of each such member so authorized; however, if no such member is so authorized, the
Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized. Any trustee or other fiduciary appointed
hereunder shall accept and be fully protected in relying upon any document executed by the
designated members (or the Chairman in the absence of a designation) as representing a valid
action by the Committee until the Committee shall file with such fiduciary a written revocation of
such designation. The Committee shall meet at least one time in each plan year, and it shall
maintain and keep such records as are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as may
be required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and shall provide for the preparation and
filing of such forms, reports or documents as may be required to be filed with any governmental
agency or department and with the participants or other persons entitled to benefits under the
plan.
Plan administrator costs. The plan administrator shall serve without compensation for services
unless otherwise agreed by the Board in writing. All reasonable expenses incident to the
functioning of the plan administrator, including, but not limited to, fees of accountants, counsel,
actuaries and other specialists, and other costs of administering the plan, may be paid from the
pension fund upon approval by the Board to the extent permitted under applicable law and not
otherwise paid by the employer.
Hold harmless. No member of the Board, the plan administrator, the enrolled actuary, nor any
other person involved in the administration of the plan shall be liable to any person on account of
any act or failure to act which is taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing their
respective duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent permitted by law, the employer shall,
and hereby does agree to, indemnify and hold harmless the plan administrator and each
successor and each of any such individual's heirs, executors and administrators, and the
delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or corporation which is independent
of the employer and which renders services to the plan for a fee) from any and all liability and
expenses, including counsel fees, reasonably incurred in any action, suit or proceeding to which
he/she is or may be made a party by reason of being or having been a member, delegate or
appointee of the plan administrator, except in matters involving criminal liability, intentional or
willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance to cover claims of a nature described
above, then there shall be no right of indemnification except to the extent of any deductible
amount under the insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed the
insured amount.
Approval of benefits. The plan administrator shall review and approve or deny any application for
retirement benefits within 30 days following receipt thereof or within such longer time as may be
necessary under the circumstances. Any denial of an application for retirement benefits shall be in
writing and shall specify the reason for such denial.
Appeal procedure. Any person whose application for retirement benefits is denied, who questions
the amount of benefit paid, who believes a benefit should have commenced which did not so
commence or who has some other claim arising under the plan ("claimant") shall first seek a
resolution of such claim under the procedure hereinafter set forth.
Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the plan administrator which shall fully
describe the nature of the claim. The plan administrator shall review the claim and make an
initial determination approving or denying the claim.
If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the plan administrator shall, within 90 days (or such
other period as may be established by applicable law) from the time the application is
received, mail notice of such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may be extended
by the plan administrator if special circumstances so require for up to 90 additional days by
the plan administrator's delivering notice of such extension to the claimant within the first
ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall be written in a manner calculated to be
understood by the claimant and, if a notice of denial, shall set forth the specific plan
provisions on which the denial is based, an explanation of additional material or information, if
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 44/483
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
any, necessary to perfect such claim and a statement of why such material or information is
necessary, and an explanation of the review procedure.
Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have the right to request a full and
fair review by the Board of the initial determination. Such request for review must be made by
notice to the Board within 60 days of receipt of such notice of denial. During such review, the
claimant or a duly authorized representative shall have the right to review any pertinent
documents and to submit any issues or comments in writing. The Board shall, within 60 days
after receipt of the notice requesting such review (or in special circumstances, such as where
the Board in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days of receipt of such notice),
submit its decision in writing to the person or persons whose claim has been denied. The
decision shall be final, conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a manner
calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall contain specific references to the
pertinent plan provisions on which the decision is based.
Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay status shall be filed within 90
days following the date of the first payment which would be adjusted if the claim is granted
unless the plan administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice requesting a review of a denial
of a claim within the time limitations specified above shall be deemed to have waived such
claim or right to review.
Nothing contained herein is intended to abridge any right of a claimant to appeal any final
decision hereunder to a court of competent jurisdiction under 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752. No decision
hereunder is a final decision from which such an appeal may be taken until the entire appeal
procedure of this subsection of the plan has been exhausted.
§ 45-9. Pension fund.
Operation of the pension fund.
The Board is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the investment of the assets of the
pension fund, subject to the provisions of the laws of the commonwealth and of this plan and
any amendment thereto.
The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan and, to the extent not
paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses of administering the plan pursuant to
authorization by the employer.
The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the exclusive benefit of its employees.
It expects to make the contributions to the pension fund required under the plan. The
employer shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in the pension fund; benefits
are payable only from the pension fund and only to the extent that there are monies available
therein. The pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under the plan,
including contributions made pursuant to the provisions hereof and the investments,
reinvestments and proceeds thereof. The pension fund shall be held, managed, and
administered pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the
plan, the employer has exclusive authority and discretion to manage and control the pension
fund assets. The employer may, however, appoint a trustee, custodian or investment
manager, at its sole discretion.
Powers and duties of employer. With respect to the pension fund, the employer shall have the
following powers, rights and duties, in addition to those vested in it elsewhere in the plan or by law,
unless such duties are delegated:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 45/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable and to deposit any cash
so retained in any bank or similar financial institution (including any such institution which may
be appointed to serve as trustee hereunder) without liability for interest thereon.
To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and keep said fund invested,
without distinction between principal and income, in securities which are at the time legal
investments for fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act or as the same
may be subsequently modified or amended.
To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for cash or on credit at such
times as it may deem appropriate; to exchange such property; to grant options for the
purchase or exchange thereof.
To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization, consolidation, merger, extension
or other similar plan affecting property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation pursuant to any such plan.
To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to property held in the fund.
To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the fund and in connection
therewith to grant proxies, discretionary or otherwise.
To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be appropriate for the purposes of
this plan no matter where situated, including, in those cases where a bank has been
appointed to serve as trustee hereunder, the savings department of its own commercial bank.
In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all of the powers, rights, and
privileges conferred upon trustees by the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act or as the
same may be subsequently modified or amended and the power to do all acts, take all
proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although not specifically mentioned herein,
as the employer may deem necessary to administer the pension fund.
To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and commingled basis with the
assets of other pension plans maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective commingled trust fund maintained
by a bank or trust company, including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this plan with assets of other
eligible, participating plans through such a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any
assets of the plan which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to all of
the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as amended from time to time, which
declaration, if required by its terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as pan of the plan
to the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled trust fund by the plan.
To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry out the provisions of the
plan, provided that if a trustee is appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and demands with respect to
the plan.
To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without liability for the payment of
interest thereon and to decline to make payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is
made by a court of competent jurisdiction.
To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund, any taxes which may be
imposed thereon, whether with respect to the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 46/483
(15)
(16)
C.
D.
E.
F.
with respect to the interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to pay; to contest,
in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax, assessment, claim or demand which may be
levied or made against or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to, accountants, investment
advisors, counsels, actuaries, physicians, appraisers, consultants, professional plan
administrators and other specialists) or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with the management of the
fund; to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely
conclusively upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by it in good
faith reliance upon the advice or opinion of such persons or firms, provided such persons or
firms were prudently chosen by the employer, taking into account the interests of the
participants and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons or firms to
perform their assigned functions.
To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the management of (including the
power to acquire and dispose of) all or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such
persons or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the Investment Advisors Act of
1940, is a bank (as defined in that Act), or is an insurance company qualified to manage,
acquire or dispose of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one state; in such
event, the employer shall follow the directions of such investment manager or managers with
respect to the acquisition and disposition of fund assets, but shall not be liable for the acts or
omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it be under any obligation to
review or otherwise manage any fund assets which are subject to the management of such
investment manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the trustee shall not be
permitted to retain such an investment manager except with the express written consent of
the employer.
Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make separate investments for
individual participants or to maintain separate investments for each participant's account but may
invest contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common investments.
Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is appointed, the trustee shall be
entitled to such reasonable compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee unless such compensation is prohibited by law. Such compensation, and
all expenses reasonably incurred by the trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a
charge upon the employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after 30 days'
written notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no obligation to pay such costs and
expenses, and, in the event of its failure to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same, or
to be reimbursed for the payment thereof, from the pension fund.
Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be evaluated annually or at
more frequent intervals by the trustee and a written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year
end of the fund and as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee and such
additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the condition of the fund and all receipts,
disbursements and other transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
Value of the pension fund. All determinations as to the value of the assets of the pension fund and
as to the amount of the liabilities thereof shall be made by the employer or its appointed trustee,
whose decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto, to the participants
and beneficiaries and their estates. In making any such determination, the employer or trustee
shall be entitled to seek and rely upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers,
appraisers and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports as to sales and
quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as contained in newspapers and in financial
publications.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 47/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
§ 45-10. Amendment and termination.
Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time or from time to time by an
instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer under its municipal seal by officers
duly authorized to execute such instrument and delivered to the Board; provided, however:
That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any beneficiary of a deceased participant
of any of the benefits to which each is entitled under this plan with respect to contributions
previously made;
That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held under this plan other
than for the benefit of employees, and no funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan
shall, except as provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by the
employer; and
That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit modification shall be made
unless the cost estimate described in § 45-11C has been prepared and presented to the
Board in accordance with the Act.
Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to terminate this plan in its entirety at
any time by an instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer.
Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the Act governing financially
distressed municipalities, the liability of the employer to make contributions to the pension fund
shall automatically terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its adjudication
as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors.
Distribution upon termination.
In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested benefits accrued by the
affected participants as of the date of such termination, to the extent funded on such date,
shall be nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan, the employer shall
direct either that the plan administrator continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of
participants in the pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other than
those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such termination until all funds have
been distributed in accordance with the provisions; or that the plan administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to the vested accrued benefit to the date.
If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all vested accrued benefits as
of the date of plan termination, priority shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts
attributable to mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are applied to the
distribution of any vested benefits attributable to other sources hereunder.
All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be distributed and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by
the employer which effects such termination.
Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others entitled to receive a benefit
under the terms of the plan have been satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the
pension fund, such residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as such
return does not contravene any provision of law, and any remaining balance, in excess of
employer contributions, shall be returned to the commonwealth.
Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and termination of the plan as provided
herein, the employer shall dispose of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan
and applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan shall any part
of the corpus or income of the pension fund, after deducting any administrative or other expenses
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 48/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
properly chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their beneficiaries or their estates.
§ 45-11. Funding standard requirements.
Actuarial valuations.
The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least biennially unless the employer
is applying or has applied for supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the
Act, whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the beginning of each plan year
occurring in an odd-numbered calendar year, beginning with the year 1985.
Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an approved actuary, as such term
is defined in the Act.
The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation report or investigation
required by the Act or any other expense which is permissible under the terms of the Act and
which are directly associated with administering the plan shall be an allowable administrative
expense payable from the assets of the pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include
but not be limited to the following:
Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments and investment
management fees;
Accounting expenses;
Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to defend the fund; and
Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials; provided, however, that the
municipal officials of the employer, in their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services
provided to the plan to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit
the plan; and further provided, that the plan administrator shall document all such
expenses item by item and, where necessary, hour by hour.
Duties of chief administrative officer.
Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision of the chief
administrative officer.
The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the financial requirements of the
plan on the basis of the most recent actuarial report and shall determine the minimum
municipal obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any given plan year.
The chief administrative officer shall submit the financial requirements of the plan and the
minimum municipal obligation of the employer to the Board annually and shall certify the
accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the Act.
Benefit plan modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the employer,
the chief administrative officer of the plan shall provide to the Board a cost estimate of the
proposed benefit plan modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Board the impact of the proposed benefit plan modification on
the future financial requirements of the plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the
employer with respect to the plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 49/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
§ 45-12. Miscellaneous provisions.
Employment rights. No employee of the employer nor anyone else shall have any rights
whatsoever against the employer or the plan administrator as a result of this plan except those
expressly granted hereunder. Participation in this plan shall not give any right to any employee to
be retained in the employ of the employer nor shall it interfere with the right of the employer to
discharge any employee and to deal with such employee without regard to the effect such
treatment might have upon participation in this plan.
Meaning of certain words. For purposes of this plan, the masculine gender shall include the
feminine gender and the singular shall include the plural, and vice versa, in all cases wherever the
person or context shall plainly so require. Headings of sections and subsections are inserted only
for convenience of reference and are not to be considered in the construction of the plan.
Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish to the plan administrator
(and, where applicable, the trustee) information in the employer's possession as the plan
administrator and the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under the plan.
Severability of provisions. Should any provisions of this plan be held illegal or invalid for any
reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan
shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been inserted
herein.
Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or mentally incapable of receiving or
acknowledging receipt of any payment of pension benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so incapacitated and that another
person or institution is maintaining the participant and that no guardian or committee has been
appointed for the participant, may provide for such payment of pension benefits hereunder to such
person or institution so maintaining the participant, and any such payments so made shall be
deemed for every purpose to have been made to such participant.
Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal of the pension fund are for
the sole use and benefit of the participants covered hereunder, and to the extent permitted by law,
shall be free, clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts, contracts or
agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be contracted, and from all claims and
liabilities now or hereafter incurred by any participant or beneficiary.
Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable under the plan to or on behalf
of a participant who has died, if the plan provides that the payment of such benefits shall be made
to the participant's estate, and if no administration of such participant's estate is pending in the
court of proper jurisdiction, then the plan administrator, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to
the surviving spouse of such deceased participant, or, if there is no surviving spouse, to such
participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall
prevent the plan administrator from insisting upon the commencement of estate administration
proceedings and the delivery of any such benefits to a duly appointed executor or administrator.
Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give any participant or
beneficiary any interest in any specific property of the pension fund or any right except to receive
such distributions as are expressly provided for under the plan.
Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically required by
other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer or agent of the employer or plan
administrator shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person under any
provision of the plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 50/483
J.
[1]
[1]
Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or conformed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, and shall be construed and enforced
according to the laws of the commonwealth, excepting such commonwealth's choice of law rules.
§ 45-13. (Reserved)
§ 45-14. (Reserved)
§ 45-15. (Reserved)
§ 45-16. (Reserved)
§ 45-17. (Reserved)
Article II. Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 944[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article II, Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan,
adopted 3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 808, as amended.
§ 45-18. Improvement of benefits authorized.
Wilkins Township, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System,
hereby elects to change its member benefits in that system as authorized by the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974, as amended,[1] and does hereby agree to be bound by all
the requirements and provisions of said Law, and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities. All references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated
between the Board and the municipality under the provisions of Article IV of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
§ 45-19. Membership.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all permanent,
municipal employees of the Township. Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a
temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on a fee basis.
§ 45-20. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or partial year thereof that the
member was employed by the Township from original date of hire or the expiration of the member's
probationary period if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement dated July 29,
2002, shall accrue based on all credited services granted and earned in accordance with this section.
§ 45-21. Payment of obligations.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 51/483
[1]
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and the agreement between the
system and Wilkins Township shall be made by the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 45-22. Benefits, obligations.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the system shall provide the benefits set forth in the
agreement between the Board and Wilkins Township, dated July 29, 2002. The passage and adoption
of this article by Wilkins Township is an official acceptance of said agreement and the financial
obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit package. Wilkins Township hereby
assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or which may be created due to the acceptance of
the benefit structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
§ 45-23. Repealer.
Wilkins Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the Township plan and it shall
become effective and specifically repeals Ordinance Number 808 either immediately or on May 1,
2002, which is the effective date of the amended agreement dated July 29, 2002, between the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and Wilkins Township, whichever is later.
§ 45-24. Filing of provisions; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal
employees of Wilkins Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be effective the
first day of January, 1962, with the revised plan structure reflected in the agreement dated July 29,
2002, effective the first day of May, 2002.
Chapter 50. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 50, Salaries and Compensation, adopted 1-25-1993 by Ord. No. 833, was repealed 7-14-
2003 by Ord. No. 955. Current provisions regarding salaries and compensation of Township
employees and officials is on file in the Township offices.]
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 61. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
948. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 61-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Wilkins Alarm System Ordinance."
§ 61-2. Repealer.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 52/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 61-3. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community, to deter alarms requiring police, fire and emergency medical personnel to respond in the
absence of an emergency thereby limiting the availability of emergency personnel and severely
affecting the public safety, to prevent public nuisances and unreasonable noise which cause
substantial public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm and to prohibit and require the removal of such
nuisances prejudicial to the public health or safety.
§ 61-4. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed
and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
The word "may" is permissive.
§ 61-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ALARM SYSTEM
Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical, electronic, or battery operated, arranged to
signal by trunk line the occurrence of a police, fire, hazard or medical emergency requiring urgent
attention and to which police, fire or emergency medical units are expected to respond.
ANSWERING SERVICE
A service whereby trained employees, in attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice
messages from automatic dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location, where such
employees have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a
trunk line to the communications center of the police, fire or emergency medical service
department.
AUDIBLE ALARM
Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the interior or exterior of a building, structure or
facility and emits a warning signal audible outside the building, structure or facility and is designed
to attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring Police or Fire
Department response.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE
A device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to transmit a signal by a
voice or coded message that indicates that an emergency condition exists and the need for an
emergency response is required.
CENTRAL STATION
A protective system or group of such systems operated privately for customers by a person, firm
or corporation which accepts recorded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 53/483
A.
B.
C.
station having operators and guards in attendance at all times who have the duty to take
appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying of messages to the
communications center of the Police or Fire Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE
The Police Chief of the Wilkins Township Police Department.
EMERGENCY
A police, fire, hazard or medical crisis, exigency or emergency.
FALSE ALARM
An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully or by inadvertence,
negligence or unintentional act, to which the Police Department, Fire Department or the
Wilkins-Churchill Rescue One (or its affiliate or successor) responds. The definition excludes
alarms caused by malfunctions of the Wilkins communication center receiving equipment;
alarms for which the user has attempted to cancel a response; testing or repairing of
telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside the premises; acts of God, such as
earthquake or flood; an attempted illegal entry; a crime in progress; or, in the case of
emergency medical alarm, an actual medical emergency requiring police, fire and/or medical
personnel. If doubt exists as to the cause of the false alarm, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall make a decision regarding the circumstances of the activation. If a call is
cancelled with the police communication center before police, fire, or emergency medical
service personnel are dispatched from their respective base, the alarm will not be counted as
a false alarm.
Multiple alarms received by the Police Department before the system can be deactivated or
repaired within 72 hours of awareness of the alarm malfunction shall be considered a single
alarm.
The definition of a false alarm also includes the intentional activation of a holdup alarm for
other than a holdup in progress, the intentional activation of a burglary alarm for other than a
burglary, the intentional activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency or
the intentional activation of a fire alarm for other than fire or hazard.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Any Wilkins Township Volunteer Fire Company.
FIRE EMERGENCY
A fire.
HAZARD EMERGENCY
An explosion, leak of toxic gas, liquid or solid or a potential explosion or leak.
INTERMEDIARY
A central station protective system or an answering service as herein defined.
KEY
To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message either directly or indirectly by
an automatic dialing device.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY
An emergency involving the health of a person.
PERMIT
Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the Township upon payment of the required
fee.
POLICE COMMUNICATION CENTER
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 54/483
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
The police, fire emergency medical service communication center through which calls are
dispatched.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Wilkins Police Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY
An incident requiring prompt response by the Police Department.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, County of Allegheny.
TRUNK LINE
A telephone line leading into the communication center of the Police Department or answering
service that is for the purpose of handling calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified
by and issued by the telephone company.
§ 61-6. Prohibited alarms.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, owners or users of audible alarms shall equip such
audible alarms with a timing mechanism that shall disengage the audible alarm after a maximum
of 30 minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township
and shall be disconnected by the owner or user within 60 days from the effective date of this
chapter.
This section shall not apply to single-family residences.
§ 61-7. Installations to be registered.
Within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, every user who has installed an alarm
system or has caused an alarm to be installed on their premises in the Township shall furnish to
the Chief of Police the following information:
The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or user.
The address where the device is installed and the telephone number at that address.
The name, address and telephone number of any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the device is installed,
including the names and phone numbers of a minimum of three individuals who are
authorized to respond to an emergency alarm, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, and gain
access to the address where the device is installed, and to disengage and reactivate the
alarm system.
The name and telephone number of any person, firm or corporation, if any, other than the
alarm supplier, who is responsible for maintenance and repair of the system.
The type of system, i.e., holdup, burglary, fire or medical emergency.
Users of alarm system devices whose devices were installed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall, within 60 days after such enactment, supply the Chief of Police with the information
specified in Subsection A of this section.
Upon approval of the registration, a permit shall be issued pursuant to § 61-8A hereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 55/483
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential and shall be for the
authorized use of the Police Department only.
§ 61-8. User's application and permit; fees.
The user's fee for an alarm system permit shall be paid annually as set by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners. Said permit shall be obtained by or on behalf of the owner of the premises
upon which the alarm system is installed from the Police Department prior to the installation of the
alarm system. Alarm systems installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall receive a
permit upon approval of registration.
The application shall contain the address of the property, the name of the business, if applicable,
the name of the owner, tenant or agent responsible for the property, the alarm supplier or other
entity responsible for maintaining the system, the type of alarm (burglary, fire, holdup or medical),
how the alarm signal will be received by the communications center (tape, central station, etc.), at
least three alternate emergency numbers of persons to be contacted to disengage/reset the alarm
and to secure the property and any additional information as may be determined to be necessary.
It shall be the owner's responsibility to notify the Police Department and answering service in
writing whenever the foregoing information changes.
The permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and shall be valid for one calendar year
after it is issued or until revoked by the Chief of Police. The permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous location upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for
inspection outside the premises by the police.
Users who fail to obtain a permit within 60 days after the alarm system is activated or within 60
days after the effective date of this chapter, if later, shall be liable to pay a late charge penalty as
set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each calendar year, or part thereof, that the
permit is not obtained.
All locations in the Township equipped with alarm systems, except as stated in this chapter, shall
secure and possess a valid permit for the same.
§ 61-9. False alarms.
By submitting an application for permit for the installation of an alarm system and the subsequent
installation of such a system or by the continuation of the use of an alarm system already installed at
the effective date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user thereof shall agree that such permit
application constitutes a waiver by such person of the right to bring or file any action, claim or
complaint whatsoever against any police officer, fireman or emergency medical service person who
makes a forced entry in response to such an alarm into the premises on which such an alarm is
installed as a result of entry into the subject premises. In the event that the owner of such premises is
a person other than the permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee or other user not the owner of
the premises on which the alarm is installed, such permit application shall constitute an indemnification
agreement by the applicant to hold harmless any such police officer or fireman, the township, the
Police Department, the Fire Department and emergency medical personnel, as appropriate, from any
and all damages whatsoever claimed by the lessor or owner of the premises on which the alarm is
installed.
§ 61-10. False alarm fines.
Consent to pay cost; schedule of costs. For the purposes of defraying the costs to the Police and
Fire Departments of responding to false alarms, the owner, lessee or user of any alarm system,
persons using the services of an intermediary, users of audible alarms and any other kind of alarm
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 56/483
B.
C.
D.
A.
systems or any other kind of direct or indirect connection with the police or fire communications
center, except persons using the two-way live voice communication by telephone shall, as a
condition to installation and continued operation of such equipment or service, execute a consent
in such form as may be prescribed by the Township that such owner, lessee or user shall pay the
Township for all false alarms upon the following schedule for each false alarm originating from the
owner's, lessee's or user's premises.
Number of
False Alarm Calls
(per year) Fine
3 No charge
4 $50.00
5 $60.00
6 $70.00
7 $80.00
8 $90.00
9-15 $100.00
15 and over $200.00
Failure to comply. Any such owner, lessee or user who fails to comply with the consent to the
waiver and indemnification described in § 61-9 of this chapter shall, within 60 days disconnect the
alarm system.
Any owner, lessee or user of an alarm system may revoke or refuse to consent to the waiver and
indemnification as set forth in § 61-9 above only by disconnecting the alarm system. With respect
to such systems installed at the effective date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user can refuse
or revoke the aforesaid consent by disconnecting such alarm system within 60 days from the
effective date of this chapter.
Penalties provided for false alarms that are relayed or transmitted by an intermediary shall be the
responsibility of the owner or user of the alarm system.
§ 61-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall pay a fine or penalty of not more than $600, or less than $50 which
fine or penalty shall be collected by suit brought in the name of the township before any district
magistrate, in like manner as debts of like amount may be sued for by existing laws. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 62. Amusements and Amusement Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 2-14-1983 as Ord. No.
700. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 62-1. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 57/483
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT
All manners and forms of entertainment, recreation or pastime, exhibitions, contests, displays and
games.
LICENSE YEAR
The fiscal year beginning March 16, 1983, and ending at midnight December 31, 1983, and from
thereon, shall mean the twelve-month period from January 1 through December 31.
MECHANICAL, ELECTRICAL OR ELECTRONIC DEVICE
Any machine or apparatus whatsoever utilizing gears, electrical current, circuits, electronic ions,
rays or beams, computer chips, fuel or solar cells or any other technological methods, magnets, or
in a combination thereof, offered for an established price for the purpose of amusement,
recreation or for games of skill and/or chance.
MUSIC BOX
Any mechanical device which, upon payment of a price, whether it be by insertion of a coin, metal
disc, slug, token or other form of monetary exchange, solely reproduces audio sounds.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation, trust or estate. Whenever
used in any section, the term "person" as applied to associations or partnerships shall mean the
members or partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PRICE
A monetary charge of any character received from the general public or a limited or selected
number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the privilege of playing, viewing or hearing such
mechanical, electrical or electronic device.
SEASONAL BUSINESS
Any business that is open to the general public for a period of time of less than six months out of
the license year to conduct any type of business whatsoever, whether it be retail or wholesale
sales, services or recreational, or any combination thereof.
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Township of Wilkins.
TOWNSHIP
The area within the corporate limits of the Township of Wilkins.
VIDEO DEVICES
Any mechanical device offered for a price to the general public or a select number thereof which
reproduces images from film, tape, discs or any other technogical method. This definition does not
include devices used in motion-picture theaters or drive-in theaters as these nomenclature are
commonly understood and whose principal business is to exhibit motion pictures by projecting
images upon a screen to be viewed by a common audience at a scheduled time, but does include
devices which are viewed at random by paying the established price; such devices may be
commonly known as "video jukeboxes," "peep shows" or any other nomenclature.
§ 62-2. License required.
No person or persons shall at any time offer to the general public within the Township of Wilkins for a
price any mechanical, electrical or electronic device for the playing of games and amusements or
music without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided by this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 58/483
A.
B.
§ 62-3. Device license required.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to offer to
the general public or a limited or selected number thereof mechanical, electrical or electronic devices,
music boxes or video devices unless a mechanical-device license shall have been issued.
§ 62-4. License application.
Any person or persons desiring to procure a mechanical-device license shall apply therefor, in writing,
to the Secretary of the Township of Wilkins. Said application shall set forth the name or names and the
residence or residences of the person or persons desiring to procure said license; if the business is a
ficticious name, in addition to the ficticious name, the applicant shall state the name and address of the
owners and principal place of business. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state, in
addition to the principal address of the corporation, the name and address of the Chairman of the
Board, the Board of Directors and the President of the corporation. If the officers of said corporation
are changed, the corporation shall give immediate notice to the Township of Wilkins of the name and
address of the new officers. The applicant shall state the name of the owner of the premises upon
which the aforesaid mechanical, electrical or electronic devices, music boxes or video devices are to
be used and installed, and if the owner of the premises is not the applicant, then the applicant shall set
forth the length of time for which the premises has been leased. The applicant shall also set forth the
nature and type of machine or machines to be installed and used, together with the manufacturer's
name and the manufacturers serial number. If the machine does not contain a manufacturer's serialnumber
plate which is in clear view of the general public, then the applicant shall imprint a series of
numbers for identification purposes upon said machine. The information heretofore required in the
application shall be furnished over the signature of the applicant or applicants and shall be made under
oath or affirmation.
§ 62-5. Investigation of applicant; transferability of license.
No license shall be granted until a period of seven days shall have lapsed from the date of
application, during which time the officials or employees of the Township of Wilkins may, at their
discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application.
No license shall be transferable from person to person or from premises to premises.
§ 62-6. Unlawful materials or devices.
This chapter shall not in any way be construed to authorize or permit any gambling devices
whatsoever or any mechanisms that have been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any
other way contrary to the law or that may be contrary to any present or future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, United States of America or ordinance of the Township of Wilkins, nor
shall the granting of a license be construed to authorize material, whether visual, audible, or a
combination of both, which may be construed to be pornographic in nature which is prohibited by the
laws of this commonwealth, United States of America or of ordinances of the Township of Wilkins.
§ 62-7. Payment of fee.
No license shall be issued until a fee as hereinafter set forth is paid annually to the Secretary of the
Township of Wilkins for each and every mechanical or electrical or electronic device, music box or
video device.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 59/483
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
§ 62-8. License fees.
[1]Each parson offering mechanical, electrical or electronic devices, music boxes or video devices
within the Township of Wilkins for a price shall, at the time of making application for a mechanical
device license, pay the fees in accordance with the schedule as adopted by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.[2]
Regular schedule. The regular schedule is applicable to mechanical, electrical or electronic
devices, music boxes or video devices which are installed or offered to the general public or a
selected number thereof for a price upon the premises of an establishment which is open to
the general public to do any type of business for a period of six months or more out of a
license year.
Seasonal schedule. The seasonal schedule shall be applicable to any mechanical, electrical
or electronic devices, music boxes or video devices which are installed or offered to the
general public or a selected number thereof for an established price upon the premises which
are open to the general public for any type of business for a period of time of less than six
months out of a license year.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Editor's Note: The most recent fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
The license fees heretofore mentioned shall not be prorated but shall remain the same for the
whole or any portion of any one year. The test of which fee is applicable is not the length of time
the aforesaid device may be upon the premises, but the length of time the business establishment
is open to the general public for any type of business during the license year.
Licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year this chapter is in effect.
Licensees shall obtain new licenses for each device subject to a license fee and pay the required
fee on or before January 31 of each year following a license expiration.
§ 62-9. Administration.
The Township Manager shall designate township employees to enforce this chapter, and they shall
have the following duties and powers of administration:
To verify the information received from the applicant.
To periodically visit establishments open to the general public or a select number thereof to
determine if all mechanical, electrical or electronic devices, music boxes or video devices are
properly licensed.
To periodically inspect the premises to ensure compliance with ordinances of the Township of
Wilkins and Allegheny County, statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including
regulations pursuant thereto, and the laws of the United States of America. If violation of any
ordinance, statute or law is found, the persons charged with enforcement shall issue a citation or
file a complaint with the proper judicial authority.
§ 62-10. Changes in premises or devices.
All licenses issued for a license year are for a specific mechanical device, music box or video device,
or a combination thereof, and for a specific premises or location and are not transferable from
premises to premises or from person to person. Any change in the premises or location of mechanical8/
17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 60/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
H.
[1]
device licenses and/or the transfer of ownership of mechanical devices, regardless of location, requires
a new license application and payment of license fees heretofore cited in § 62-8; provided, however,
that a license issued for a license year may be transferred from one mechanical device of the same
type to a substitute mechanical device of the same type as long as the premises or location, ownership
and the total number of mechanical devices licensed to that premises or location does not change. Any
additional mechanical devices or transfers from one premises to another premises which result in
additional mechanical devices on said premises or any transfer of ownership shall require a new
application and payment of the license fee as heretofore set forth.
§ 62-11. Sealed devices.
Enforcement personnel may put a lead or any other type of seal upon any device for which no license
fee was paid for the license year or for which an erroneous license fee was paid, whether through
mistake, error, misrepresentation or failure to pay or make application or any other reason. While said
devices are under seal, the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge shall be severally and
jointly responsible for any unlawful use of said sealed devices. All sealed devices shall not be offered
for an established price until a valid license is issued and the fees paid thereon, whereupon the seals
shall be removed.
§ 62-12. Duties of applicants and licensees.
Every person who makes application for a mechanical-device license and/or is granted a mechanicaldevice
license shall be legally responsible for the following:
To ensure that the business where such mechanical devices are located is operated in a peaceful
and orderly manner and not conducted in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance.
To ensure that no noise, either from the mechanical devices or from the patrons, or a combination
of both, which can be heard solely by the ear shall be transmitted or heard beyond the premises
where the mechanical devices are located.
To ensure that none of the video devices exhibit obscene or pornographic matter.
To prevent loitering of persons on or about the area which is under the control or ownership of the
persons who operate, run or own the business or premises where the devices are housed.
To be truthful on all information requested on the application.
To inform the Secretary of the township of any change in data or information provided on said
application within 10 days after said changes have occurred.
To make annual application for said license and to pay the annual license fee.
To comply with all the requirements of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 13, which immediately followed this section and dealt with fees paid
prior to the adoption of this chapter, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
§ 62-13. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted under authority of Act 511 of 1965, the Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 61/483
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 62-14. When fee effective.
The fee imposed by this chapter shall go in effect 30 days from the date of adoption of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 62-15. Continuation of fee.
The fee herein levied shall continue in force on a calendar-year basis following December 31, 1983,
without annual reenactment.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 62-16. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statements on his application or fails or refuses to procure a
mechanical-device license or to pay the required fee when so required under this chapter or fails to
keep mechanical-device license conspicuously posted upon said device as required herein or shall
violate the duties of a licensee hereunder shall, upon conviction before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, for
each offense and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Allegheny
County jail for a period of not exceeding 30 days for each offense. In the case of firms or associations,
the penalty may be imposed upon the partners or members thereof, and in the case of corporations,
upon the officers thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 65. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
Article I. Rabies Vaccination of Dogs
[Adopted 6-11-1973 by Ord. No. 539]
§ 65-1. Definitions.
The following terms whenever used in this article have the meanings indicated in this section, except
where the context indicates a different meaning.
APPROVED VACCINE
Any vaccine that has the approval of the Allegheny County Health Department.
DOG
Any member of the canine genus.
KENNEL
Any establishment wherein dogs or other animals are kept or maintained for any commercial
purpose and which is so constructed that dogs or other mammals cannot stray therefrom. This
definition is to exclude veterinary hospitals, research institutions and nonprofit animal shelters.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 62/483
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
A.
OWNER
Any person, group of persons, firms or corporations owning or keeping or harboring a dog or dogs
or other animals.
PERSON
Any natural person, corporation, partnership or association.
RESTRAINT
Occurs when a dog or other animal is controlled by a leash or chain not exceeding six feet in
length.
VETERINARIAN
A Doctor of Veterinary Medicine who is graduated from an accredited and recognized school of
veterinary medicine and possessing a license to practice veterinary medicine as issued by the
Pennsylvania State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners or licensed to practice veterinary
medicine in another state where residing.
§ 65-2. Dogs to be vaccinated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or own any dog over six months of age in the
Township of Wilkins unless such dog has been vaccinated against rabies with an approved
vaccine by a veterinarian.
Every person keeping, harboring or having any dog over six months of age in the Township of
Wilkins shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine by a veterinarian
on or before the latest of the following dates:
One year after vaccination with an inactivated vaccine.
Three years after vaccination with an approved live-virus vaccine.
Thirty days after first acquiring such a dog or the dog coming of age for such vaccination.
Thirty days after the effective date of this article.
Thirty days after bringing such dog into the Township of Wilkins.
§ 65-3. Revaccination of dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the Township of Wilkins
which has been vaccinated with an approved modified-live-virus vaccine not to cause such dog to
be revaccinated within a period of not more than 36 months after such prior vaccination.
It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the Township of Wilkins
which has been vaccinated with an inactivated vaccine not to cause such dog to be revaccinated
within a period of not more than 12 months after such prior vaccination.
§ 65-4. Certification of vaccination.
Any owner who has his dog vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine shall have the veterinarian
who vaccinates the dog in accordance with §§ 65-2 and 65-3 of this article issue to him/her an original
of a certificate signed by said veterinarian which states:
The name and address of the owner or harborer or keeper of the vaccinated dog.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 63/483
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
The kind of vaccine used, the name of the manufacturer and the manufacturer's serial or lot
number and the date of vaccination.
The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog.
§ 65-5. Animal bite reporting.
It shall be unlawful for anyone treating a patient who has received a bite or laceration caused by a
mammal not to report such injury to the local Police Department. The report shall give the name,
age, sex and address of the patient, the date of occurrence and the name and address of the
animal's owner along with a description of the animal owned as to breed, sex, age, color and
history of vaccination.
The local Police Department or other authorized local agency is hereby authorized to investigate a
reported biting incident and to notify the dog owner, using quarantine notice, that said animal must
be quarantined for not less than 10 days following the evening of the day of the bite.
Following the investigation of each biting incident, the local Police Department or other authorized
local agency is to send a report to the Allegheny County Health Department on an animal bite
reporting form as provided by such Department.
§ 65-6. Quarantine of biting animal.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other mammal which bites any person,
regardless of the circumstances or whether the animal is vaccinated for rabies protection or not,
not to confine said mammal, either within an enclosure at home, a veterinary hospital or restrained
by leash composed of a chain or other indestructible material, for a period of not less than 10 days
following the evening of the day of the bite.
Test required. It shall be unlawful to destroy any mammal which should, for any reason, die during
the ten-day quarantine, be it at home, a pound or a veterinary hospital. Instead, the head shall be
removed and submitted, within 12 hours following the animal's death, to any qualified official
laboratory for examination. The head, when submitted, shall be accompanied by a full description
of the animal's breed, sex, age and vaccination, if any, the owner's name, address and telephone
number and the name, address, and telephone number of persons bitten.
§ 65-7. Animals exposed to rabies.
Any dog, cat or mammal which has been exposed to rabies should be destroyed immediately unless
herein otherwise provided. If the owner is unwilling to do this, one of the following alternatives must be
followed:
Strict isolation in a kennel or animal hospital for six months.
If no previous vaccination has been given with an approved modified-live-virus vaccine or within
one year using an inactivated vaccine, there must be administered post-exposure treatment and
confinement in a kennel for three months. Post-exposure treatment must be done in accordance
with the method prescribed by the Allegheny County Health Department.
If the animal has been vaccinated previously within one year with an inactive vaccine or within
three years with an approved modified-live-virus vaccine, the animal must be revaccinated and
restrained by a leash or confined at home for 30 days.
§ 65-8. (Reserved)
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 64/483
[1]
[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 65-8, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed 12-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 949. For current violations and penalties provisions, see § 65-25.
Article II. Keeping and Possession Regulations
[Adopted 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 922]
§ 65-9. Purpose.
This article is enacted to prohibit and to regulate the maintenance, keeping and possession of certain
animals within the Township of Wilkins in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its
inhabitants.
§ 65-10. Interpretation; severability.
[Amended 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
The Township of Wilkins hereby recognizes the passage of the Pennsylvania Dog Law, Act of
December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No. 225, Art. I, § 101 et seq., P.S. § 459-101 et seq.,[1] as amended.
Where the provisions of any other ordinance impose greater restrictions than this article, the provisions
of such other ordinances shall be supplemental to any laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
hereinbefore or hereinafter adopted covering animals within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
specifically in the Township of Wilkins. Should any of the provisions of this article be contrary to the
provisions of any act of assembly, it is the intent that the act of assembly shall supersede this article.
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such section or provisions shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any other part
thereof.
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 65-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL
Construed in a broad sense to include not only animals so called but also birds, fish, reptiles,
insects, hogs, dogs, cats, pets, livestock and fowl.
BOARD
The Board of Commissioners of Wilkins Township.
COMMISSIONERS
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
HOUSEHOLD PET
Any dog, cat or other domestic animal normally and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in
the dwelling of its owner.
[Added 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
HUMANE MANNER
Care of an animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter,
wholesome food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the
animal's size, species and breed.
[Added 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 65/483
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
KENNEL
Any lot in which animals are kept, boarded or trained, whether or not in special buildings or
runways, including but not limited to dog and cat kennels, or any lot in which more than three
animals are kept.
NUISANCE
A dog or cat shall be considered a nuisance if it: damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private
property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas, unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous or
offensive conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; chases
vehicles; or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public
property.
[Added 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any Township police officer and any person(s) employed, appointed or contracted by the Township
who is certified to enforce ordinance or animal control.
OWNER
A person having the right of property or custody of an animal or who keeps or harbors an animal
or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person.
[Added 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, estate or trust, as well as all officers, agents,
servants, employees or others acting for any of the same, and shall be taken as applying in the
singular or plural, as the case may require.
PET SHOP
A retail shop primarily in the business of selling animals and maintaining, keeping or possessing
any animal for which a permit may be issued by the Board of Commissioners at any time during
the calendar year or any part thereof.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
§ 65-12. Permitted animals.
[Amended 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
Household pets.
It shall be unlawful to maintain any number of animals within a dwelling unit in such a way that
the conditions of the dwelling unit constitute a nuisance or health hazard and threat to the
occupants or welfare of the animals maintained.
If such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its owner, such owner shall be
required to follow such procedures and practices, as to the number of such pets to be kept
there, and as to sanitation, to insure that no public nuisance shall be created or maintained
and no threat to the health of persons living elsewhere shall be created.
If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the keeper of every animal
shall confine the same in an enclosure sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and
such enclosure shall be of a size and construction conducive to the animal's health, and adequate
sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 66/483
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be collected daily
in a container or receptacle that, when closed, shall be ratproof and flytight and after every
such collection shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept dosed.
At least once each week, every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so collected
to be disposed of in such manner as not to permit the presence of fly larvae.
All animals shall be kept in a humane manner.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit any person to maintain any dangerous
animal, whether inside or outside a dwelling unit.
§ 65-13. Noise disturbances; nuisances.
[Amended 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation utilizing the service of an animal or animals for
security purposes or possessing an animal as a pet shall be responsible for the quieting of said
animal from barking, yelping and/or howling or otherwise disturbing the peace and quiet of the
surrounding neighbors in a consistent or persistent manner.
Nuisances. Nuisances include excessive noise, soiling of public property and of private property
not owned or rented by the pet owner, and odors caused by failure to clean the animal's resident
property.
Soiling occurs when the animal deposits feces on public property, public and private rights-ofway,
and private property; sprays or deposits urine on lawns and landscaping that causes
damage to grasses, flowers, shrubs, etc
Nuisance soiling also includes odors caused by failure to properly dispose of feces and clean
urine from kennels and yards.
§ 65-14. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any animal to allow the animal
to run at large upon public property or upon the private property of another other than the owner or
person in custody or control of said animal. Any animal beyond the boundaries of its owner's
property or the property of the person in custody or control of said animal must be under positive
control by a leash.
Every police officer and Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Wilkins may seize and
detain any animal which is found running at large, either on the public property of the Township or
the highways of the commonwealth or upon the property of another than the owner of such animal
and unaccompanied by the owner or keeper.
Police officers and Ordinance Enforcement Officers are hereby authorized and empowered to go
upon any premises and enter any building to seize and detain animal(s) which have been found
running at large, unaccompanied by the owner or keeper, when such police officer or Ordinance
Enforcement Officer is in immediate pursuit of any such animal.
§ 65-15. Control and keeping of dogs and animals.
All dogs must be licensed in accordance to the provisions of Pennsylvania Statutes, Title 3,
Chapter 8, entitled "Dogs," as hereafter amended or supplemented.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 67/483
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
It shall be the duty of every police officer or Ordinance Enforcement Officer to seize and detain
any licensed dog or dogs which are found running at large upon the public streets of the Township,
county or commonwealth or upon the property of other than the owner or keeper of said dog or
dogs when unaccompanied by the owner or keeper.
Every police officer or Ordinance Enforcement Officer may seize and detain any dog or dogs
which do not bear a proper license.
All dogs seized by officers of the Township shall be disposed of in conformance with Pennsylvania
Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 8, entitled "Dogs."
Any dog which is within the limits of the Township shall be confined or controlled on a leash no
longer than eight feet, except when on the owner's or keeper's property or on the private property
of another person with the knowledge and consent of such person.
No owner or keeper of any animal, dog or dogs shall permit the premises or enclosures in which
the animal or dog is kept to be unsanitary or unclean.
Except as provided in § 117-22, no person shall bring into, keep or permit in any Township park or
in the Township Municipal Building or its appurtenant property any animal, reptile or bird.
[Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 1048]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any animal to allow such
animal to defecate or urinate upon the public property of Wilkins Township, the highways of the
county and commonwealth and the private property of another other than the owner or keeper of
said animal.
If such animal shall defecate upon the property other than the owner or keeper of the animal, the
owner or person in control must immediately clean up the feces and make proper disposition of it
so as not to endanger the health and safety of the public.
If any animal shall defecate upon the property of the owner or keeper of such animal, the owner or
keeper must clean up the feces and make proper disposition of it in accordance with § 65-12B(1)
and (2).
[Amended 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990]
§ 65-16. Enforcement.
It shall be lawful for any authorized private entity to perform the duties under the provisions of this
article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any police officer or Ordinance Officer in the
enforcement of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut the leash or take an animal away from such officer having
an animal in his possession when found running at large unaccompanied by the owner or keeper.
§ 65-17. Conditions for keeping pigeons and rabbits.
It shall be lawful for any person to keep pigeons and rabbits anywhere in the Township only if the
following conditions are strictly adhered to:
There shall be no violation of any provision of the Township's Zoning Ordinance(s).[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 68/483
[2]
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
Such pigeons and rabbits shall at all times be confined to pens which shall be constructed out of
doors and shall be at least 30 feet from any street and at least 30 feet from any inhabited dwelling.
All such pens shall be constructed so that the floors shall be not less then two feet from the
ground. All filth accumulating in, about and under the same shall be removed at least once every
24 hours and more often if so ordered by the Board or Ordinance Enforcement Officer.[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the number of rabbits or pigeons permitted to be
kept or maintained, which immediately followed, was repealed 9-29-2008 by Ord. No. 990.
§ 65-18. Prohibited animals.
No person is permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the Township any of the following animals,
which classification shall be broadly construed:
All poisonous animals.
Apes: chimpanzees (pan), gibbons (hylobates), gorillas (gorilla), orangutans (pongo) and simians
(symphalangus).
Cows (bos taurus), beef and dairy.
Baboons (papio, mandrillus).
Bears (ursidae).
Bison (bison bison).
Cheetahs (acinonyx jubatus).
Coats (capra hircus).
Coyotes (canis latrans).
Crocodilians (crocodilia) 30 inches in length or more.
Deer (cervidae); includes all members of the deer family, for example, white-tailed deer, elk,
antelopes, moose.
Elephants (elephas and loxodonta).
Game cocks, i.e., fighting birds.
Hippopotamuses (hippopotamidae).
Hogs.
Horses and ponies (equus caballus).
Hyenas (hyaenidae).
Jaguars (panthera onca).
Leopards (panthera pardus).
Lions (panthera leo).
Lynxes (lyrnx).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 69/483
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
CC.
DD.
EE.
FF.
GG.
HH.
II.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Monkeys, old world (cercopithecidae).
Ostriches (struthio).
Pigs.
Piranha fish (characidae).
Poultry (ducks, chickens, swans, geese, turkey and guinea fowl) are prohibited. Cage birds,
including parakeets, parrots, canaries, finches, lovebirds, myna birds and other birds ordinarily
kept in cages in households, excluding wild birds captured or rescued and kept in cages, are
hereby permitted.
[Amended 4-29-2013 by Ord. No. 1033]
Pumas (felis concolor), also known as "cougars," "mountain lions" and "panthers."
Rhinoceroses (rhinocerotidae).
Sharks (class chondrichthyes).
Sheep (ovis aries).
Snakes which are poisonous, nonpoisonous or constrictor.
Snow leopards (panthera uncia).
Swine (suidae).
Tigers (panthera tigris).
Wolves (canis lupus).
§ 65-19. Kennels and pig pens.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to maintain any dog kennel or pig and/or hog pen within the limits
of the Township of Wilkins.
§ 65-20. Animals permitted with permit.
No individual other than a registered veterinarian in the course of his professional duties is
permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the Township of Wilkins any animal not specifically
mentioned in § 65-12 herein, unless application for a permit shall have been made by such person
to the Board of Commissioners or its designated agent, and a permit shall have been issued
thereof. Among such animals for which a permit may be issued by the Board are as follows:
Coatimundis (nasua).
Crocodilians (crocodilia) under 30 inches in length, including baby alligators and caimans.
Eagles (aquila and haliaeetus), subject to state and federal law.
Falcons (falconidae), subject to state and federal law.
Foxes (vulpes and urocyon).
Iguanas (iguanidae).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 70/483
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Jugaurandis (herpailurus).
Kinkajous (potos).
Margays (feiis paradalis).
Monkeys: white-throated capuchins and other cebus monkeys; night monkeys or
douroucoulis (aotes); marmosets (callimico), callithrix and leontocebus; squirrel monkeys
(saimiri) and woolly monkeys (logothrix).
Ocelots (felis paradalis).
Otters (lutrinae).
Raccoons (procyon).
Skunks (mephitinae).
If all of the standards have not been satisfied, the Board shall reject the application for the permit
or revoke the permit, as the case may be, and promptly notify the applicant or permit holder of his
decision, in writing. If the application is not approved within 30 days of the date on which it was
filed, the application shall be deemed to be denied.
If all of the standards have been satisfied, the Board shall approve the application for permit,
whereupon the permit shall be issued to the individual applicant only for the calendar year or
remaining part thereof. Such permit shall not be transferable.
§ 65-21. Application for permit.
Unless waived by the Board of Commissioners, the application for a permit shall have attached thereto
a registered veterinarian's health certificate for each animal to be covered by the permit, shall be
verified by an affidavit and shall set forth the following:
The type and number of animals to be covered by the permit.
The purpose of keeping such animals.
The period for which the permit is requested.
A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept, including plans and specifications
thereof, where appropriate.
The circumstances, if any, under which the animals will be removed from their quarters.
Biographical information about the applicant and any other person to be placed in charge of the
animals, with particular emphasis on the knowledge of such persons about the animals in question
and the experience of such persons handling the animals in question.
Such additional information as the Board may require which is reasonably related to standards set
forth in § 65-22.
§ 65-22. Considerations for issuance or denial of permit.
In making the determination as to whether a permit should be issued or revoked, the Board of
Commissioners shall consider the following standards:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 71/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in clean and sanitary conditions. Adequate
ventilation shall be maintained.
The permit holder shall use every reasonable precaution to assure that the animals are not
teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any means.
Animals which are enemies by nature or are temperamentally unsuited shall not be quartered
together or so near each other as to cause the animals fear or to be abused, tormented or
annoyed.
The permit holder shall maintain the premises so as to eliminate offensive odors or excessive
noise.
The permit holder shall not permit any condition causing disturbance of the peace and quiet of his
neighbors.
Animals must be maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. The permit
holder assumes full responsibility for recapturing any animal that escapes from his premises. The
permit holder shall make adequate provisions and safeguards to protect the public from the
animals.
§ 65-23. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Commissioners may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a written notice of appeal with the Board. A person aggrieved by any decision of the
Board shall include any person who is a property owner in or a resident of the Township who
disagrees with such decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board in accordance with the
provisions of the Local Agency Law (Act of April 28, 1978 P.L. 202, No. 523, as amended 2,
Pa.C.S.A. 101 et seq.)
The notice of appeal shall state the name and address of the applicant or the permit holder, as the
case may be, the date on which the Board made the decision appealed from and a statement of
the grounds on which the appellant contends the decision of the Board was erroneous.
Within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board of Commissioners shall fix a time and
a place for public hearing thereon and shall, not less than five days before the date of the hearing,
cause to be published once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Township notice of
the time and place of the hearing; the name and address of the applicant or permit holder, as the
case may be; and a brief statement of the issues involved in the appeal.
The Board of Commissioners or Hearing Officer shall not be required to conduct and/or complete
such a hearing unless the appellant first pays to the Township a sum determined by the Township
Solicitor to be sufficient to cover any costs of the preparation of the stenographic record of the
hearing which the Township shall make part of the original record to be filed with the Court of
Common Pleas if an appeal is taken to that court. Otherwise, such stenographic record shall be
filed and preserved by the Township.
The Board of Commissioners shall review the written findings and conclusions of any hearing
officer and render its adjudication within 60 days of its receipt of the stenographic record.
§ 65-24. Fees.
The applicant for any permit hereunder shall, at the time of his application, pay to the Township the
following fees:
Pet shop: a fee as set by resolution for each calendar year or part thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 72/483
B.
[1]
All other applicants: a fee as set by resolution.
§ 65-25. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 949]
Any person who shall violate a provision of Code Chapter 65, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof shall pay a fine or penalty of not more than $600 or less than $50, which fine
or penalty shall be collected by suit brought in the name of the township before any District Magistrate,
in like manner as debts of like amount may be sued for by existing laws and to remit such fines or
penalties. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 65-26. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or
any actions required or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action occurred or existing under
any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
Chapter 70. Brush, Grass and Weeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 7-12-1976 as Ord. No.
601. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 135.
§ 70-1. Unlawful vegetation.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the Township of Wilkins shall
permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of one foot or to
throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen.
Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the township in violation of any of
the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the township.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-2. Removal or cutting of vegetation.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by the owner, and the
occupant thereof, in the case of premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim
or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of the first section of this chapter.
§ 70-3. Notice; failure to comply.
The Township Commissioners or any officer or employee of the township designated thereby for the
purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by United States Mail, to the
owners or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of the first section of this chapter, directing and
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 73/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the
requirements of this chapter, within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm or
corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the township authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost
thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the township
from such person, firm or corporation in the manner provided by law.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation shall constitute
a separate offense, and notice to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 72. Building Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins: Art. I, 3-9-1992 as
Ord. No. 823; Art. II, 12-11-1995 as Ord. No. 878. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
Article I. Building Construction Code
[Adopted 3-9-1992 as Ord. No. 823]
§ 72-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Secretary of the Township of Wilkins,
being marked and designated as the "BOCA National Building Code/1990, Eleventh Edition," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the Township of Wilkins, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
BOCA National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 72-2 of this
Article.
§ 72-2. Modification of standards.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section 100. 1 (page 1, second line) shall be amended by inserting "the Township of Wilkins."
Section 103.4 (page 3, first line) shall be amended by inserting "January 1, 1988."
Section 112.0 is amended to add Section 112.10 as follows:
112.10 Sewage disposal plan: No building permit shall be issued until such time as the sewage
disposal plan for the structure or structures involved has been reviewed and approved in
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 74/483
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
[1]
H.
(1)
(2)
I.
accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
Section 114.3.1 (page 10, third line) is amended to read as follows:
114.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspections shall be
paid in the amount as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners now in effect or as
revised from time to time.
Section 117.4 (page 12):
In the fifth line, insert the following for offense: "summary offense."
In the sixth line, insert the following for amount: "$1,000 (see Act No. 19 of 1988)."
In the seventh line, insert the following for number of days: "30 days."
Section 118.2 (page 12):
In the fourth line, insert the following for amount: "$50."
In the fourth line, insert the following for amount: "$1,000.
Section 123.0 is deleted in its entirety. Any person aggrieved by an order of a township
enforcement officer may appeal such order to the Board of Appeals in the manner set forth in
Section 124.0.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, regarding the substitution of Board provisions, was repealed
7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 945.
Article 7 is amended as follows:
The title of Article 7 is amended to read: "Interior and Exterior Environmental Requirements."
Article 7 is amended to add Section 715.0 as follows:
SECTION 715.0 EXTERIOR ILLUMINATION
The quantity of illumination falling outside of the user's property and the luminance of
lighting equipment visible from neighboring property shall be controlled by the user in
accordance with the following.
715.1 Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDELA — One "candela" is the unit of luminous intensity in a given direction. It is
commonly called one "candlepower."
DIFFUSING LUMINAIRE — A "diffusing luminaire" is one that scatters light substantially in
all directions, as contrasted with a directional luminaire, which confines its light principally in
an angle of less than 180°.
FLOODLIGHT — A luminaire designed to project its light in a well-defined area. It is
directional in character.
FLOODLIGHT BEAM — The angular spread of light between two orthogonal planes, each
of which equals 10% of the maximum candlepower within the beam.
FOOTCANDLE — One "footcandle" is the amount of illumination provided by one lumen
uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface.
FOOTLAMBERT — One "footlambert" is the luminance of a surface uniformly emitting,
transmitting or reflecting one lumen per square foot of surface.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 75/483
ILLUMINATION — The density of the luminous flux (lumens) incident on a surface. It is the
quotient of the luminous flux divided by the area of the surface, expressed in footcandles.
LIGHT SOURCE — A device (such as a lamp) which produces visible energy as
distinguished from devices or bodies which reflect or transmit light such as a luminaire.
LUMEN — The quantity of luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one square foot, all
points of which are one foot from a uniform source of one candela. A one-candela source
provides 12.57 lumens.
LUMINAIRE — A device or fixture containing a light source and means for directing and
controlling the distribution of light from the source.
LUMINANCE — The luminous intensity per unit projected area of a given surface viewed
from a given direction, expressed in footlamberts.
715.2. Illumination.
A. Metering equipment: Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct
reading portable light meter with a color and cosine-corrected sensor with multiple
scales. The meter shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus 5%. It shall have
been tested and calibrated by an independent commercial photometric laboratory or
the manufacturer within one year of the date of use as attested to by a certificate
issued by such laboratory.
B. Method of measurement, horizontal: The meter sensor shall be mounted not more
than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position. Readings shall be taken
only after the cell has been exposed to provide a constant reading. Measurements
shall be made when the meteorological optical range is six miles or further such that
measurements will not be adversely affected by atmospheric scatter. Measurements
shall be made after dark with the existing-questioned light sources on, then with the
same sources off. The difference between the two readings shall be compared to the
footcandle ratings listed in Section 715.2D. This procedure eliminates the affects of
moonlight and other ambient light.
C. Method of measurement, vertical: The meter sensor shall be mounted at five feet
above ground level in a vertical position, perpendicular to the property line and
facing the outdoor lighting in question. Readings shall be taken only after the cell
has been exposed to provide a constant reading. Measurements shall be made after
dark with the existing-questioned light sources on, then with the same sources off.
The difference between the two readings shall be compared to the footcandle ratings
listed in Section 715.2D. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and
other ambient light.
D. Limitations.
1. Limitations on neighboring property: The limit of illumination on neighboring
property from one establishment shall be by zoning of the neighboring
property. Maximum computed or measured footcandles at the neighboring
property line shall not exceed:
Footcandles
Horizontal Vertical
Single-family and two-family
residential districts
0.2 0.5
Multiple-family residential districts 0.5 0.5
Non-residential districts, streets 3.0 3.0
Industrial districts 5.0 5.0
2. Limitations on established property. The maximum outdoor initial-computed or
measured illuminance level on the establishment property shall not exceed 25
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 76/483
footcandles outdoors at any point, except that lighting under canopies (such
as service stations) shall not exceed 40 footcandles.
E. Computation of illumination: Illumination at a point may be compared in lieu of
measurement. Computational methods shall consist of a point-by-point method,
using certified photometric data furnished by the fixture manufacturer, lamp
manufacturer, photometric laboratory or other reliable authority satisfactory to the
township. Computations shall be based on new, properly seasoned lamps, new and
clean fixtures and at rated voltage and wattage, with ballasts, lenses, shields,
diffusers and other appurtenances in place; and with proper regard taken for
mounting height, relative elevation and natural and man-made objects.
715.3 Illuminance (brightness): Because of the lack of a practical means of measuring
fixture luminance in the field and because of the factors involved in glare, a computational
method shall be used from which to determine compliance with this section. The point from
which luminance calculations shall be made is five feet above ground on other property line.
A. Vertical luminance calculations using luminaire photometric data: For the purpose of
this section, the illuminance shall be computed by the formula:
I
L = SIN O
(d2 th2)
Where:
I = The fixture candlepower in candelas in the direction of the point from which the
calculations are to be made.
d = The shortest distance in feet measured horizontally from the property line to a point
directly under the luminaire.
h = The height of the luminaire above the eye level as explained in Figure A below.[2]
This calculation assumes the photorecep-tor is vertical, five feet above grade (at the
property line) and facing toward the questioned luminaire.
B. Illuminance limitations: The luminance on neighboring property from one
establishment shall be by zoning of the neighboring property. The luminance
as calculated in Section 715.3 above shall not exceed the value by zoning as
set forth in Section 715.2D.
715.4. Enforcement.
A. Illumination in excess of limitation. If the illumination, as measured or
calculated, exceeds the limitations shown in Section 715.2D, the illumination
shall be reduced until the illumination is equal to or less than that prescribed in
the aforementioned Section 715.2D. This may be accomplished by reduction
in the quantity of luminaires, reduction of the wattage of the lamps, shielding
the luminaires or by reaiming of the luminaires.
B. Shielding: Luminaires which are directed toward a viewer shall be aimed in
such a manner that the viewer's eye, five feet above ground at or beyond the
property line, shall not be exposed to fixture luminance within the luminaire
beam as defined in Section 715.1. Such luminaires, if they cannot be reaimed,
shall be shielded such that the fixture is effectively concealed from view from
the neighboring property. Shielding may be accomplished by louvers, buffers,
visors or shields placed on the luminaires or by plantings, fences, berms,
elevation or any other method such that the limitations of illuminance and
luminance heretofore prescribed are achieved.
715.5. Exceptions: Lighting installed by a governmental agency for public benefit on
public rights-of-way and parks shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 77/483
Temporary special effects of holiday lighting shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section. Other temporary lighting effects may be used if approved by the
Township Manager.
715.6. Existing lighting: When outdoor lighting does not conform to the provisions
of this section and lawfully exists on the date of enactment, it shall be modified to
conform to this section.
715.7 Lighting plan: All commercial, industrial and multifamily uses in excess of
three units shall file with the township and obtain approval of a lighting plan
complying with the regulations of this section.
(3) Article 7 is amended to add Section 716.0 as follows:
[Added 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 829]
SECTION 716.0 CONSTRUCTION SITES
716.1 Construction activities regulated: All earthmoving and construction activity
conducted in or on land development or building sites in all zoning districts shall be
conducted so as to prevent and eliminate all pollution of the air over or onto realty
adjacent to or in the vicinity of the land development or building site.
716.2 Air pollution defined: Pollution of the air includes pollutants arising as a
result of land development or construction activity, including but not limited to dust,
smoke and pollen.
716.3 Responsibility of owner and contractor: The owner of and any contractor
involved in a land development or construction site shall provide, at all times,
sufficient technology and equipment to assure that polluted air does not escape from
the perimeters of the land development or building site.
(4) Article 7 of BOCA is amended by adding thereto the following section:
[Added 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 829]
717.1: Work hours: All earthmoving or construction activity conducted in or on all
land development or buildings sites, in all zoning districts, which activity creates
noise which is projected beyond the perimeters of the land on which the land
development or construction activity is conducted, shall be limited to the following
hours of work:
Days Permitted Times
Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. prevailing time
Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. prevailing time
Sunday none
Construction activity includes the operation of machinery, engines and
vehicles, the operation of which shall not commence before or continue after
the hours designated herein.
J. Article 28 is deleted in its entirety.
K. Section 2906. 1 (page 455):
(1) In the third line, insert the following for amount: "$500,000."
(2) In the fifth line, insert for amounts: "$1,000,000 and $500,000.
L. Section 2907.0 is amended by adding thereto Sections 2907.6, 2907.7 and 2907.8 as
follows:
2907.6 Lighting: All lights heretofore or hereinafter installed to illuminate any sign
shall be provided with a hood, shade or similar device so as to direct the light emitted
toward the sign.
2907.7 Time: All lights installed to illuminate any sign located within 250 feet of any
structure used as a dwelling shall not be turned on prior to sunrise and shall be
turned off prior to 10:00 p.m. prevailing time.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 78/483
[2]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
2907.8 Size: Any sign located within 250 feet of any structure used as a dwelling
shall not exceed 32 square feet. When more than one distinct and separate business
entity occupies the same lot, the provisions of Section 303 of Ordinance No. 542 shall
apply.
M. Section 2908.1 is deleted and revised to state: "The structural frame of ground signs
shall not be erected to a height of more than 35 feet (10,668 millimeters) above the
ground."
N. Section 2908.2 is deleted in its entirety.
Editor's Note: Figure A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Township
Secretary.
§ 72-3. Severability.
Nothing in this Article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court or any rights acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed or cited in § 72-2 of this Article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this Article.
Article II. Building Permits; Construction Within Flood
Hazard Areas
[Adopted 12-11-1995 as Ord. No. 878[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Construction Within Flood Hazard Areas,
adopted 2-27-1995 as Ord. No. 870.
§ 72-4. Intent.
The intent of this Article is to:
Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its residents by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 72-5. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake or cause to
be undertaken any construction or development anywhere within the township unless a building
permit has been obtained from the Building Permit Officer.
A building permit shall not be required for repairs to existing buildings or structures, as provided by
Article I of this chapter or as said Article I is hereinafter amended, reenacted or supplemented.
§ 72-6. Abrogation; greater restrictions to apply.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 79/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
This Article supersedes any other conflicting provision which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
Article, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 72-7. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This Article does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain area or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
This Article shall not create liability on the part of the township or any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 72-8. Definitions and word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted so as
to give this Article its most reasonable application.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use or structure.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof; included
shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is designed and
constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or
relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or
minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 80/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(1)
(2)
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given
magnitude. For the purposes of this Article, the "floodway" shall be capable of
accommodating a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
The floodplain area specifically identified in this Article as being inundated by the onehundred-
year flood; included would-be areas identified as "floodway" (FW), "flood-fringe"
(FF).
LAND DEVELOPMENT
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for
any purpose involving a group of two or more buildings, or the division or allocation of
land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features;
A subdivision of land.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the "lowest floor"
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 81/483
of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements in this Article.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of
assembly, contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a
site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar
vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the
placement of two or more manufactured homes for nontransient use.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal or
change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the
exitway requirements, nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 1978, and
includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a onepercent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; no more than 400 square feet, measured at the
largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year flood elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL PERMIT
A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails and new manufactured
home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including but not
limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items.
SUBDIVISION
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 82/483
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or residential dwellings shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure
to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
§ 72-9. Building permits.
Building permits required. Building permits shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any area of the township.
Issuance of building permit.
The Building Permit Officer shall issue a building permit only after it has been determined that
the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and
all other applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Permit Officer shall review the
application for permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state
and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended), the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments
Act (Act 1978-325, as amended), the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended)@BEGIN FNOTEEditor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., respectively. and the United States Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the township and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. In
addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and Pennsylvania Department of Community
Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified by the township prior to any
alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
Application procedures and requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 83/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[2]
(b)
(2)
Application for such a building permit shall be made, in writing, to the Building Permit Officer
on forms supplied by the township. Such application shall contain the following:
The name and address of the applicant.
The name and address of the owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
The name and address of the contractor.
The site location.
A listing of other permits required.
A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as
well as any existing buildings or structures.
Required information.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any
identified floodplain area, applicants for building permits shall provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Building Permit Officer to
determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any other pertinent
information (e.g., any or all of the technical information contained in § 72-19B) as may be
required by the Building Permit Officer to make the above determination:
A completed building permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal
to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale and date.
Topographic contour lines, if available.
All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size of the site
expressed in acres or square feet.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision
and land development.
The location of all existing streets, drives and other accessways.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified
floodplain areas and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway and the
flow of water, including direction and velocities.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 84/483
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[3]
[a]
[i]
[ii]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[4]
D.
E.
F.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at a
suitable scale, showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with a one-hundred-year flood.
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures.
The following data and documentation:
A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which
states that the proposed construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 72-16F, Storage,
and § 72-17, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred
to in §§ 72-16F and 72-17 which are intended to be used, produced, stored
or otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or
substances listed in § 72-17 during a one-hundred-year flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources
Planning Module for Land Development.
Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements
of the Department of Environmental Resources to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed
construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Building Permit Officer to the County Conservation District for review and
comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation
District shall be considered by the Building Permit Officer for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction
or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted
by the Building Permit Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning
Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
Changes. After the issuance of a building permit by the Building Permit Officer, no changes of any
kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the Building Permit
Officer. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Building Permit Officer for consideration.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 85/483
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Placards. In addition to the building permit, the Building Permit Officer shall issue a placard which
shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall
show the number of the building permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building
Permit Officer.
Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within six months and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the building permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Building Permit
Officer. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have started with the
preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation of basement, footings, piers or
foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes or electrical or other service lines
from the street.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant which
sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building Permit Officer to approve such a
request.
Inspection and revocation.
During the construction period, the Building Permit Officer or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
In the discharge of his duties, the Building Permit Officer shall have the authority to enter any
building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
Article.
In the event that the Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not comply with the
permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Building Permit Officer shall revoke the
building permit and report such fact to the Board for whatever action it considers necessary.
A record of all such inspections and violations of this Article shall be maintained.
Fees. Applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the
Building Permit Officer at the rates set forth by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 72-10. Enforcement.
Notices. Whenever the Building Permit Officer or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this Article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Building Permit Officer
shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing.
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 86/483
(4)
(5)
[1]
B.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
(a)
(1)
B.
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state.
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions
of this Article.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions or this
Article or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Building Permit
Officer or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction, shall pay a fine to the township of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution. In
default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in the county prison for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day during which any violation of this Article continues shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Article. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this Article shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any
structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance
with this Article may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Building Permit Officer concerning the
administration of the provisions of this Article, may appeal to the Board of Commissioners. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision or action of the Building Permit
Officer.
Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 nor
more than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court
as provided by the laws of this commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 72-12. Identification of floodplain areas.
Identification. The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Township of Wilkins which
are subject to the one-hundred-year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated
October 4, 1995, and the accompanying maps, prepared for the township by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof. The Flood
Insurance Study and map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary at 110 Peffer Road,
Wilkins Township, where it may be examined.
Description of floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
FW (floodway area): the areas identified as "floodway" in the AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 87/483
(b)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study. For
the purposes of this Article, the floodway is based upon the criteria that a certain area
within the floodplain would be capable of carrying the waters of the one-hundred-year
flood without increasing the water-surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at
any point.
FF (flood-fringe area): the remaining portions of the one-hundred-year floodplain in those
areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has been
delineated. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundredyear
flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance
Study.
In lieu of the above, the township may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the township.
Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Board where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need
for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administration (FIA).
Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Township Planning Commission, and any party aggrieved by
this decision may appeal to the Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 72-13. General technical provisions.
No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until all
adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. In
addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this Article and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 72-14. Special requirements for FW areas.
Within any FW (floodway area), the following provisions apply:
Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment that would cause any increase
in flood heights shall be prohibited.
No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.
§ 72-15. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 88/483
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, the lowest floor (including basement)
of any new residential structure or any substantial improvement to an existing residential structure
shall be at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation. Fully
enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited.
Nonresidential structures.
Within any identified floodplain area the lowest floor (including basement) of any new
nonresidential structure, or any substantial improvement to an existing nonresidential
structure shall be at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall
remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
Any nonresidential structure or part thereof having a lowest floor which is not elevated to at
least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation, shall be
floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2
space-classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications
for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above-referenced standards.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"partially enclosed space" also includes crawl space. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles or to the storage of tools, materials and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 89/483
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or movement and shall be
designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 72-16. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points.
Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted.
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or
settling.
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the Building Permit Officer.
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located,
designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area
except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or contamination from it
during a flood.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 90/483
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines and electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal or plant life and not listed in § 72-17, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or floodproofed
to the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with a marine or waterresistant
paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 91/483
M.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas- and oil-supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
§ 72-17. Development which may endanger human life.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act[1] and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community Affairs as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved
structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances or will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of
more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises or will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to
human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Within any identified floodway area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A above
shall be prohibited.
Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the
kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood and designed to prevent
pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a one-hundred-year flood. Any such
structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in
the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972,
as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 92/483
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
B.
§ 72-18. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any improvements
thereto, shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation.
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2 feet or more above the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
§ 72-19. Activities requiring special permits.
General. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of
Community Affairs to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has been
issued by the township.
The commencement of any of the following activities or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision.
Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for special permits shall provide five
copies of the following items:
A written request including a completed building permit application form.
A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is located.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale and date.
The topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, showing
existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet.
All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in
acres or square feet.
The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways and parking areas, with
information concerning widths, pavement types and construction and elevations.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings, structures and
other public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 93/483
(f)
(g)
(h)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
natural and man-made features affecting or affected by the proposed activity or
development.
The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot elevations concerning
the one-hundred-year flood elevations and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities.
The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any other improvements.
Any other information which the municipality considers necessary for adequate review of
the application.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn
at a suitable scale, showing the following:
Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor plans, sections
and exterior building elevations, as appropriate.
For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and, as
required, the elevation of any other floor.
Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with the one-hundred-year flood.
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures.
Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways and parking
areas showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular accessways, including
existing and proposed grades.
Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems, water supply
systems and any other utilities and facilities.
The following data and documentation:
Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or development
proposed is an existing separate and single parcel owned by the applicant or the client
he/she represents.
Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect that
the proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect against damage from
the one-hundred-year flood.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape
architect, or other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate description of
the nature and extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development during
the course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a statement concerning the effects
such pollution may have on human life.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect, which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect which contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of
any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 94/483
(f)
(g)
[1]
(h)
(i)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation and the effects such materials and debris
may have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources Planning
Module for Land Development.
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Resources to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Any other applicable permits such as but not limited to a permit for any activity regulated
by the Department of Environmental Resources under Section 302 of Act 1978-166.[1]
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safely
evacuated before or during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the township
the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of § 72-9, 72-10 and 72-11:
Within three working days following receipt of the application, a complete copy of the
application and all accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission, by registered or certified mail, for its review and recommendations. Copies of
the application shall also be forwarded to the Township Planning Commission and Township
Engineer for review and comment.
If an application is received that is incomplete, the township shall notify the applicant, in
writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.
If the township decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
the reasons for the disapproval.
If the township approves an application, it shall file written notification, together with the
application and all pertinent information, with the Department of Community Affairs, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of approval.
Before issuing the special permit, the township shall allow the Department of Community
Affairs 30 days after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the application and
decision made by the township.
If the township does not receive any communication from the Department of Community
Affairs during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the township and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the
township shall not issue the special permit.
Special technical requirements.
In addition to the requirements of §§ 72-13 through 72-18 of this Article, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development requiring a special
permit. If there is any conflict between any of the following requirements and those in §§ 72-
13 through 72-18 of this Article or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be determined that the
structure or activity will be located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 95/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
(1)
B.
Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any occupants of the
structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located and constructed so
that:
The structure will survive inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year flood without
any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
The lowest floor elevation will be at least one and one-half (11/2) feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an indefinite period of time and
be safely evacuated at any time during the one-hundred-year flood.
Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or flows or debris
endangering life and property.
All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the township and
the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 72-20. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
Existing structures. The provisions of this Article do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing
structure, the provisions of Subsection B shall apply.
Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any floodway
area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an existing structure
to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
Article.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an existing structure
to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value shall be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
§ 72-21. Variances.
General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this Article would result in an exceptional
hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the township may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
Variance procedures and conditions. Requests for variances shall be considered by the township
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 72-11 and the following:
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any
floodway area that would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 96/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
Except for a possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot freeboard requirement
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically
to development regulated by special permit (§ 72-19) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 72-17).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the township shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to achieve the objectives of this Article.
Whenever a variance is granted, the township shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the township shall consider, at a minimum, the
following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited
increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public or conflict with any
other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
township. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed
so as to have the capability of resisting the one-hundred-year flood.
Chapter 74. Buildings, Dangerous
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 4-9-1990 as Ord. No.
798. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 28.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
§ 74-1. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING
An independent structure having a roof supported by columns or walls resting on its own
foundation, and includes a dwelling, garage, barn, stable, shed, greenhouse, mobile home,
plant, factory, warehouse, school or similar structure.
DANGEROUS BUILDING
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 97/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed
"dangerous buildings":
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to
such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the
middle third of its base;
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show damage or deterioration to 33% of the
supporting member or members or damage or deterioration to 50% of the nonsupporting
enclosing or outside walls or covering;
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the
same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used;
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to be dangerous to
life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the public;
Those which are so damaged, dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, vermin-infested
or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are
unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury
to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein;
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure
property or members of the public;
Those which lack illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities or because of another
condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of
the occupants or the public;
Those which because of their location are unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the
health or safety of the occupants or the public;
Those existing in violation of any provision of the Building Code, the Fire Prevention
Code or other ordinances of the township; or
Those which have been inspected by the Fire Department and found to be fire hazards
by reason of age, condition, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment.
DWELLING
Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Fire Official, Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any
other person designated by the Board of Commissioners to enforce township ordinances.[1]
EXTERMINATION
Control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places, removing or making inaccessible the materials that may serve as their food,
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pestelimination
methods.
GARBAGE
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 98/483
(1)
(2)
[1]
B.
Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GOVERNING BODY
The Township Board of Commissioners.
INFESTATION
Presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins.
OWNER
A person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of
the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he/she were the owner.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership or other legal entity.
PROPERTY
A piece, parcel, lot or tract of land.
RUBBISH
Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected with a fixed or ascertainable location on the ground or in
water, whether or not affixed to the ground or anchored in the water, including buildings, walls,
fences, platforms, docks, wharves, billboards, signs and walks.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," or "premises," are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 74-2. Dangerous buildings declared nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 74-1 of this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as herein provided.
§ 74-3. Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the enforcement officer in ordering repair,
vacation or demolition:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 99/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of
the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered to be repaired.
If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety or
general welfare of its occupants or the public and is so placarded, it shall be ordered to be vacated
within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable.
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be
used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by
the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect
or defects upon which the placarding action were based have been eliminated.
If the dangerous building, whether or not vacant, has not been repaired in accordance with the
notice and order herein provided and if it is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of its occupants or of the public and the vacation of the
building would not eliminate such condition, it shall be ordered to be demolished.
§ 74-4. Duties of enforcement officer.
The enforcement officer shall inspect, on a regular basis, dwellings, buildings and structures to
determine whether any conditions exist which render such premises dangerous buildings within
the terms of § 74-1 above.
Whenever an inspection discloses that a dwelling, building or structure has become a public
nuisance, the enforcement officer shall issue a written notice to the person or persons responsible
therefor. The notice:
Shall be in writing.
Shall include a statement of the reasons it is being issued.
Shall state a reasonable time to rectify the conditions constituting the nuisance or to remove
and demolish the dwelling, building or structure.
Shall be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require.
Except in emergency cases and where the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee is
absent from the township, all notices shall be deemed to be properly served upon the
owner, occupant or other person having an interest in the dangerous building if a copy
thereof is served upon him/her personally or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure affected by the notice or if he/she is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of the commonwealth.
Except emergency cases, in all other cases where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is absent from the township, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be
sent by certified mail to the owner, occupant and all other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the records of the County Recorder of Deeds to the last known
address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed
adequate service.
May contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Shall contain notice of the right to appeal to the governing body.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 100/483
C.
A.
B.
C.
The enforcement officer shall appear at all hearings conducted by the governing body or hearing
officer and testify as to the condition of the dangerous building.
§ 74-5. Hearings.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of
any provision of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
governing body or a hearing officer appointed by the governing body, provided that such person
shall file with the Municipal Secretary a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a
brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Municipal Secretary shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the day on which the petition was filed.
After such hearing, the governing body or hearing officer shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice. If the governing body or hearing officer sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed
to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed with the Municipal Secretary within 10 days after such
notice is served.
Any aggrieved party may appeal the final order to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with
the provisions of the Judicial Code.
§ 74-6. Removal of notice prohibited.
No person shall remove or deface the notice of a dangerous building except as provided in § 74-3C.
§ 74-7. Emergency cases.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, he/she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as is necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
enforcement officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon the findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the
enforcement officer shall continue such order in effect or modify or revoke it. The costs of such
emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same
manner as provided herein for other cases.
§ 74-8. Abatement by township.
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order of the enforcement officer
within the time specified in the notice issued by him/her and no petition for a hearing is filed within 10
days thereafter or following a hearing by the governing body or hearing officer where the order is
sustained thereby, the enforcement officer shall cause such building or structure to be repaired,
vacated or demolished, as determined by the governing body or hearing officer in accordance with the
standards hereinbefore provided. The township may collect the cost of such repair, vacation or
demolition together with a penalty of 10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law, or the township
may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the rules of civil procedure.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 101/483
[1]
A.
B.
§ 74-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues beyond
the date fixed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 76. Cable Television
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 3-7-1994 as Ord. No.
849. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. General Provisions
§ 76-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Wilkins Cable Television Ordinance
of 1994."
§ 76-2. Prior agreements.
All franchise agreements between the municipality and cable operators are abrogated to the extent
and only to the extent inconsistent herewith, except to the extent abrogation is not required by the
Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 or the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 76-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate cable television in the exercise of the power of the governing
body to:
Regulate telephone, telegraph and electric power poles and other obstructions erected upon or in
the streets and roads of the municipality.
Provide for the maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the municipality
and its trade, commerce and manufactures.
§ 76-4. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted under the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, which permits local franchising authorities to regulate cable television, subject to certain
substantive and procedural limitations.
§ 76-5. Construal of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, these provisions shall be construed broadly
as required for the maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the municipality and
its trade, commerce and manufactures.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 102/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 76-6. Conflicts with other laws.
It is the intent of the Governing Body that this chapter conform to the federal law. If a court of
competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this chapter to be in conflict with the federal law, the
federal law will control, and this chapter, to the extent that any provision is declared to be in conflict
with the federal law, shall not apply.
Article II. Definitions
§ 76-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT
All equipment in a cable subscriber's home that is used to receive the basic service, regardless of
whether such equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated programming
service and/or unregulated service. Equipment shall include, but not be limited to:
Converter boxes.
Remote control units.
Connections for additional television receivers.
Other cable home wiring.
BASIC SERVICE
At a minimum, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber
(except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such
station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public,
educational and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic
tier and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable
operator.
BASIC SERVICE RATE
The rate charged by a cable operator for basic service and associated equipment costs.
CABLE OPERATOR'S
Any person or group of persons:
That provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in such cable system; or
Who otherwise owns, controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming
service; and
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or
other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM
A facility consisting of a set of closed-transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 103/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but does not
include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television
broadcast stations;
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-away;
A facility of a common carrier except to the extent that such facility is used in the transmission
of video programming directly to subscribers;
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
FEDERAL LAW
The Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and all regulations promulgated by the FCC
thereunder, as any of the foregoing may be amended from time to time.
FCC
The Federal Communications Commissions.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins.
Article III. Compliance Officer
§ 76-8. Appointment.
For the administration of this chapter, a compliance officer, who shall not hold any elective office in
the municipality, shall be appointed by the governing body.
The compliance officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
§ 76-9. Powers and duties.
The compliance officer shall be responsible for:
Taking such action on behalf of the municipality as may from time to time be required to obtain or
maintain the municipality's certification to regulate basic service rates.
Notifying all cable operators serving the municipality when the municipality has been certified by
the FCC to regulate basic service rates.
Notifying all cable operators serving the municipality that the municipality intends to enforce the
minimum customer service standards established by the federal law.
Making all filings required or permitted to be made to the FCC by the municipality pursuant to the
federal law, subject to oversight and control of the governing body.
Receiving, filing in the public records of the municipality, reviewing for completeness and placing
on the governing body's agenda for consideration all submissions, petitions and other filings
required or permitted to be made to the municipality pursuant to the federal law. All submissions,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 104/483
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
petitions and other filings made to the municipality pursuant to the federal law shall be made via
first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the following address: Attn: Cable Television Compliance
Officer, Township of Wilkins, 110 Peffer Road, Turtle Creek, Pennsylvania 15145.
Receiving and transmitting to the proper officer of the municipality any filing fees paid pursuant to
this chapter. The filing fees shall be as follows: $500, plus the municipality's public-notice costs for
the initial filing of a schedule of rates by a cable operator, and $250, plus the municipality's publicnotice
costs for any rate increase filing. These fees may be changed by resolution of the
governing body.
Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all decisions of the governing body made hereunder to
the fullest extent permitted by the federal law, subject to the oversight and control of the governing
body.
Taking such other actions as may be necessary from time to time, subject to the oversight and
control of the governing body, to protect the right of the municipality to regulate cable television to
the fullest extent permitted by the federal law.
Article IV. Rate Regulation
§ 76-10. Regulation of basic service rates.
The governing body shall regulate basic service rates in accordance with the substantive and
procedural provisions of the federal law and any applicable state law or regulations or local ordinances.
§ 76-11. Duties of cable operators.
Within 30 days of receiving written notification from the municipality that the municipality has been
certified by the FCC to regulate rates for the basic service, a cable operator shall file its schedule
of rates for the basic service and associated equipment with the municipality, together with the fee
specified by § 76-9F.
At least 30 days prior to increasing its rates for the basic service, a cable operator shall notify each
subscriber of the proposed rate increase and shall file a notice of its proposed rate increase with
the municipality, together with the fee specified by § 76-9F.
Within 20 days of filing a schedule of rates or a proposed rate increase with the municipality, a
cable operator shall publish a summary of the rates or rate increase in a newspaper of general
circulation for at least three consecutive days and cablecast a summary of the rates or rate
increase on its public information channel at least twice daily at such times as are reasonably
expected to reach the largest audience, over a three-day period, in each case notifying interested
parties that they must submit written comments by a certain date within 30 days of the cable
operator's filing with the municipality at the appropriate address.
A cable operator shall comply with all orders of the municipality except that a cable operator shall
not be required to comply with an order if the cable operator demonstrates that complying with the
order would require the cable operator to disclose proprietary information.
§ 76-12. Duties of the municipality.
Within 20 days of receiving a cable operator's schedule of rates or a proposed rate increase, the
municipality shall publish at least once in a newspaper of general circulation a notice that
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 105/483
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
(1)
A.
interested parties shall submit written comments to the municipality by a date certain within 30
days of the cable operator's filing with the municipality at the appropriate address.
The municipality shall make any decision on the reasonableness of current basic service rates or
proposed rate increases pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions of the federal law.
Prior to making any decision on the reasonableness of current basic rates or proposed rate
increases, the municipality shall receive comments on the matter from all interested citizens. This
process shall include both the receipt of written comments as described in § 76-12A as well as the
receipt of oral comments at a public meeting of the governing body. Oral comments may be
received at the public meeting at which the rate decision is made so long as the comments
precede the final vote on the decision.
§ 76-13. Enforcement.
In rendering its decisions, the governing body shall have the full authority granted to it pursuant to the
federal law to order a cable operator to take any and all actions as the federal law permits, including,
without limitation:
Ordering a cable operator to implement a reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment
rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in the federal
law.
Prescribing a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines
that a proposed rate is unreasonable.
Ordering a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined
to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the
operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justified the rate charged as reasonable.
Before ordering such a refund, however, the municipality shall give the operator notice and shall
give the operator 15 days from the date such notice is given to submit written comments to the
municipality. Any such refund order shall be further subject to the limitations contained in the
federal law.
§ 76-14. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a cable operator does not comply with a decision made pursuant to this chapter and
directed specifically toward the cable operator, the cable operator shall be guilty of a summary offense
punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to a period of imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Every day that the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Article V. Customer Service
§ 76-15. Federal minimum customer service standards adopted.
It is the intent of the Municipality to enforce the following minimum customer service standards as
established by the federal law:
Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which
will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 106/483
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
[1]
(a)
(1)
C.
Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries during normal business hours.
After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after
normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the
next business day.
Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative,
including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call
needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be
met no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly
basis.
The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure
compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of
complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than 3% of
the time.
Customer service center and bill-payment locations will be open at least during normal
business hours and will be conveniently located.
Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
four standards will be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis-:
Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been
placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing
distribution system.
Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable operator will begin working
on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption
becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem.
The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation
activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal
business hours. (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities
outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on
the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will
not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The
appointment will be rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the customer.
Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers.
Notifications to subscribers.
The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the
time of installation of service at least annually to all subscribers and at any time upon
request:
Products and services offered.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 107/483
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[1]
[2]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(d)
D.
Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to
programming and other services.
Installation and service-maintenance policies.
Instructions on how to use the cable service.
Channel positions of programming carried on the system.
Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the
local franchise authority's cable office.
Billing.
Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with
itemizations including but not limited to basic and premium service charges and
equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
In cases of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint
from a subscriber within 30 days.
Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days,
whichever is earlier; or
The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated.
Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS
Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve
customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least
one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS
Those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions
which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the
cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the
cable system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION
The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.
§ 76-16. Enforcement.
In furtherance thereof, the compliance officer, 90 days after giving notice to the cable operators of the
municipality's intent to enforce these standards, shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce
these standards to the fullest extent permitted by the federal law and in accordance with all substantive
and procedural requirements of the federal law. In furtherance thereof, the compliance officer may
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 108/483
A.
B.
C.
make any and all such orders and assess any and all such penalties for violations of these standards
as are permitted by the federal law, subject to the oversight and control of the governing body,
including, without limitation:
Ordering the cable operator to pay credits or refunds to the subscribers to the cable operator's
system.
Filing suit against a cable operator to compel specific performance.
Conducting performance evaluations at the time of renewal of the cable operator's franchise
agreement.
§ 76-17. Other customer service standards not affected.
All other customer service standards, whether established by franchise agreement, state law or
regulation or local ordinance and whether now or hereafter enacted shall remain in full force and effect
to the extent that such other customer service standards are not preempted by the federal law.
Chapter 78. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 6-28-2004 by Ord. No.
963. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Code Enforcement Appeals — See Ch. 8.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 124.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 78-1. Administration and enforcement.
The Township of Wilkins hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.103, as amended from time
to time, and its regulations.
§ 78-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building
code of this Township.
§ 78-3. Process for administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this Township shall be undertaken in the following
way as determined by the governing body of this Township from time to time by resolution: by the
retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf of the
Township.
§ 78-4. Board of Appeals.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 109/483
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A Board of Appeals has been established by ordinance of the governing body of this Township in the
Code of the Township of Wilkins, Part 1, Chapter 8, in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for purposes set forth therein. If at any time
enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 78-5. Effect on other ordinances.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by the Township of
Wilkins on or before the date of the enactment of this chapter, and which equal or exceed the
requirements of the Code, shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions
fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time;
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date of
this chapter and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are
hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code; and
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township of Wilkins not governed by the
Code shall remain in fall force and effect.
§ 78-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township of Wilkins for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be established by the Board of Township Commissioners
by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 79. Driveways
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins: Art. I, 6-1-1925 as
Ord. No. 80; Art. II, 8-29-1977 as Ord. No. 621. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Drainage
[Adopted 6-1-1925 as Ord. No. 80]
§ 79-1. Placement of sewer pipe.
Any property owner building a driveway from his property to any public road or street in the township
shall be required to place a storm sewer pipe at least 12 inches in diameter underneath said driveway
where the driveway connects with the public road or street to prevent water from standing on the road
or at the side of the road.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Article II. Permits for Driveways for Nonresidential Uses
[Adopted 8-29-1977 as Ord. No. 621]
§ 79-2. Intent.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 110/483
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
The intent of this Article is to provide controls with which the Township of Wilkins can regulate driveway
access from nonresidential land uses to rights-of-way of streets that are functionally classified as local
streets in the township.
§ 79-3. Permit required.
No person shall construct, open up or connect any driveway to a public right-of-way of a local street
from a nonresidential land use without first obtaining a driveway permit, the conditions for which are
further set forth in this Article, and complying with the provisions of Section 308 of Chapter 173,
Zoning.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 79-4. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DRIVEWAY
A private road giving access to a public right-of-way from private land.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH
That portion of a driveway crossing a public right-of-way for access to a public roadway from
private property.
That portion of a driveway situated within a public right-of-way.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The total width of any land and air space assembled, reserved or dedicated and maintained by
governmental action to permit public right of passage or for other public or quasi-public purposes.
PUBLIC ROADWAY
That portion of a public street which is improved, designed or ordinarily intended for vehicular
use.
The roadway width normally measured between regularly established curblines or between
outer extremities of the shoulders, whichever is appropriate.
The area of a public street, sometimes referred to as the "cartway" or "pavement."
PUBLIC STREET
A public way deeded or dedicated for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel within a
public right-of-way.
A public way with or without provisions made for curbs, sidewalks, paved gutters or other
travel-related appurtenances.
PUBLIC STREET (by functional classification)
ARTERIAL STREET:
All public roadways owned, operated and maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by the County of Allegheny in Wilkins Township are, for the purpose of
this Article functionally classed as "arterial streets."
The function of an "arterial street" is:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 111/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
To serve vehicle trips having one or both trip ends outside Wilkins Township.
To serve vehicle trips between neighborhoods and major traffic arteries.
To provide access to an abutting land use.
LOCAL STREET:
All publicly owned, operated and maintained roadways in Wilkins Township which are not
owned, operated and maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the
County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania, are, for the purpose of this Article, functionally
classed as "local streets."
The function of a "local street" is to provide access to abutting land uses and, as a
secondary purpose, to provide for the distribution of vehicular traffic between intersecting
local streets and traffic arteries.
§ 79-5. Application for driveway permit; fee.
Applications for driveway permits can be obtained from the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer
at the Wilkins Township Municipal Building, 110 Peffer Road, during any normal business day. An
application fee shall be paid at the time of filing in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 79-6. Permit application documents.
All persons seeking to construct, open up or connect any driveway to a public right-of-way of a local
street from a nonresidential land use must complete a driveway permit application and submit the
completed application to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer for the Township of Wilkins. A site plan,
drawings and supportive material clearly describing the applicant's intent shall be submitted with the
driveway permit application. All driveway permit documents shall be prepared in sufficient detail so as
to afford a clear description of:
The land use and purpose for which the property is to be used or reused.
The proposed location of all driveways and driveway approaches to all public roadways to which
access is being sought.
The precise location of all driveways and driveway approaches serving all abutting properties.
The number of parking spaces within the areas which can be served by the proposed driveways.
§ 79-7. Contents of permit application documents.
The information shown on all driveway permit documents shall be in sufficient detail to:
Identify the roadways to which the proposed driveways are to connect with.
Identify pertinent physical features that affect or may affect the placement and design of
driveways.
Identify relevant engineering design details that may affect driveway(s) placement or design.
All drawings are to contain the North point and a legend to clearly identify all elements of the plan
that will be critical for a proper evaluation by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. All plans and
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 112/483
A.
B.
drawings shall be to scale. Graphic scales shall be used.
§ 79-8. Submission of application.
The completed application form and required support data listed above are to be submitted to the
Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer during normal working hours.
§ 79-9. Review of application.
The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall be afforded three calendar weeks for the review of
the application and support material.
§ 79-10. Supplemental traffic report.
The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to also submit a detailed
report of existing and forecasted vehicular traffic activity which may result from a driveway or
driveways being connected to the right-of-way of a local street from a nonresidential land use.
§ 79-11. Purpose of traffic report.
It will be the duty of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer to advise the applicant of the need for this
traffic report during the application review. The purpose for this traffic report is to further afford the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer an opportunity to determine if traffic generated by the proposed land
use or reuse will adversely affect traffic flow and safety, particularly within the environs of the planned
land use or reuse.
§ 79-12. Preparation of traffic report.
The traffic report must be prepared by an expert in the field of traffic engineering or transportation
planning or by others considered qualified and acceptable to the Township Ordinance Enforcement
Officers.
§ 79-13. Contents of traffic report.
The traffic report shall clearly and concisely describe pertinent vehicle safety and traffic capacity
information. The report shall also contain conclusions concerning the impact of the proposed, use or
reuse on the flow of traffic, traffic capacity and safety on affected public roads and at all potential
conflict points within the environs of the planned land use or reuse.
§ 79-14. Conditions governing issuance of driveway permit.
A driveway between a nonresidential land use and the right-of-way of a local street can only be
granted under the following conditions:
No driveway shall be provided to a local street if a driveway access can be provided to an arterial
street.
All portions of the driveway must lie wholly within the zoned property being considered for use or
reuse.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 113/483
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
No portion of any driveway or driveway approach shall be constructed closer than five feet from
the side property lines or the side property lines extended to the edge of the right-of-way.
Driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width. Driveway approaches shall not exceed 30 feet in
width measured at the edge of the roadway.
All driveways and driveway approaches shall be constructed consistent with good engineering
practice and with materials acceptable to the township engineer.
Sight distance for motorists entering the local street from the proposed driveway shall not be less
than 100 feet along the local street. Sight distance from the eye-level equivalent (3.75 feet) of a
motorist stopped on the driveway no closer than 10 feet from the edge of the roadway of the local
street is measured along center lines of vehicle gravel paths on the local street.
The applicant's development shall not generate so much vehicular traffic that traffic volumes on
the local street linking the proposed development with the nearest artery exceed 300 vehicles per
hour (two-way) during the peak hours of operation or during the peak street traffic hours and/or
more than 2,000 vehicles in an average twenty-four-hour day.
When volumes generated by the proposed development are added to potential traffic generated
by possible future land use on the local street in a ten-year forecast period, total local street traffic
volumes shall not produce average daily (twenty-four-hour) traffic volumes in excess of 2,000
vehicles and/or more than 300 vehicles per hour (two-way) during the peak street traffic hours or
during the peak hours of business activity.
§ 79-15. Denial of driveway permit applications.
Nonconformance to any of the preceding minimum restrictions shall result in denial of the application to
construct, open up or connect a driveway to a public right-of-way of a local street from a nonresidential
land use by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. Such denial shall be furnished the applicant in writing.
The denial shall state the reasons for denial by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
§ 79-16. Approval of driveway permit application.
If, based on information supplied with the applications for driveway permits and/or requested by the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer, a driveway to the right-of-way of a local street will not have an adverse
effect on traffic flow or the residential quality of a local street but that traffic control may be needed to
improve traffic flow and safety, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer is to advise the applicant of the
need to prepare appropriate preliminary design drawings for required traffic control devices.
§ 79-17. Required approvals.
If traffic control devices are to be considered, the permit to construct, open up or connect a
driveway to a public right-of-way of a local street from a nonresidential land use will not be issued
by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Wilkins until after preliminary approval of
those traffic control devices that are under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation is obtained and after a written statement is received from the applicant that the
applicant for the proposed land use or reuse will assume all costs relevant to the engineering
design and installation of the recommended traffic control devices and sufficient surety of the
funds required for said controls is posted.
Where approvals for traffic control devices are required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer will advise the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) of impending applications for installation of such traffic
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 114/483
[1]
A.
B.
control devices. On request by PennDOT, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer will forward all
information, sketches and support data provided to him/her by the applicant to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation District Office for their evaluation.
§ 79-18. Design of traffic control devices.
If, in the judgment of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation District Office, traffic control
devices will meet warrants established by the commonwealth for such control devices, it shall be the
duty of the applicant to have prepared all necessary preliminary design drawings and support data for
the recommended traffic control devices. This information is to be prepared in a manner consistent
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation requirements as set forth in its design manuals.
Once completed by the applicant, these preliminary drawings and support data are to be forwarded to
the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer for transmittal to the District Office of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
§ 79-19. Installation of traffic control devices.
Where traffic controls are required, no local street driveway access shall be opened until controls are
installed as designed.
§ 79-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this Article shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such fine and costs, such person, the members of
such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. In appropriate cases,
actions seeking injunctive relief may be filed.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 79-21. Appeals.
The applicant or developer of nonresidential land use or reuse seeking driveway access to local streets
has the right of appeal or to seek variance to this Article by direct written appeal showing cause for
such appeal or variance to the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
§ 79-22. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer and to any
person who has made timely request for the same. Notices shall be published once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at
the hearing. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days or fewer than 14 days from the
date of the hearing.
The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality and any person affected by the application who
has made timely appearance of record before the Board and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on forms
provided by the Board that purpose.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 115/483
C.
D.
E.
The Board members shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
The Board shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings
on the appeal within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to
the applicant personally or mailed to him/her within five days following its date. To all other
persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a
statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
§ 79-23. Filing fee.
The appellant shall, on appeal, pay a filing fee to cover the cost of notice and stenographic services in
an amount set forth in an appropriate resolution or motion adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 82. Explosives
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous building — See Ch. 74.
Firearms — See Ch. 85.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Noise — See Ch. 110.
Article I. Use and Transportation
[Adopted 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 888]
§ 82-1. Intent.
The Township of Wilkins has evidenced its intent to provide a complete and comprehensive regulatory
framework to control the use and transportation of explosives and blasting agents within the Township.
§ 82-2. Adoption of standards.
The Township of Wilkins hereby makes the standards of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
Eighth Edition, 1990, as adopted and amended by the Township, applicable to the use and
transportation of explosives and blasting agents for any purpose and at any location within the
Township.
Article II. Permits
[Adopted 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 889]
§ 82-3. Permit required.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 116/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
An explosive permit shall only be applied for and issued to the legal owner of the property on which
blasting activity will occur.
§ 82-4. Application.
Any applicant wishing to use or transport explosive materials within the Township of Wilkins must
secure a permit, as required by § 88-1. Written application for such a permit shall be made to the
Wilkins Township Fire Marshal and must include the following:
Name of applicant.
Address of applicant.
Phone number of applicant.
Names of parties licensed by the Department of Environmental Protection to conduct blasting who
are working with or at the direction of the applicant.
A copy of a valid Department of Environmental Protection license to store, handle and use
explosives, issued to the person conducting the blasting.
A proposed blast plan.
The blast plan shall include the location, times, quantity, and purpose of the blasting and
licensed person primarily responsible for the blasting.
The blast plan shall identify, in feet, the distance from all proposed blasting to highways,
roadways, alleys, underground or above-ground utilities, structures whether occupied or
unoccupied, and any other installations that could be affected by blasting.
The blast plan shall describe any structures or installations falling within Subsection F(2)
above and shall list the names and addresses of the owners of any such structure.
The blast plan shall conform to all requirements of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
Eighth Edition, 1990, as adopted by Wilkins Township by Ord. No. 824, Section I,[1] all
Department of Environmental Protection blasting requirements in Title 25, Chapter 211 of the
Pennsylvania Code, all applicable Township ordinances amending or supplementing the
BOCA Code and all additional requirements as set forth in this application procedure.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Fire Prevention, § 88-1.
Photographs of all structures and/or installations that the Township, in its discretion, determines,
after review of the applicant's blast plan, may be affected by the proposed blasting. This
requirement shall be fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Township enforcement officer. No permit
shall be issued prior to the completion of all such required photography.
Evidence of a liability insurance policy pursuant to § 88-8B of this Code.
Evidence of a bond in the form, amount and coverage determined by the legal authority of Wilkins
Township pursuant to § 88-1 of this Code.
A fee for this application shall be in the amount set by the Board of Commissioners by resolution
adopted from time to time.
[Amended 3-29-1999 by Ord. No. 919]
The Fire Marshal of Wilkins Township, as the designated supervising enforcement officer under
§ 88-3 of this Code, may request any additional information from the applicant as he/she shall
deem necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or to prevent public or private
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 117/483
A.
B.
C.
property from exposure to risk of damage, and may condition the issuance of this permit upon
compliance with said additional criteria.
§ 82-5. Issuance of permit.
[Amended 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 920]
The Fire Marshal shall review the application and the report of the person, firm or corporation
reviewing the blast plan as set forth in § 82-11E hereof.
If the Fire Marshal finds that all conditions set forth in § 82-4A through K have been satisfied and
that there is no likelihood of harm to public health, safety and welfare (including private property)
the Fire Marshal shall issue a permit, provided that the applicant has supplied proof that all notices
required in § 82-9 have been sent.
With respect to any blast site on which blasting has occurred without complying with all the
requirements of Article II, as enacted and amended, no new permit shall be issued to any original
or new applicant, except upon approval of the Board of Commissioners, given after a public
hearing.
§ 82-6. Certification of applicant.
The applicant, by signing this application, certifies that he/she has read Chapter 88 of this Code, the
applicable section of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Eighth Edition, 1990, as adopted by
Wilkins Township, and Chapter 211 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, and agrees that the issuance
of an explosive/blasting permit is conditional upon the applicant's compliance with all regulations
contained therein.
§ 82-7. Permit to be for specific job only; expiration.
[Amended 3-29-1999 by Ord. No. 919]
The applicant understands that any permit issued by the Township of Wilkins shall be for the specific
job set forth in the blast plan and shall expire within 30 days of the permit date.
§ 82-8. Rights of officials to inspect.
The applicant agrees that upon issuance of a permit, the Fire Marshal and the Deputy Fire Marshal or
any Township employee acting at their instruction may, for reasons of public safety, enter any vehicle,
structure, dwelling, construction site, workplace or environment within the Township limits where
he/she or she can articulate grounds to believe explosives are being stored or possessed or used.
Said official may revoke said permit for any just cause, including but not limited to, false statement or
representations on the blasting permit or violation of any applicable ordinance or law. Any revocation of
a permit may be appealed by the aggrieved party under the procedures of § 88-7 of this Code.
§ 82-9. Notice of the date and approximate hour of detonation.
[Added 3-29-1999 by Ord. No. 919]
The applicant shall give the occupants of each residential structure identified in Subsection F(2) of
§ 82-4 above written notice of the date and approximate hour of detonation at least 48 hours prior to
the detonation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 118/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
The notice shall be delivered by first-class mail or personally handed to an adult person on the
premises.
The applicants shall certify to the Fire Marshal that such notices have been delivered.
§ 82-10. Residential district.
[Added 3-29-1999 by Ord. No. 919]
No permit shall be issued when the blast plan identifies any house in a residential district within 250
feet of the site of the proposed detonations.
§ 82-11. Monitoring.
[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 920]
Ground vibrations and air overpressures from production blasts shall be conducted in accordance
with generally accepted industry protocols, by a responsible person, firm or corporation regularly
engaged and qualified in monitoring operations.
The measurements shall be compared with recommendations of the United States Bureau of
Mines and existing regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
The monitoring entity shall have a qualified representative on the premises prior to and during the
blasting operation.
A report of all findings shall be delivered to the Fire Marshal and the applicant.
The blast plan shall be reviewed and approved by a responsible person, firm or corporation
regularly engaged in and qualified to conduct such reviews.
The reviewing entity shall have a qualified representative on the premises prior to and during the
blasting operation.
The monitoring entity and the reviewing entity shall be retained by and compensated by the
Township of Wilkins. The applicant shall advance to the Township the estimated cost of these
consultants prior to the issuance of the blasting permit.
§ 82-12. Inspection and report.
[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 920]
Damage notices.
Any property owner who believes his or her property has been damaged as a result of
blasting may notify the Township in writing, delivered within 60 days of the blasting date,
specifying the nature of the alleged damage.
During the year 1999 notices will be accepted for any damage claimed to have occurred
between February 8, 1999, and May 1, 1999, provided that the notice is received on or before
June 30, 1999.
The Township shall retain a responsible person, firm or corporation qualified to inspect property
damage and qualified to give an opinion as to the cause thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 119/483
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
The Township Manager shall, upon receipt of any claim as above described in Subsection A,
forthwith request an inspection and report from the entity retained under Subsection B above; the
report shall be delivered to the property owner and the applicant.
Inspection compensation; estimate.
The inspection entity shall be compensated by the Township; the estimated cost of the
inspections and reports shall be advanced to the Township by the applicant prior to issuance
of the blasting permit.
The estimate shall take into consideration the number of structures shown to be within the
blast zone by the blast plan.
§ 82-13. Violations and penalties.
[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 920]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder by the Fire Marshal within the time fixed
herein shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of
an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of the fine or penalty and costs imposed, the violator may be
sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations immediately on notice to do so. Each day that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
Article III. Geophysical Seismic Testing
[Adopted 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1061]
§ 82-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ENERGY SOURCE OPERATIONS
Operations that involve the transmittal of seismic waves to model the geophysical properties of the
Earth's subsurface strata.
§ 82-15. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any exploration activities within the Township
regarding oil, gas, and/or other materials by the use of energy source operations, including,
without limitation, weight drops, explosives and/or vibrating machines, thumper trucks or any other
vehicles or equipment that causes vibrations, without first obtaining a permit from the Township.
To the extent an applicant, pursuant to this article, seeks to conduct energy source operations on
Township property, including but not limited to Township roads, highways, and real estate, the
Board of Commissioners has the express right to grant or deny any application under this article.
§ 82-16. Permit application; fee; procedure.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 120/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Application for a permit hereunder shall be made with the Township. Such application shall contain
the following information:
Name of the applicant;
Address of the applicant;
Type of explosives or other geophysical methods of mineral exploration to be used and the
purposes therefor;
A map designating a testing area and showing the location of all points of use and the energy
source to be used at each point;
A traffic control plan for any operations or testing that will impede traffic on public rights-ofway;
and
The applicant's insurance information, including the name of the applicant's insurance carrier,
the types and amount of insurance covering its proposed operations, the name and telephone
number of an individual to contact in case of a claim for personal injury or property damage,
and the procedure for obtaining a copy of the applicant's certificate of insurance.
A permit fee shall accompany the application for testing. No application shall be accepted or acted
upon unless payment is made to the Township. The Board of Commissioners shall create, by
resolution, a schedule of fees to be paid. The schedule of fees may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
Upon receipt of such application, the Township shall prepare a report showing all Township
facilities or infrastructure that may be affected by the proposed exploration activity located in the
testing area shown in such application. Such report and the application shall then be submitted to
the Board of Commissioners with recommendations of Township staff. No permit shall be issued
except upon approval of the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 82-17. Term of permit; commencement of operations;
extensions.
The term of a permit issued under this article shall be for one year beginning on the date of
approval of the permit by the Board of Commissions, and all energy source operations shall be
completed within said term.
The applicant shall notify the Township a minimum of seven business days in advance of the
actual commencement of energy source operations.
Once operations have commenced, in the event the applicant is rendered unable, wholly or in
part, by circumstances beyond the applicant's control, to complete operations within the remaining
term of the permit, then the time for completion may be extended, at the sole discretion of the
Township Commissioners, for a period of time not to exceed six months, upon written request by
the applicant setting forth full particulars of the circumstances causing the delay which were not
within the control of the applicant and which the applicant could not have avoided by the exercise
of due diligence and care.
§ 82-18. Operations in general.
All geophysical operations shall be limited to areas determined by the Township Board of
Commissioners and depicted on the map kept in the Township office. A copy of such map shall be
attached to any permit issued by the Township. If, during the course of operations, any utility line
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 121/483
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
must be relocated to maintain compliance with the terms and conditions set forth herein or to
ensure the safety of the general population, the applicant shall notify the Township office at least
seven business days before embarking on such relocation, which shall be performed in
compliance with Township standards and permitting procedures.
The applicant shall employ an engineer specializing in seismology, to be approved by the
Township, who shall be available during the entire period of testing to mitigate any potential
damage to public or private property. Trained and experienced technicians under the supervision
of the licensed engineer must be on site at all times. The applicant shall also designate a point of
contact, who will respond within 24 hours to any request from the Township for information
regarding the applicant's testing operations, including a request for maps of the testing area that
show the points of use as planned by the applicant at the time of the request.
The applicant shall obtain written permission, as required by law, from property owners before
entering upon or crossing their property.
The applicant shall be responsible for and shall settle all reasonable and legitimate claims,
demands, and causes of action relating to property or persons arising out of or as a result of the
applicant's operations under this permit and shall handle all such claims in an expedient manner.
§ 82-19. Notice.
The applicant shall notify each owner of property, in writing, by certified United States mail to or
personal service at the property, prior to the conducting of any test. Said notice will include the
anticipated start date of energy source operations and the energy source planned to be used. The
applicant will offer to provide, and will provide if requested, to such owner, in writing, the insurance
information required by § 82-16A(6) to be included in its application.
The applicant shall notify each owner of property, in writing, by United States mail to or personal
delivery at the property, within 300 feet of charge tests or 150 feet of vibroseis or weight drop tests
from the actual building structures, a minimum of 10 working days prior to the conducting of any
test. Contact information should be provided in the notice. The applicant shall maintain records of
such notifications for a period of two years and shall make such records available upon request by
the Township.
The applicant shall place newspaper advertisements in the Pittsburgh Tribune Review, the
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, or other newspaper of general circulation agreed upon by the Township.
Said advertisements shall be not less than three inches by four inches and shall explain the work
to be performed, the location of the proposed work, and a toll-free telephone number where
residents may call for more information. Said advertisements shall be placed continuously during
the two-week period immediately before the permit application is scheduled to be considered by
the Township Board of Commissioners and again during the two-week period immediately before
actual operations commence in the testing area. The toll-free telephone number provided by the
applicant shall be answered during hours of operation as set forth in this article while work is
ongoing in the Township, and an answering machine shall be installed to receive after-hours calls.
§ 82-20. Energy level restrictions.
The applicant shall engineer all source locations (explosive charge size and depth, and vibrator
source sweep frequency and drive-levels or other geophysical sources) so that no structure,
subject to limitations contained in § 82-20D herein, shall be subject to any peak particle velocity
greater than 0.6 inch per second. The applicant shall conduct all the necessary engineering tests
on property located in proximity to the Township and containing soils similar to that at the planned
locations of the geophysical operations and shall provide all reports to the Township in an
appropriate form for evaluation at the time of application.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 122/483
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Using industry-standard equipment and techniques, the engineer required by § 82-18 shall
monitor and record, during operations, all pertinent locations to ensure compliance with the
maximum peak particle velocity established by Subsection A. If peak particle velocity for any test
exceeds said maximum, the engineer shall notify the Township and cease all operations until
corrections are made. The applicant shall maintain all documentation of monitoring activities for a
period of at least two years and make said documentation available upon request for inspection by
the Township.
The applicant shall obtain location and/or maps for all water wells, septic systems, underground
hazardous waste storage/disposal sites, and water, sewer, oil, gas and chemical pipelines as well
as underground utilities located in the testing area and conduct all energy source operations in a
manner so as to not damage, interrupt, or otherwise interfere with said structures. Information
obtained by the applicant shall be used by the surveying teams and operations manager to ensure
compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit and that safe operating distances are
maintained. If requested by the applicant, the Township shall make available for inspection and
copying maps, if any, prepared by or on behalf of the Township that indicate subsurface structures
or facilities; provided, however, that the applicant's reliance on any information furnished by the
Township, its agents, representatives and employees, whether written or verbal, shall be at the
sole risk of the applicant, and the following disclaimer shall be placed on and shall apply to any
and all such information:
APPLICANT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE TOWNSHIP HAS NOT MADE ANY INDEPENDENT
INVESTIGATION OR VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION REGARDING SUBSURFACE
STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES FURNISHED TO APPLICANT AND MAKES NO
REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
SUCH INFORMATION. APPLICANT EXPRESSLY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE TOWNSHIP
MAKES NO WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, OR ARISING
BY OPERATION OF LAW, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTY OF
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR USE OR PURPOSE OF SUCH SUBSURFACE INFORMATION.
All Township-owned structures, including but not limited to susceptible underground utilities (water
mains, sewer mains, etc.) shall have pre- and post-testing inspections paid for by the applicant if
subjected to a peak particle velocity greater than 0.35 inch per second. The Township shall have
the option of receiving reimbursement of its actual cost of performing said inspections or having
the inspections done by a third-party firm hired by the applicant. Any reimbursement provided by
this section shall be paid to the Township within 30 days following the applicants' receipt of an
invoice from the Township.
§ 82-21. Hours of operation.
Energy source testing may be conducted from 8:00 a.m. until the earlier of sunset or 7:00 p.m., local
time, on Mondays through Fridays, and from 9:00 a.m. until the earlier of sunset or 7:00 p.m., local
time, on Saturday. Testing shall not be permitted on Sunday.
§ 82-22. Lands, streets, rights-of-way, and easements.
The applicant shall restore, at its own cost, Township-owned lands or rights-of-way and residents'
property used in its operations to the original condition just prior to the testing operations, free of
damage, including ruts or any injury to landscaping.
The applicant shall ensure that its operations will not interfere with the free and safe flow of traffic.
When operations are immediately adjacent to the pavement, all equipment shall be parked and/or
operated in one lane of traffic.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 123/483
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The applicant shall notify the Township of any equipment to be operated on Township streets that
will exceed the maximum load limit and obtain any special permitting required.
Cables placed on the pavement within rights-of-way must be arranged so they do not create a
hazardous condition or rumble strip effect. All cables must be securely anchored to the roadway
with materials that will not damage and/or puncture the pavement. Nails, spikes, and similar
materials used for anchors shall not be placed inside the pavement edge.
Operations under the permit shall be barred when the Township determines that the ground
conditions are such that operations would cause ruts deeper than five inches in the rights-of-way
or easements. In addition, when ground conditions would cause the tracking of mud, gravel, rock
or debris onto the roadway surface of any right-of-way or other Township improvements in a way
that creates a safety hazard or potential for damage to vehicles, operations shall include
measures to prevent such hazardous tracking. In the event that hazardous tracking occurs, the
applicant shall immediately clean the roadway of all mud, gravel, rock or debris and cease
operations until such time as appropriate preventative measures are implemented to ensure that
said hazardous tracking does not occur.
Each testing crew performing work that impedes the flow of traffic, such as testing on Township
streets or rights-of-way, shall be accompanied by appropriate traffic control personnel and
conducted in accordance with PennDOT standards. The applicant shall furnish, at its cost,
adequate signs, barricades, flares, flagmen, etc., as necessary, to protect the traveling public.
§ 82-23. Testing.
The applicant shall furnish to the Township a schedule of each week's test plans. If thumper trucks
are utilized on Township roads, which shall require permission from the Township, the Township
Engineer shall inspect the road before and after testing. The applicant shall pay any and all costs
incurred by the Township as a result of these inspections.
All vibroseis or weight drop operations shall be conducted a minimum distance of 150 feet from
any building, which shall mean a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, or
movable property of any kind and which is affixed to the land. No charge test shall be detonated
within 300 feet of any building, water well or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site.
Additional buffers beyond 300 feet will be based on results of a ground attenuation analysis in the
region and PA DEP regulations but will not be less than 300 feet. Monitoring beyond 300 feet for
random structures and structures of concern will be determined as needed by the operator.
The applicant shall maintain and make available upon request to the Township, for a period of two
years, the daily log of energy source tests, showing date, location, energy source used, drive
level, operator and all other related information, including seismic and pre- and post-test surveys.
No energy source operation shall subject any building intended for human habitation, utility line,
water well, or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site to a peak particle velocity
greater than 0.5 inch per second.
Explosives shall be transported in constantly attended Type 3 magazines as defined by Section
1902.4.7 of the 1994 Standard Fire Prevention Code, as amended and updated from time to time.
All vehicles transporting explosives will be placarded according to regulation of hazardous
materials, 49 CFR. Only the necessary amount of explosives for each day's operations, during
such periods as the permit is in effect, shall be transported within the Township at any given time.
No explosives shall be stored within the corporate Township limits, unless approved by the Fire
Marshal or his designee. If such storage is approved, explosives must be stored in a locked and
secure, constantly attended Type 2 magazine, as defined by Section 1902.4.6 of the 1994
Standard Fire Prevention Code, at a single, isolated and sparsely populated location.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 124/483
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The applicant shall notify the Township within three business days after the occurrence of any
violation of these permit requirements.
§ 82-24. Bond, insurance and indemnity.
The applicant shall submit to the Township a performance bond in the amount of $100,000 from a
surety authorized to do business in the state. The performance bond shall be valid for a period of
two years from the date that the permit is issued. The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the
following condition: There shall be recoverable by the Township, jointly and severally from the
principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the Township in connection
with the applicant's geophysical operations within the Township. The bond shall contain the
following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled
by the surety company until 60 days after receipt by the Township, by registered mail or written
notice, of such intent to cancel or not to renew." The rights reserved to the Township with respect
to the bond are in addition to all other rights of the Township, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall affect any other rights of the Township.
Prior to conducting any operations hereunder, the applicant and/or its contractors shall furnish a
certificate of insurance to the Township showing the Township as an "additional insured" with
respect to operations conducted within the Township and showing liability insurance coverage
covering commercial, personal injury, and general liability in amounts not less than $1,000,000 per
person, $3,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 property damage.
The applicant shall protect, indemnify, defend and hold the Township, its officers, employees,
agents and representatives harmless from and against all claims, demands, and causes of action
of every kind and character for injury to, or death of, any person, persons, damages, liabilities,
losses and/or expenses, occurring or in any way incident to, arising out of, or in connection with its
or its contractors', agents', or representatives' operations under this permit, including attorneys'
fees, and any other costs and expenses incurred by the Township in defending against any such
claims, demands, and causes of action. Within 30 days of receipt of same, the applicant shall
notify the Township, in writing, of each claim for injuries to, or death of, persons or damages or
losses to property occurring or in any way incident to, arising out of or in connection with its or its
contractors', agents', or representatives' operations conducted under this permit. At the Township's
discretion, the Township may conduct an independent investigation, monitor, and review the
processing of any such claim to ensure that such claim is handled as required herein.
Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked upon breach of any term or condition contained
herein.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any permit granted hereunder shall not
be effective unless and until a copy of the permit, signed by an authorized officer of the applicant,
the performance bond, and the certificates of insurance have been filed with the Township
Secretary.
§ 82-25. Violations and penalties.
A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 85. Firearms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissions of the Township of Wilkins 3-2-1964 as Ord. No.
324; amended int its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 125/483
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the hunting of game and discharge of firearms in the
Township of Wilkins thereby creating conditions promoting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the residents of the Township of Wilkins.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIR GUN
Any gun which discharges metal missiles through a smooth barrel and derives its force from a
spring which is set by a cocking device.
FIREARM
Any rifle, shotgun, carbine, revolver, pistol, bow and arrow, compound bow or crossbow or any
other mechanism capable of firing a percussion cartridge and ejecting a projectile therefrom.
PERSON
Every natural person, corporation, partnership or association.
§ 85-3. Discharge unlawful.
No person shall fire or discharge any firearm or air gun anywhere within the Township of Wilkins.
§ 85-4. Violations by children.
The parent or legal guardian of any person within the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, who knowingly permits such child to violate the provisions of this chapter, shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the penalties herein provided.
§ 85-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the municipal police or the Ordinance Enforcement Officer employed by the
Township of Wilkins to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to make information and arrests for
violations thereof.
§ 85-6. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person violating the same shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice of said township, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be
sentenced and committed to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 88. Fire Prevention
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 126/483
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 3-9-1992 by Ord. No.
824. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
§ 88-1. Standards adopted.
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1018]
The Township of Wilkins hereby adopts the International Fire Code, known as the "International Fire
Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, for the purpose of regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Township of
Wilkins are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in § 88-8 of this chapter.
§ 88-2. Enforcement.
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Township of
Wilkins established by Ordinance No. 742.[1]
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 742, previously repealed, is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 88-3. Operation of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Marshal and three
Deputy Fire Marshals, which offices were established by Ordinance No. 742. The Fire Marshal shall be
the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
The Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners,
upon recommendation of the fire companies of the Township of Wilkins, for two-year terms. They
shall serve without compensation and may not be removed except for cause and after hearing
before the Board of Commissioners.
In the absence of the Fire Marshal or a Deputy Fire Marshal, in cases of emergency, the highestranking
company fire officer in whose jurisdiction the emergency occurs is hereby empowered to
act as a Deputy Fire Marshall, with all the powers of that office, until such time as the Fire Marshal
or a Deputy Fire Marshal arrives at the scene.
§ 88-4. Powers and duties of Fire Marshals.
The powers and duties of the Fire Marshal and the Deputy Fire Marshals shall be as described in
the International Fire Code, Section 104, General Authority and Responsibilities.
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1018]
The Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal may detail such members of the duly chartered
volunteer fire companies situate within the Township of Wilkins to perform inspections and report
thereon as may from time to time be necessary.
§ 88-5. Annual report.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 127/483
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the Township
Secretary; it shall contain data regarding all proceedings under this Fire Prevention Code, with such
statistics as the Fire Marshal shall wish to enclose therein and such recommendations for amendments
to the Fire Prevention Code which, in the Fire Marshal's judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 88-6. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 88-6, Fire Prevention Code Hearing Board, was repealed 7-29-2002 by Ord.
No. 945.
§ 88-7. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 88-7, Appeals, was repealed 7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 945.
§ 88-8. Amendments to standards.
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1018]
The International Fire Code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Township of Wilkins,
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a
permit or certificate used under provision of this code and from which no appeal has been taken or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Marshal, or by a
court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein shall severally, for each and every such
violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine
or penalty of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of the fine
or penalty and costs imposed, the violator may be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects immediately on notice to do so. Each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $600 nor more than $1,000.
3301.2.4. Financial responsibility. Before a permit is issued, as required by Section 3301.2, the
applicant shall file with the Township of Wilkins a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of
$100,000 or a public liability insurance policy for the same amount for the purpose of payment of
all damages to persons or property which arise from or are caused by the conduct of any act
authorized by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. The Legal Department of the
Township is authorized to specify a greater or lesser amount when, in its opinion, conditions at the
location of use indicate a greater or lesser amount is required. Government entities shall be
exempt from this bond requirement.
3404.2.9.6.1. Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within all residential-zoned
areas of Wilkins Township as defined by the Wilkins Township Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 128/483
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
3406.2.4.4. Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II
liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited within all residential-zoned areas of Wilkins Township as
defined by the Wilkins Township Zoning Ordinance.
3506.2. Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of
buildings is prohibited within the geographic borders of the Township of Wilkins.
3804.2. Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by
commonwealth law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a
water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 liters).
§ 88-9. Modification of standards.
The Fire Marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon
application, in writing, by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Fire Prevention Code, provided that the spirit
of the Fire Prevention Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Marshal thereon
shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
§ 88-10. New materials, processes or occupancies.
The Public Safety Committee and the Fire Marshal and his Deputies shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said Fire
Prevention Code.
§ 88-11. Word usage.
Whenever the words "municipality" or "jurisdictions" are used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall
be held to mean the Township of Wilkins.
Whenever the term "legal officer" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the
Township Solicitor.
Whenever the words "Fire Code Official" are used in the Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the
Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshals of Wilkins Township.[1]
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1018]
Editor's Note: Former § 88-12, Violations and penalties, as amended, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1018.
Chapter 90. Floodplain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 7-7-2014 by Ord. No.
1041. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 129/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
Article I. Statutory Authorization
§ 90-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978,[1] delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins does hereby order as
follows.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 90-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents, by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 90-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Township of Wilkins unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 90-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 90-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 130/483
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
C.
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Wilkins or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 90-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred
to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may:
Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or
Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector entity
to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of
its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Chair of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 90-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Township of Wilkins.
§ 90-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended);[1] the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);[2] the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[3] and the United
States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.5 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 131/483
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event that the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the
permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement
or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Board of Commissioners for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
§ 90-9. Application procedures and requirements.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Township of Wilkins. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of the applicant.
Name and address of the owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of the contractor.
Site location, including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 132/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
C.
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within any identified floodplain area
(see § 90-17) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 133/483
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(e)
(f)
D.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 90-24F, Storage, and § 90-
25, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 90-24F and 90-25 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 90-25 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 90-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the
County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 90-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 90-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 90-13. Placards.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 134/483
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 90-14. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development permit does not refer to the zoning
approval.
The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 90-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Township of Wilkins of not less than $25 nor
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 135/483
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
more than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to
be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 90-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance
with the Municipal Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to a court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.
Article IV. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 90-17. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
Any areas of Township of Wilkins classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study; and
Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are
hereby adopted by Township of Wilkins and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 90-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which
represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 136/483
(1)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included
in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined.
No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
AE Area/District without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
A Area/District.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available,
the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary
of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality.
Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where the Township of Wilkins has
identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood
Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study methodologies.
§ 90-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Commissioners where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 137/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood
hazard area by submitting technical or scientific data. See § 90-22B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 90-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Township of Wilkins, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Board of Commissioners. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 90-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in CFR 44 60.3.
Article V. Technical Provisions
§ 90-22. General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: any development that
causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in
Zones Al-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one
foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 138/483
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
§ 90-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area any new construction or substantial improvements shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial improvements in the identified
floodplain area in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 90-
18C of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE, Al-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new construction
or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 90-18C of this chapter.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations," published by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which
states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 139/483
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
E.
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Basements are prohibited.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement as defined in this chapter, must comply with all chapter requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a
specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of
the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements
will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 140/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 90-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill.
Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used,
it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring,
or settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall
be utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines and electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 141/483
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 90-25, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 142/483
(1)
(2)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
A.
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections
R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
§ 90-25. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A, below, shall
be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 143/483
(16)
(17)
(18)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
§ 90-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals in identified floodplain areas where base flood
elevation data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision
and letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 90-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be prohibited. No variance shall be
granted.
§ 90-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
Article VI. Prohibited Activities
§ 90-29. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Article VII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 144/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
§ 90-30. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 90-31 shall apply.
§ 90-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 90-18C.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Within any floodway area/district (see § 90-18A), no new construction or development shall be
allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the definition of
"repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article VIII. Variances
§ 90-32. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township of Wilkins may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 90-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of Wilkins in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 90-16 and the following:
No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in § 90-18C.
No variance shall be granted for any development regulated by § 90-25, Development which may
endanger human life, § 90-27, Special requirements for manufactured homes and Article VI.
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 145/483
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
In granting any variance, the Township of Wilkins shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Wilkins shall notify the applicant in writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Wilkins shall consider, at a minimum, the
following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Township of Wilkins. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included
in the annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
Article IX. Definitions
§ 90-34. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 90-35. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 146/483
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 147/483
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
An umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood hazard area on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include additional areas
identified by the community. See §§ 90-17 and 90-18 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant,
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after
September 29, 1978, and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 148/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 29,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 29,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the
permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 149/483
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage or repetitive
loss, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)
(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Article X. Enactment
§ 90-36. Adoption.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 150/483
[1]
[2]
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014, and shall remain in force until modified,
amended or rescinded by Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 94. Grading and Drainage
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 10-12-1992 as Ord.
No. 827. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction within flood hazard areas — See Ch. 72, Art. II.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 94-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Grading Control
Ordinance," implementing Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Pt. I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Resources, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water
Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
§ 94-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the modification of the natural terrain and the alteration of
drainage and to provide for certain erosion and sediment-control measures with the township to assure
and safeguard health, safety, ecology and the general welfare in the township.
§ 94-3. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision and/or land development approved
under the Subdivision and Land Development or Zoning Ordinances[1] or activity qualified under §§ 94-
5 and 94-6 herein shall be in conformity with this chapter. In the event of a conflict between this
chapter and floodplain regulations, the floodplain regulations shall take precedence.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 173, Zoning.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction, Art. II.
§ 94-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS
An agonal great group of soils, developed from transported and relatively recently deposited
material (alluvium), characterized by a weak modification (or none) of the original material by soilforming
processes.
CUT AND/OR FILL
The process of earthmoving by excavating part of an area and/or using excavated material for
embankments or fill areas.
EROSION
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 151/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, chemical or other
geological agents.
Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
GRADE
The slope of a road, channel or natural ground.
The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation;
any surface prepared for the support of construction like paving or laying a conduit.
To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
RUNOFF (hydraulics)
That portion of the precipitation of a drainage area or watershed that is discharged from the area
in stream channels; types include surface runoff, groundwater runoff or seepage.
SEDIMENT
Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been
moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's
surface either above or below sea level.
SLOPE
The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.
SOIL DRAINAGE
A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and duration of periods when the soil is free of
saturation.
WATERCOURSE
A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of water.
§ 94-5. General requirements.
Whenever the landscape is to be permanently disturbed as to either contours, soil or slope
characteristics or vegetation or any ground cover is to be permanently removed, a plan is required
showing how resulting erosion and sediment shall be controlled. This plan shall include the following:
The amount of site alteration proposed.
Development of a schedule.
Erosion- and sediment-control practices (both temporary and permanent) and the operation and
maintenance arrangements.
§ 94-6. Activities requiring grading permit.
The following activities require a grading permit:
Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely affecting the natural overland or
subsurface flow of stormwater.
Construction, erection or installation of any drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any
other structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any premises.
Paving, filling, stripping, excavating, grading or regrading of any land.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 152/483
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Disturbing the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover by any proposal involving an area in
excess of 5,000 square feet.
§ 94-7. Activities not requiring permit.
The following activities require no grading permit:
Improvements such as erection of retaining walls, driveway paving, minor regrading or activities
on a property which do not adversely affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater,
drainage of any premises or adversely disturb the landscape in a gross area of up to 25 acres on
any one property.
Farming, gardening or lawn restoration, but not including sod farming.
§ 94-8. Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity requiring a grading permit
hereunder shall apply by the submission of a plan.
The applicant should, before submitting a preliminary plan for review, consult the Zoning
Ordinance, the Floodplain Regulations, the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and
Grading Ordinance which regulate the development of land in the Township of Wilkins.
A separate plan shall be required for each grading permit.
Five copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and development schedules, shall be
submitted to the Township Manager for a grading permit. The Manager shall forward one copy of
the plan to the Planning Commission, one copy to the Township Engineer and one copy to the
Zoning Officer.
The plan for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a fee established in the township's
schedule of fees and collection procedure for all applications and other matters pertaining to the
subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and this chapter.
§ 94-9. Required data.
The plan for a grading permit shall include:
A valid boundary-line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed.
A description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding the site which are of importance
to the proposed development.
A plan of the general topography (including drainage) and soil conditions on the site (the latter
available through the County Conservation District).
The location and a description of existing and future man-made features of importance to the
proposed development (i.e., cuts and/or fills, buildings, roads and driveways).
Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sediment-control measures in accordance with
standards and specifications of the Township of Wilkins and the County Conservation District.
A development schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the
development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective
erosion- and sediment-control measures.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 153/483
A.
(a)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
C.
§ 94-10. Special requirements.
In addition to the requirements of § 94-9 and where deemed necessary by the Township Engineer and
the Planning Commission, or the Commissioners the applicant shall submit with the plan a detailed
drainage study prepared by a registered professional engineer qualified in hydrology in the
commonwealth. This study shall include:
A plan of the property showing the location of all present and proposed ditches, streams, pipes
and other drainage structures and proposed cuts and/or fills. In addition to showing present
elevations and dimensions and the location and extent of all proposed grading and/or drainage,
the plan shall clearly indicate all woodlands, buildings, parking areas and driveways. Further, the
plan shall indicate the present and proposed sources, storage and disposition of water being
channeled through or across the premises, together with elevations, gradients and maximum flow
rates. The plan shall describe the work to be performed and disposition of cut and/or fill, the
materials to be used and the manner or method of performance, including provisions for protecting
and maintaining existing drainage facilities, whether on public or private property. The applicant
shall also supply the supporting data for the plan as developed by the engineer.
Calculations to determine runoff which shall be based on the Soil-Cover Complex Method, a
description of which is available from the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service and outlined in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
The design criteria for storm-sewer piping on inlet systems within a subdivision being
developed shall be designed for a twenty-five-year-frequency storm; culverts across
roadways shall be designed for a fifty-year-frequency storm; open watercourses or swales
shall be designed for a one hundred-year-frequency storm as prescribed in accordance with
the following:
The coefficient of runoff used for all areas upstream of any drainage structure shall be
computed on the basis of existing land use and the projected land use described and
shown on the Township's Comprehensive Plan and adjacent municipalities
Comprehensive Plans, where applicable.
The following provisions apply to the carrying and disposal of stormwater runoff:
All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface water in such a manner as to
prevent erosion or overflow.
The applicant shall agree to the granting and recording of easements covering the
installation and maintenance of drainage facilities.
The rate of runoff shall be no greater during and after a one-hundred-year-frequency
storm when the development is completed than that which existed before the
development began, and appropriate measurements of calculations shall be provided to
verify such provisions.
A soils investigation report, if load-bearing fill is proposed, which shall consist of test borings,
laboratory testings and engineering analysis to correlate surface and subsurface conditions with
the proposed grading plan. The results of the investigation shall be presented in a report by a
registered professional soils engineer and shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and
supporting ability of existing soils and rocks on the site, conclusions and recommendations to
ensure stable soil conditions and groundwater control as applicable. The township may require
such supplemental reports and data as is deemed necessary by the Township Engineer.
Recommendations included in such reports and approved by the Township Engineer shall be
incorporated in the plan or specifications. In addition:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 154/483
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than four horizontal to one vertical shall not be made
unless a report is received which is deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer and
approved by the Commissioners. The report shall be made by a registered professional soils
engineer certifying that he/she has investigated the property, made soils tests and that, in his
opinion, such steeper slopes will safely support the proposed fill.
Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one vertical shall be benched or
continuously stepped into competent materials prior to placing all classes of fill.
§ 94-11. Approval.
Upon the approval of the plan by the Township Engineer, the Township Manager shall issue the
necessary grading permit.
§ 94-12. Standards for permit issuance.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any condition of the grading permit, the permittee
is responsible for the prevention of damage to other property or personal injury which may be
effected by the activity requiring a grading permit.
No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade or regrade land in any
manner so close to a property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining street, alley or any
other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling,
cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding or any other physical damage or personal injury which might
result.
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any other material whatsoever
or cause such to be thrown or placed in any drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner
as to obstruct free flow.
No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain in good operating order any
drainage facility on his premises. All drainage ditches, culverts, drainpipes, and drainage
structures shall be kept open and free-flowing at all times.
The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant to a grading permit granted
under this chapter shall continuously maintain and repair all graded surfaces and antierosion
devices, retaining walls, drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings and
ground cover, installed or completed. The township is responsible for maintenance and repair
within the right-of-way of municipal roads.
All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded and/or planted or otherwise protected from
erosion within 30 days, weather permitting, and shall be tended and/or maintained until growth is
well established. The disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept to a minimum using
temporary erosion- and sediment-control measures immediately, as outlined in the Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
All trees in an area of extreme grade change shall be protected with suitable tree wells unless the
necessity for removal is established. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary
removal of trees.
When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust-control measures as are deemed
acceptable by the Township Engineer.
All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall include provisions for both interim
(temporary) and ultimate (permanent) erosion and sediment control. The design, installation and
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 155/483
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
A.
B.
maintenance of erosion- and sediment-control measures shall be accomplished in accordance
with standards and specifications established by the County Soil Conservation District as adopted
from standards and specifications of the United States Soil Conservation Service and as outlined
in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion- and sediment-control measures
are on file with the township, the office of the County Conservation District and other
governmental agency offices.
Standards and specifications adopted for the purposes of this chapter and by the County
Conservation District include but are not limited to the following basic conservation measures:
Temporary cover on critical areas.
Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on prepared seedbed.
Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on unprepared seedbed.
Sodding.
Mulching.
Temporary diversion.
Permanent diversion.
Grassed waterway or outlet.
Grade stabilization structure.
Debris basin.
Drain.
Drainage mains or laterals.
A quality control program is critical for fills; therefore, wherever fill material is to be used, the
person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for testing to determine its dry density as per
ASTM D 1556. The density of each layer shall be not less than 95% of maximum density as
determined by ASTM D 1557.
Inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as stated in § 94-13.
Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be subject to review at all times.
The degree of compaction required shall be determined by the Township Engineer following
the guidelines in this section.
§ 94-13. Inspections.
All inspections shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or, in his absence, a qualified
person acceptable to the Township Engineer and the Commissioners.
Inspections will be carried out on a random basis except as stated below. However, a set of asbuilt
plans shall be on file at the site and authenticated by a registered professional engineer.
When it is deemed acceptable to the Township Engineer, a designated qualified person may
authenticate the as-built plans and will assume full responsibility for the quality of work.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 156/483
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
Any and all as-built plans shall be available on the site at all times and be subject to inspection
and inquiry.
Engineering checknotes shall accompany all as-built plans which involve structural or mechanical
measures and shall serve as supporting evidence that structures meet design standards and
specifications specified herein.
A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer to certify compliance with this
chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this chapter shall be necessary before issuance of an
occupancy or use permit.
§ 94-14. Costs of inspection.
Permittees shall bear all costs of inspections required or permitted hereunder and shall deposit with
the township such sum as the Commissioners shall determine to guarantee payment of the costs of
such inspections. The costs of inspections shall be in accordance with the established schedule of fees
and collection procedure for matters pertaining to this chapter.
§ 94-15. Fee.
The fee for a grading permit shall be fixed by the Commissioners pursuant to resolution.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 94-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecutions, and, in default
of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 94-17. Additional remedies.
In addition to the penalties as set forth in § 94-16, any movement of the landscape, vegetation or any
ground cover performed in violation of this chapter shall be restored to its previous condition, including
replacement of excavated earth, removal of illegally placed fill and restoration of grades and planting.
In order to enforce this section, the Township Solicitor may seek injunctive relief in accordance with the
rules of civil procedure.
Chapter 99. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins: Art. I, 10-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 891; Art. II, 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 892. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Taxation — See Ch. 156.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 157/483
[1]
A.
B.
Article I. Transfer of Fire Insurance Proceeds to Pay
Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 891]
§ 99-1. Designation of municipal officer.
The Township Manager or such official's designee (hereinafter the "municipal officer") is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties of the
municipality stated herein.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FIRE LOSS or CLAIM FOR FIRE DAMAGE
Any loss occurring after the effective date of this article and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 99-3. Payment of certain claims limited.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurance") doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the Township of Wilkins (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer and the named
insured comply with the provisions of § 508(b)[1] and the provisions of this Article and Article II.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
§ 99-4. Responsibility of municipal officer.
The municipal officer shall, upon the written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property named and address of the insurer and the date agreed upon by the insurer
and the named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, furnish the insurer either
of the following within 14 working days of the request.
A certificate or, at the discretion of the municipality, a verbal notification, which shall be confirmed
in writing by the insurer, to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and that, as of the
date of the municipal officer's certificate or verbal notification, the municipality has not certified any
amount as total costs incurred by the municipality for the removal, repair or securing of a building
or other structure on the property; or
A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and user
charges against the property as of the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of
the date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the municipal officer's certificate, the
amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the municipal officer that have been incurred by the
municipality for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property. For
the purpose of this subsection, the municipality shall provide to the municipal officer the total
amount, if any, of such costs, if available, or the amount of costs known to the municipality at the
time of the municipal officer's certificate. A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 158/483
A.
B.
[1]
delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the property
by the municipality under applicable law.
§ 99-5. Action of insurer upon receipt of certificate.
Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 99-4A of this article, the insurer shall pay the claim
of the named insured in accordance with the policy terms and Article II, if applicable.
Upon the receipt of a certificate of all bills pursuant to § 99-4B of this article, the insurer shall
return the bill to the municipal officer and transfer to the municipal officer an amount from the
insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as
shown on the bill, or the full amount of the insurance proceeds, whichever is the lesser amount.
The municipality shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown in
the bill.
§ 99-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the municipality to recover any
deficiency.
§ 99-7. Transfer of proceeds to municipal officer.
The transfer of proceeds to the municipal officer shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurers with
applicable policies of insurance providing protection for fire loss.
§ 99-8. Additional regulations.
The Council of the Township of Wilkins may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt additional procedures
and regulations to implement § 508[1] and this article and may, by ordinance, fix reasonable fees to be
charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to § 508 and this article including, but not
limited to, issuance of certificates and bills.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 99-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this article shall be subject to a
penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 99-10. Filing of copies.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development on or before its effective date.
Article II. Transfer of Fire Insurance Proceeds to Secure
Removal or Repair
[Adopted 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 892]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 159/483
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 99-11. Designation of municipal officers.
The Township Manager or such official's designee (hereinafter, the "municipal officer,") is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties of the
municipality stated herein.
§ 99-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FIRE LOSS or CLAIM FOR FIRE DAMAGE
Any loss occurring after the effective date of this article and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 99-13. Payment of claims limited.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer") doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the Township of Wilkins (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the
Municipal Officer with a municipal certificate pursuant to § 508(b)[1] and unless there is compliance
with § 508(c) and (d) and the provisions of this article and Article I.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
§ 99-14. Procedure for transfer of proceeds.
After full compliance with the requirements of § 508(b) (i) and Article I, the insurer shall pay the
claim of the named insured, provided, however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named
insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60 percent of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building structure, the following procedures shall be followed:
The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the municipal officer the aggregate
of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, provided
that this section is to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000 and that, if at the time of a loss report the
named insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall transfer to the municipality
from the insurance proceeds the amount based upon the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies, associations or
exchanges insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the municipality shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall
return the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or
other structure.
§ 99-15. Action by municipality upon receipt of proceeds.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 160/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do the following:
The municipal officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as security
against the total cost of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality on connection with such removal, repair or
securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds to provide the municipality with the
name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and
address of the named insured, the municipal officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the municipality and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and
When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed in
accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the municipal officer, and if the municipality has not incurred any
costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the funds and, if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer
the remaining funds to the named insured; and
To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the municipality pursuant to this section,
and retained by it, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To the extent that proceeds are
returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the name
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
§ 99-16. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the municipality to recover any deficiency.
Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if
some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 99-17. Additional regulations.
The Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins may, by resolution or ordinance, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement § 508 and this article and may, by ordinance, fix reasonable fees to be
charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to § 508 and this article, including but not
limited to, issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
§ 99-18. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this article shall be subject to a
penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 99-19. Filing of copies.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development on or before its effective date.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 161/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
Chapter 104. Municipal Building and Property
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 5-6-1968 by Ord. No.
426. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Noise — See Ch. 110.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 117.
§ 104-1. Hours of operation.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
The Municipal Building of the Township of Wilkins shall be open to the public for business on Monday
through Friday, inclusive (excluding legal holidays and other holidays as declared from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners), from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and at the time during which any public
township meeting is being conducted.
§ 104-2. Public portions of building; nonpublic areas.
The auditorium, lobby, rest rooms and hallways are declared to be the public portions of the building.
The following portions of the building are reserved and are not open to the public: the safe room, the
police communications room and adjoining office, the office of the Police Chief, the Township Secretary
or Manager's office and adjoining typists' offices, the garage and the jail cells.
§ 104-3. Entry into reserved portions restricted.
No person shall at any time without the permission of the Township Secretary or Manager enter into or
upon the reserved portions of the Municipal Building as defined in § 104-2 hereof.
§ 104-4. Remaining after public hours.
No person shall, without the permission of the Township Secretary or Manager, remain in the Municipal
Building after public business hours (which shall be construed to include the time during which any
public township meeting is being held).
§ 104-5. Acts prohibited in Municipal Building.
The following actions are hereby defined as disorderly practices and prohibited throughout the
Municipal Building:
Yelling, shrieking or screaming.
Swearing at or threatening bodily harm upon any municipal employee or official or any other
citizen therein.
Any conduct which has as its purpose or effect the harassment of municipal employees to the end
that they are distracted from their duties and unable to properly perform the same.
Interfering with the conduct of any public meeting of the Board of Commissioners, the Zoning
Hearing Board, the Planning Commission or any other duly appointed board, commission or
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 162/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
committee of the Township of Wilkins by refusal to abide by the rules and regulations governing
the conduct of such meetings as adopted from time to time.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
§ 104-6. Acts prohibited on township or school property.
[Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 661; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
The following actions are hereby prohibited in and on any property owned by the Township of Wilkins
or the school lands of the Woodland Hills School District, within the Township of Wilkins, including but
not limited to parks and public school grounds:
Fighting.
Destruction of or tampering with any sign, equipment, building facility or structure or attempting the
same.
Destruction of trees, shrubs, foliage, flowers, grass or other plantings.
Entry upon or into any township park or other township lands or any public school lands and
playgrounds before or after the hours designated by action of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Wilkins or the Board of Directors of the Woodland Hills School District when the open
hours are posted on such properties.
Use of township recreational facilities without required proof of payment of any fee required by the
township.
Except as provided in § 117-22, permitting any animal (other than dogs used as service dogs by
those with physical or mental handicaps) whether tame, domestic or feral, to enter upon any
property of the Township.
[Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 1048]
§ 104-7. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined or penalized in an amount not to
exceed $600 and costs. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction or by proceeding
by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed by said judgment and the costs,
such person may be sentenced to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 104-8. Enforcement.
Pursuant to the First Class Township Code, Article XIV, Section 1403,[1] the Township Police may,
without warrant and on view, arrest and commit for hearing any person violating the provisions of this
chapter.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56403.
Chapter 110. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 9-9-1974 as Ord. No.
561. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 117.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 163/483
[1]
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 110-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others within the Township of Wilkins limits.
§ 110-2. Vehicular warning signals.
No person shall sound any horn or any signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or motor
bicycle or other vehicle in any street or public place of the Township of Wilkins except as a danger
warning signal, nor activate any such signal device that is unreasonably loud or harsh; nor shall any
person sound any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; nor shall any air
horn be used.
§ 110-3. Motor vehicle muffling systems.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle or motor scooter in the Township of Wilkins
without an appropriate muffling device on the exhaust system of said vehicle in order to prevent any
unnecessary and unreasonably loud or harsh sound.
§ 110-4. Sound equipment disturbing others.
No person shall use, operate or permit to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
television, phonograph or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants, nor shall machines or
devices be operated at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the
person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber or building or open lot in or on in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such
instrument, machine or device in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
building, structure, vehicle or open lot in which it is located is prohibited.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 110-5. Sound-amplifying machines.
No person shall use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any sound-amplifying machine
for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
advertising.
§ 110-6. Yelling and singing in streets.
No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle or sing on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., nor anytime or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any building or of any persons in the vicinity.
§ 110-7. Animals and birds.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 164/483
[1]
The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or long-continued noise which disturbs the
comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity is prohibited.
§ 110-8. Construction operations.
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, construction or repair, of any building other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety, is prohibited.
§ 110-9. Noise adjacent to public buildings.
No person shall create any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or other public building while the same are in use which unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys the pupils, churchgoers or others inside
such building.
§ 110-10. Peddlers and vendors.
No peddler, hawker or vendor shall shout or otherwise cry his wares which disturbs the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood.
§ 110-11. Hours of operation of power equipment.
The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam or power shovel,
excavating equipment, pneumatic hammer, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which
is attended by loud or unusual noise, is prohibited.
§ 110-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and the costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment thereof, to be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more
30 days.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 117. Parks and Recreation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 4-30-1990 as Ord. No.
801. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 42.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Firearms — See Ch. 85.
Municipal Building and property — See Ch. 104.
Noise — See Ch. 110.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 121.
Solid waste — See Ch. 135.
§ 117-1. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 165/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
AGENCY
The Township of Wilkins or the Township Recreation Board.
AUTHORITY
The Board of Commissioners.
DEPARTMENT AREAS
Any and all parks or recreational facilities controlled or managed by the Township of Wilkins.
DIRECTOR
The Township Manager.
§ 117-2. Opening and closing hours.
The Township parks and parklets shall be closed to department visitors from dusk until dawn, with
the following exception: a group with a written contract signed by the Director or an authorized
representative giving permission for the use of a facility to a specified hour beyond dusk.
In addition to the general closing of department facilities from dusk to dawn, the individual facilities
in those parks will be closed from dusk to dawn unless such facility is staffed and open to serve
department visitors or specific permission is granted by the Director.
§ 117-3. Emergency closing of parks.
No person or persons may enter any area of the department at any time that the area has been closed
on order of the Director or his authorized representative.
§ 117-4. Vehicular traffic.
No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled along or over any road within
the department areas any vehicle at a greater rate of speed than 15 miles per hour unless
otherwise posted. No person shall drive any vehicle on any area except the paved roadways or
parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary
parking areas by the Director.
The state laws relating to lights on vehicles and all standards required by state law shall apply to
all vehicles within department areas.
The footpaths, pedestrian walks, nature trails, and all other trails designated and established for
pedestrian travel shall not be used for vehicular travel.
No persons shall leave any vehicle in department facilities between dusk and daybreak without
written permission from the Director or his authorized representative unless said person is
attending an event approved for extension beyond the dusk closing.
No person shall refuse to comply with any order or request relating to the regulations, direction or
control of traffic or to any other order or request lawfully given by a police officer or other
department official acting under the authority of the agency.
No person may park a vehicle on a roadway or parking area in such a manner or under such
conditions as to impede or obstruct the normal and safe flow of traffic. All handicapped parking
spaces will be honored.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 166/483
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in department areas without the use of a muffler
adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in said vehicle.
No person may operate a vehicle in department areas which emits excessive noxious fumes or
dense smoke.
No person operating a motor vehicle or other equipment in department areas may use a siren or
other type of loud sounding device which makes unusually loud and unnecessary noise.
No person may operate a motor vehicle on a service drive except in making deliveries and
servicing the facility to which such drive provides access.
§ 117-5. Motorbikes, dune buggies and other special motor
vehicles.
In the department areas, the operation of motorbikes, dune buggies and other special motor vehicles,
except conventional motor vehicles as properly registered and licensed, is prohibited.
§ 117-6. Bicycles.
No person may operate a bicycle in department areas other than on the roadways, parking areas and
bicycle trails or other areas specifically designated for such use. The operation of bicycles is prohibited
in and around the athletic fields while they are in use.
§ 117-7. Preservation of property and natural features.
No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of department areas or any building, sign,
equipment, turf area or other property found therein, nor shall any tree, flower, shrub, rock or other
mineral be removed, injured or destroyed.
No person shall intentionally accelerate or stop a motor vehicle causing the rubber tires to spin or
slide, resulting in defacement of the surface of any department roadway or parking area.
§ 117-8. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Disorderly conduct as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code of 1972 (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503) is
hereby prohibited within the department areas. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he/she:
Engages in fighting or in threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior;
Makes unreasonable noise; or
Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves no legitimate
purpose of the actor.
§ 117-9. Unlawful assemblage.
No person or persons shall collect in bodies or groups or engage in conduct of such nature as to
annoy, harass or interfere with other park visitors or interfere with the orderly operation of park
facilities.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 167/483
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 117-10. Use of recreational facilities.
The agency shall establish fees and charges for the use of department recreational facilities and
shall establish specific regulations governing their use. No person shall make use of the
recreational facilities without paying the required fee and adhering to the rules and regulations
governing use of said facility. The agency will maintain an appropriate office with an attendant
where participants may register, pay fees and secure rules and regulations governing the use of
said facility. All appropriate permits will be made available, upon request, at the recreational facility
to an authorized agency representative.
No person shall participate in a recreational activity other than at the facility specifically designed
for the same. The tennis courts are provided for tennis play only. All other court activities, including
hockey, are prohibited.
The facilities at the various recreational areas of the department are provided for the convenience
and comfort of those making use of said recreational facilities. Facilities such as the Lions Park
shelter are to be used exclusively by persons participating in scheduled activities in that particular
area of the park, as permitted, when applicable.
§ 117-11. Picnicking.
[Amended 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 811; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 951]
The picnic facilities in the various park pavilions are provided for use by families, local businesses, and
organizations. Picnic facilities are not to be provided to groups, unless the group has made previous
reservations for the site, including the time of arrival and departure. The individual or group must have
a permit in its possession signed by a department Official. The possession and consumption of
alcoholic beverages will be permitted inside the pavilion and picnic shelter in the parks. Prior to
transporting alcoholic beverages into a park pavilion or shelter, a permit identifying the group reserving
the shelter must be obtained and be in the permittee's possession at the time of consumption.
§ 117-12. Camps.
No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging place within the park
without a specific permit from the Director or his authorized representative.
§ 117-13. Hunting.
No person within the confines of department areas shall hunt, pursue with dogs, trap, molest, harm,
harass or injure any bird or animal found within the confines of the park or molest any bird's nest or
take the eggs of any bird.
§ 117-14. Ice skating, skiing and sled riding.
Sled riding and cross-country skiing may occur in any area of the park. Police officers may stop
these activities if property is being damaged or other department rules are being broken e.g.,
unauthorized fires, consumption of alcoholic beverages, etcetera. All sled riding must cease at
dusk.
No person shall ice skate on any area not specifically designated for ice-skating activity.
§ 117-15. Professional instruction.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 168/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
F.
No person other than unauthorized employees or volunteers of the agency shall offer professional
instruction in department activities.
§ 117-16. Soliciting.
No person or persons shall beg, hawk, peddle, distribute or solicit or offer for sale any article, thing,
paper, privilege or service within any department facility or circulate petitions within the facilities without
a written permit from the agency.
§ 117-16.1. Sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages.
[Added 7-11-1995 by Res. No. 9-95]
Pursuant to § 117-16, the Board of Commissioners authorizes the sale of food and nonalcoholic
beverages in the Township parks and playgrounds.
All persons, corporations or other entities shall file with the Parks Director an application as
provided by the Director and pay at the time of filing the fee or fees required.
The Director shall issue permits and coordinate the number of vendors authorized to use the parks
at any particular time and the areas of use within the park.
The Director shall develop a system and schedule which does not discriminate against any entity
applying for a permit.
Fees for permits shall be in the amount set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time
to time.[1]
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Editor's Note:The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
Permits may be revoked for good cause, in which case any unused time for which a fee has been
paid shall be refunded prorationally.
§ 117-17. Signs.
No person shall expose, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, circular, notice or statement or
display any banner, emblem or design within any department facility without a specific written permit
from the Director.
§ 117-18. Protection of special horticultural features.
No person or persons may walk, occupy or in any way trespass on special horticultural plantings or
specially designed landscaped areas.
§ 117-19. Revocation of permits.
The Director or his authorized representative has the authority to revoke any and all permits upon the
finding of violation of any department rule or regulation by any person or persons.
§ 117-20. Supervision of children.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 169/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
No parent or guardian may permit a child under eight years of age to make use of department facilities
and areas without providing direct supervision for the entire period of the visit.
§ 117-21. Fires and use of tobacco products.
[Amended 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 1015]
Fires. No person or persons shall start a fire in any department facility except small fires for
culinary purposes in department grills or privately owned grills in designated area. All fires shall be
extinguished by the person or persons starting or using the same before leaving the immediate
vicinity of the fire. All requests for campfires must be approved and proper notifications given by
the Director.
Use of tobacco products. Areas of the parks and playgrounds where children are present, such as
playgrounds, pavilions, parking areas, restroom facilities and sports and playing fields, in the
Township of Wilkins are designated tobacco-free. Appropriate signage will be posted designating
tobacco-free areas.
§ 117-22. Domestic animals.
[Amended 7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 836; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917; 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 1048]
Dogs shall be permitted in Lions, Linhart and Eastmont Parks subject to the following requirements:
Dog owners/custodians are legally responsible for their dogs and must have control of their dogs
at all times. Children under the age of 12 that are custodians for a dog must be closely supervised
by an adult.
All dogs must be secured by a leash of no greater than six feet in length at all times.
Every pet owner must be in possession of a bag or other visible means for removing feces which
may be produced by such dog.
Dogs are not permitted in the playground, ball field, concession area or pavilion areas of the
parks.
Dogs must be healthy, fully immunized, dewormed, licensed and wearing ID tags.
Dogs with a known history of or who exhibit dangerous behavior are prohibited.
§ 117-23. Solid waste.
No person or persons shall deposit, permit or suffer to be deposited in any part of the department
areas any garbage, ashes, sewage, refuse or any waste material whatsoever otherwise than in
receptacles provided for such purposes or dump any earth within the department areas without a
specific written permit from the Director.
No persons may haul or transport garbage, refuse, ashes or waste materials of any kind into the
department areas for the purpose of disposing of the same.
No person shall, either within or without the department areas, discharge into, throw, case, lay,
drop or leave in any river, brook, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into or through department
areas or into any river, brook or stream which may be tributary to any river, brook or stream
flowing into or through department areas any substance, matter or thing, either liquid or solid,
which may or shall result in the pollution of the river, brook or stream within department areas to
such an extent as to unreasonably or improperly prevent or interfere with the conservation of the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 170/483
[1]
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
natural resources of the department by preventing, interfering with or lessening to an improper or
unreasonable degree the use of said river, brook or stream for recreational or other proper uses or
to endanger the health of visitors in department areas in the proper use and enjoyment of the
same.
§ 117-24. Firearms, fireworks and explosives.
No person or persons except law enforcement officers shall carry firearms of any description or an air
rifle, slingshot or missile-throwing device within department areas or discharge any firearms, fireworks
or explosive substances.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section XXV, entitled "Dress," which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
§ 117-25. Erection of structures.
No person or persons may construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section XXVII, entitled "Youth groups," which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917
§ 117-26. Use of furnishings and equipment.
No person or persons may remove any furnishings or equipment from any facility nor may they
relocate or rearrange any furniture or equipment at any facility. No person or persons may use
equipment for any purpose other than its intended use and may not remove said equipment from the
facility, including tennis rackets, toys, games, ball sports and other equipment.
§ 117-27. Loitering and vagrancy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone and/or
in consort with others, in any department areas in such manner so as to:
Obstruct any road, lane, street, walkway, sidewalk, parking area or any other public place or
building by hindering or impeding the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians.
Permit in or upon any public road, lane, street, walkway, sidewalk, parking areas or any other
public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or
facing or fronting any road, lane, street, walkway, sidewalk, parking area or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress
therein, thereon and thereto.
When any person commits or causes any of the conditions enumerated in Subsection A above, a
law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and
to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 117-28. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 171/483
A.
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
a period of imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or both.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
In addition to or in lieu of the above Subsection A, any person who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter may be requested to leave the park premises and will be subject to arrest under
Section 1403 of the First Class Township Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56403.
Any person who is found to be a repeat offender of the provisions of this chapter may be banned
from department areas for such period as may be specified by the director. Such ban shall take
effect upon written notice to such offender, given by certified or first-class mail, who shall have the
right to appeal such ban to the Board of Commissioners within 10 days from receipt of said written
notice by serving written notice of such appeal on the Director. Such notice shall be transmitted to
the Board, which Board or a hearing officer appointed by the Board shall hear the appeal pursuant
to the Local Agency Law.[2]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
For those individuals who shall be shown to violate the provisions of § 117-22, the following
penalties shall be imposed:
[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 1048]
First offense: Any person who first violates any provision of § 117-22 shall be subject to a
written warning.
Second offense: Any person who violates any provision of § 117-22 for a second time shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $50.
Third offense and each offense thereafter: Any person who violates any provision of § 117-22
for a third time and any offense thereafter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $250 for each and every offense.
Chapter 121. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 8-9-1982 by Ord. No.
693. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 110.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 117.
§ 121-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
An organization which has been granted an exemption by the United States Internal Revenue
Service under Section 501(c) or Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
SOLICITOR
Includes any person:
Who goes from private house to house conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales or delivering articles,
goods, wares or merchandise to purchasers.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 172/483
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
Who goes from private house to house soliciting or attempting to take orders from individuals
for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal
property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery or for service to be performed at that
time or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such order or whether or not he/she is collecting advance payments on such
orders.
Who goes from private house to private house soliciting donations or money for himself or for
any organization for any purpose, whether or not anything of value is given in return.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT
Includes any person who temporarily and for a short time hires, rents or obtains a definite place of
business, whether a storeroom or a market stand, or a private residence for the sale of goods,
wares or merchandise or to offer or expose the same for sale or for future delivery and sale.
"Temporarily" and "short-time" shall be construed as three months or less.
§ 121-2. Exemptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of merchants or their employees or
agents in delivering goods or services in the regular course of business, nor shall it apply to any
manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products or milk
and milk products.
§ 121-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or transient merchant as defined in § 121-1 of this chapter to
engage in any such business within the Township of Wilkins without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 121-4. Application.
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Police Department of the township an
application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the township which will give the following
information:
The name and a physical description of the applicant.
The complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of
transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made and the kind
of building or structure in or under which the business is or will be conducted.
[Amended 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold or the organization
on behalf of which funds are solicited.
If employed, the name and address of the employer.
The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale
thereof and the proposed method of delivery.
Two recent photographs of the applicant which shall be approximately two inches, showing
the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner.
Criminal history.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 872]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 173/483
(a)
(b)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
A report of criminal history record information from the Pennsylvania State Police or a
statement from the Pennsylvania State Police central repository that it contains no such
information relating to the applicant. Such criminal history record information shall be
limited to that which is disseminated pursuant to 18 pa.C.S.A. § 9121(b)(2) (relating to
general regulations) and shall be no more than 180 days old. The original report or
statement of the State Police shall be copied and returned to the applicant, if requested.
Where the applicant is not a resident of the commonwealth, the applicant shall submit
with the application a report of federal criminal history record information pursuant to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation appropriation of Title II of Public Law 92-544, 86 Stat.
1115, and the township shall be the intermediary for the purposes of this section.
Applications involving solicitation for a charitable institution shall be accompanied by a copy of
the grant of exemption issued by the Internal Revenue Service.
Applications by transient merchants shall be accompanied by written permission detailing the
use authorized and signed by all registered owners of real estate (or signed by attorneys-infact)
on which the transient merchant intends to conduct business. If attorneys-in-fact are
involved, a copy of the power of attorney must be filed with the application.
[Added 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 810]
The term or period for which the business shall be conducted, which in no case shall be
greater than three months.
[Added 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
A letter from the owner or lessee of an establishment in the vicinity of the premises from
which the transient business will be conducted stating that all persons who will be engaged in
the transient business will be permitted to use sanitary facilities of that establishment. Such a
letter will not be necessary in those cases where adequate sanitary facilities exist on those
premises from which the transient’s business will be conducted. In either case, a certification
of the Code Enforcement Inspector must be obtained to ensure that such proper sanitary
facilities either exist or are available to all persons engaged in the transient business.
[Added 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
This application completed as to all matters inquired of shall be turned over to the Police
Department of the township, together with the initial fee to cover the expenses of investigation,
payable to the Township of Wilkins, said fee to be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
The applicant for a transient business license shall be required to apply for an occupancy permit
for the use and occupancy of the ground or building or premises where or upon which such
business is conducted or operated. Such occupancy permit shall be similar to that provided for in
Chapter 124, Property Maintenance.
[Added 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
The applicant for a transient business license shall be required to obtain certification of the Tax
Collector that a mercantile tax license has been issued to him.
[Added 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
The Township, by its duly authorized agent, shall have the right, power and authority to make
periodic inspections at reasonable times during business hours to determine conditions regarding
matters of health, sanitation, fire safety and the protection of persons and property and for such
purposes as he is authorized and directed to enter upon any such business premises without
liability of trespassing upon said property while engaged in and acting within the course and scope
of his duties.
[Added 9-29-2014 by Ord. No. 1044]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 174/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
§ 121-5. Investigation and issuance of license.
Upon receipt of each application, it shall be immediately reviewed by the Police Department for
accuracy.
If, as a result of such review, the application is found to be true, the Chief of Police or his
designate shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the Township
Secretary or designate who shall, upon payment of the prescribed initial license fee, deliver to the
applicant his or her license within 24 hours after payment of the fee.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 872]
Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address
and photograph of said licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods or organization
involved, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the expiration date, as well as the
license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business.
Each solicitor or transient merchant must secure an individual license. No license shall be used at
any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The Township Secretary shall
keep a permanent record of all licenses issued and those rejected.
No person subject to this chapter shall be issued a license when the report of criminal history
record information indicates that the applicant has been convicted of a felony, serious
misdemeanor or crime involving moral turpitude or an out-of-state or federal offense similar in
nature to crimes, designated felonies or serious misdemeanors under Pennsylvania law.
[Added 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 872]
The criminal history record information obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be retained in the
office of the Police Chief of the township and shall be confidential.
[Added 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 121-6. Charitable organization fee exemption.
Solicitors for charitable organizations shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, but no application
or license fee shall be charged.
§ 121-7. Fees.
Every applicant for a license as a solicitor or transient merchant under this chapter, shall pay a license
fee as established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 121-8. Application to business and public places; restrictions on
time and place.
No licensee shall solicit at private residences on Sunday nor before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
prevailing time on weekdays.
No licensee shall solicit at any private residence exhibiting a sign reading "No Solicitors" or words
of the same meaning.
Residents may erect "No Solicitors" or similar signs not to exceed 120 square inches in size,
which, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be conspicuously displayed near their entrance walk
or doorway.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 175/483
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
[1]
Solicitors may solicit at business properties in the township during all business hours and may
solicit in township streets and other public places from 9:00 a.m. prevailing time to sunset,
provided that such solicitors obtain a license as required by this chapter, and they shall be subject
to all the other provisions of this chapter.
§ 121-9. Exhibition of license.
Licensees shall exhibit their license at the request of any resident or police officer.
§ 121-10. Revocation of permit; notice of hearing.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police or his
designee with respect to such persons after notice and opportunity for a hearing for any of the
following causes:
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business
as solicitor or transient merchant.
Any violation of this chapter.
Conviction of a felony, serious misdemeanor or crime involving moral turpitude or an out-ofstate
or federal offense similar in nature to crimes, designated felonies or serious
misdemeanors under Pennsylvania law.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 872]
Conducting solicitation or business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace.
Refusing to leave the premises when asked to do so by the occupant.
Notice of the revocation of a license shall be given, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
of complaint and the opportunity for a hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address.
§ 121-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his designee in the denial of application
approval as provided § 121-5 of this chapter or in the action of the revocation provided in § 121-10 of
this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Commissioners. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the Board, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
Hearings shall be governed by the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 121-12. Expiration of permit.
All permits expire on the date specified in the permit.
§ 121-13. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 176/483
[1]
A.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and
pay to the township for each and every separate offense a sum of not more than $1,000 to be used for
and recovered as other fines and penalties are now by law recoverable, and, in default of payment of
the fine and costs of prosecution, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 124. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
928; amended in its entirety 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 976. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 28.
Animals – See Ch. 65.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 131.
Solid waste — See Ch. 135.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 152.
Vector Control – See Ch. 165.
Abandoned or nuisance vehicles – See Ch. 167.
Article I. Property Maintenance Code Provisions
§ 124-1. Adoption of standards.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1013; 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1064]
The Township of Wilkins hereby adopts the Property Maintenance Code known as the “International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition,” as published by the International Code Council, for the
purpose of regulating and governing the conditions of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and the
collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Township of Wilkins are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any prescribed in § 124-2 of this chapter.
§ 124-2. Modifications to standards.
[Amended 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 641; 7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 945; 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 987; 2-14-
2011 by Ord. No. 1013]
The property maintenance code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "International Property Maintenance Code
of the Township of Wilkins," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 177/483
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
Section 103.4, Liability, is amended to read:
103.4 Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code,
while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of
an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. This section is subject to the
Pennsylvania Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act.
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the
Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be
free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or
omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
Section 103.5, Fees, is amended to read:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
Section 106.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof shall pay a fine or penalty of $1,000, which fine
or penalty shall be collected by suit brought in the name of the Township before any District
Magistrate, in like manner as debts of like amount may be sued for by existing laws. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
The fine or penalty may be reduced by official action of the Township Board of Commissioners,
upon written recommendation of the code official who investigated the violation.
Section 108.1.3, Structure unfit for human occupancy, is amended to read:
108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy
whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe or unlawful as described in
Sections 108.1.1 and 108.1.4 or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and contamination, or
lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required
by this code or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
Section 111.7, Court review, is amended to read:
111.7 Court review. Appeals shall be processed as provided in the Pennsylvania Local Agency
Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $600 nor more than $1,000.
Section 302.3, Sidewalks and driveways, is amended to read:
[Added 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1040]
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 178/483
I.
J.
K.
L.
and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous
conditions. All sidewalks, walkways or similar areas that are available for use by the public, or
persons other than the property owner, shall be cleared of snow and ice no later than 24 hours
after any snow or ice storm.
Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended by restating the first paragraph of the section as follows:
[Added 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 999]
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined
as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, that
this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Section 302.8, Motor vehicles, is amended to read:
[Amended 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1064]
302.8 Motor vehicles.
302.8.1 Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative, unlicensed or
uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle
shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
shipped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body
work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area
designed and approved for such purposes, but not including a tarp.
302.8.2 Except as provided for in other regulations, no vehicle shall be parked, kept or
stored in any residential yard area not part of a garage driveway.
302.8.3. Where vehicle repairs are being conducted on exterior property, no vehicle shall be
elevated above the ground on which the tires would normally rest, by the use of one or
more jacks, jack stands, concrete or wood blocks, or other support devices, for more than
seven days for the purpose of making repairs. Repairs requiring more than seven days shall
be performed inside of a structure approved for such work.
Section 302.10, Dangerous exterior structures, is added to read:
302.10 Dangerous exterior structures.
302.10.1 The continued existence of all unused wells, septic tanks, cisterns or similar structures
located on exterior property, and which constitute an imminent hazard, are a violation of this
Code and shall be eliminated by the owner pursuant to plans and specifications supplied by the
owner and approved by the Township Engineer.
302.10.2 If wells, septic tanks, cisterns or similar structures are in use and constitute an
imminent hazard, those structures shall be rendered nonhazardous by the owner.
303 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
and in good repair.
303.3 Below grade swimming pools, the use of which is temporarily discontinued, shall be
covered with material which will prevent access to the pool basin and be of sufficient strength to
sustain the weight of 100 pounds.
303.4 Below grade swimming pools, the use of which is permanently discontinued, shall be filled
to ground level with earth and/or other material in accordance with plans and specification
supplied by the property owner and approved by the Township Engineer.
“Permanently discontinued” is defined as not in use for more than 18 months, beginning on June
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 179/483
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
1 of any year.
303.5 Above grade swimming pools, the use of which is permanently discontinued, shall be
dismantled and removed from the property.
Section 304.14, Insect screens, is amended to read:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 15 to October 15, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Section 507, Storm drainage, is amended to read:
507 Storm drainage. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open
areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance nor
which is in violation of Township Code § 131-52 or any federal, Pennsylvania or Allegheny
County law or regulation.
Section 602.3, Heat supply, is amended to read:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from May 15 to
September 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required, provided that the
heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for
the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the Plumbing Code.
Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended to read:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
during the period from May 15 to September 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F.
(18° C.) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
Section 603.4 is amended to read:
[Added 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1064]
603.4 Safety controls.
603.4.1 Quarter-turn shutoff valve. Every gas-fired appliance shall have a quarter-turn
shutoff valve located within six feet of the appliance. The shutoff device shall be located so
as to be easily and readily accessible. Those that are not quarter-turn shall be converted to
the quarter-turn type.
Section 605.2 is amended to read:
[Added 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1064]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 180/483
S.
605.2. Receptacles.
605.2.1 Ground-fault circuit interrupter protection. All electrical outlet receptacles within
six feet of any sink with running water (faucet) shall be the ground-fault circuit interrupter
protection type and in working condition.
605.3. Luminaries. The exterior side of every egress door exiting from a one- or two-family
dwelling, every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room,
boiler room and furnace room shall contain not less than one electric luminaire. Pool and
spa luminaires over 15 volts shall have ground-fault circuit interrupter protection.
Section 705 is added to read:
[Added 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1064]
SECTION 705 CARBON MONOXIDE.
705.1. Every one- and two-family dwelling burning fossil fuel(s) shall provide a working
carbon monoxide detector in the area leading to the sleeping rooms and the basement or
area where fossil-fuel-burning equipment may be located.
§ 124-3. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of
departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or
regulations, or other ordinances of the Township of Wilkins, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this chapter. The code shall
control in all cases where the state requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of the
Township of Wilkins, are not as strict as those contained in this chapter.
§ 124-4. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/or codes in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Article II. Occupancy Permit Requirements
§ 124-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings hereafter designated:
CODE
Any Code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and for the Township of Wilkins
concerning fitness for habitation or construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or
appearance of any structure. Included within, but not limited by, this definition are the following
which are in effect as of the date of enactment of this article: 2003 International Property
Maintenance Code, Uniform Construction Code[1] and the Wilkins Township Zoning Ordinance.[2]
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The duly appointed code enforcement officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code Enforcement
of the Township of Wilkins and any assistants or deputies thereof. In appropriate circumstances
this is intended to include police.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 181/483
COMMON AREA
In multiple-unit establishments (either residential or commercial), space which is not part of a
single unit but is shared with other occupants of the unit whether they reside in the units or not.
Common areas shall be considered as part of the structure for purposes of this article.
COMMERCIAL UNIT or COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT or COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE
An establishment, structure or unit of an establishment or structure utilized for the engaging in a
nonmanufacturing or a nonprocessing business, including but not limited to stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters. These units or structures are predominantly
located within the C-1 (Commercial) Zoning classification of the Township, or in other zoning
districts as existing, nonconforming uses.
DWELLING
A building having one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT
A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single unit and used for living and
sleeping purposes, having its own cooking facilities and a bathroom with a toilet, bathtub and
shower.
LANDLORD
One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the
premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the
premises, including a mortgage holder in possession of a unit. (same as "owner").
LEASE
A contract granting use or occupation of property during a specified period in exchange for a
specified rent.
MANAGER
An adult individual designated by the owner of a structure. The manager shall be the agent of the
owner of service of process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the obligation of the
owner under this article and under rental agreements with occupants.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING or MULTIFAMILY DWELLING
A building containing three or more independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to, row
houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses and conversion apartments.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT
The permit issued to the owner of a unit or structure under this article which is required for the
lawful rental and/or occupancy of a unit or structure.
OCCUPANT
An individual who resides in or is the owner of a business within a unit or structure whether or not
the individual is the owner of the unit or structure thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the
owner or landlord of the unit or structure is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER
One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the
premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the
premises, including a mortgage holder in possession of a unit or structure.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT
A dwelling unit in which the owner resides on a regular, permanent basis.
PERSON
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 182/483
[1]
[2]
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, limited partnership, trust or
any other entity.
PREMISES
Any parcel of real property in the Township, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant
structures or appurtenant elements, upon which one or more units or structures is located.
RENTAL UNIT
A residential or commercial unit or structure occupied by any person under a rental agreement.
RENTAL AGREEMENT
A written agreement between owner/landlord and occupant/tenant.
TENANT
An individual who resides in or is the owner of a business within a unit or structure, whether or not
he or she is the owner thereof with whom a legal relationship with the owner/landlord is
established by a written lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (see
"occupant").
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
§ 124-6. Duties of owner.
General.
It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all units and structures in compliance
with all applicable codes and provisions of all other applicable state laws and regulations and
local ordinances, and to keep such property in good and safe condition.
It shall be the duty of every owner to apply for an occupancy permit upon the construction,
reoccupancy and change in occupancy of every one- and two-family dwelling, every multiplefamily
dwelling and every commercial unit and/or establishment in the Township of Wilkins.
Designation of manager.
Property owners are required to maintain properties in accordance with this article and other
established ordinances of the Township. In the event that a property owner must be notified in
writing by the Township of ordinance violations three times within a two-year period, then and
in that event, the property owner will be required to appoint a manager, if the property owner
is not a full-time resident of Wilkins Township or a resident elsewhere within 15 miles from
Wilkins Township.
If the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if any officer of the corporation does
not reside within the aforesaid distance. The officer shall perform the same function as a
manager.
If the owner is a partnership, a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside in the
aforesaid distance. Said partner shall perform the same function as a manager.
The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving notices and
demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the owner under this article and under
rental agreements with occupants.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 183/483
(5)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
F.
G.
The identity, address and telephone number(s) of a person who is designated as manager
hereunder shall be provided by owner or manager to the Township, and such information shall
be kept current and updated as it changes.
Maintenance of premises.
The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the applicable codes of the
Township and shall regularly perform all routine maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice
and snow removal, and shall promptly make all repairs necessary to fulfill its obligation.
The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform specified repairs,
maintenance tasks, alterations, or remodeling. In such case, however, such agreement
between the owner and occupant must be in writing. Such agreement may be entered into
between the owner and occupant only if:
The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not for the purpose of
evading the obligations of the owner or occupant; and
The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the owner to other occupants
in the premises.
In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and occupant relieve any
owner of any responsibility under this article or other ordinances or codes for maintenance of
premises.
§ 124-7. One- and two-family residential structures.
All residential structures, whether owner-occupied or rental units, single-family or two-family
dwellings, shall be bound by these requirements. Each unit in a two-family dwelling shall be
treated separately by this article and each shall require its own occupancy permit.
All residential dwelling units must be inspected by the Township of Wilkins and brought up to
current code standards prior to a change in the person or persons occupying the dwelling unit.
The property owner or agent for the property owner shall make application for an occupancy
permit to the Township of Wilkins on a Township supplied form and return it to the Township along
with the required application fee.
The Township shall conduct an inspection of the premises and shall make note of all deficiencies
from the applicable codes including the Zoning Code[1] and the International Property
Maintenance Code 2003 in its entirety. If the dwelling unit is found to be in compliance with the
aforementioned codes then the property owner or agent shall be issued an occupancy permit for
the dwelling unit.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
If deficiencies are found, the Township shall reinspect the property after notification that all
deficiencies are corrected by the owner or agent. If all deficiencies are found to be corrected, the
owner or agent shall be issued an occupancy permit for the structure.
No dwelling unit may be sold, leased, rented or otherwise reinhabited prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit after the tenants legally residing in the premises at the time of adoption of this
article vacate the premises.
No one- or two-family dwelling unit shall be required to be inspected more than once every two
years regardless of the number of changes in the persons occupying the unit.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 184/483
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
§ 124-8. Multifamily residential structures.
All multifamily residential dwellings shall be bound by these requirements. Each unit in a
multifamily dwelling shall be treated separately by this article and each shall require its own
occupancy permit.
All dwelling units in a multifamily dwelling must be inspected by the Township of Wilkins and
brought up to current code standards on a cyclical basis.
The property owner or agent for the property owner shall make application for an occupancy
permit to the Township of Wilkins on a Township-supplied form and return it to the Township prior
to the requested inspection.
The Township shall conduct an inspection of the premises and shall make note of all deficiencies
from the applicable codes including the Zoning Code[1] and the International Property
Maintenance Code 2003 Edition. If the dwelling unit is found to be in compliance with the
aforementioned codes, then the property owner or agent shall be issued an occupancy permit for
the dwelling unit.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
If deficiencies are found, the Township shall reinspect the property after notification that all
deficiencies are corrected by the owner or agent. If deficiencies are found to be corrected, the
owner or agent shall be issued an occupancy permit for the structure.
Interior corridors of all multifamily dwellings whose units share common interior corridors are
subject to inspection and code compliance at the same time as the inspection of the first unit in the
structure requested for inspection.
All property owners or managers of multifamily dwellings shall be required to have a minimum of
20% of the units under their control inspected on an annual basis. The property owner or manager
may designate which units are inspected annually providing that no unit which has previously
been inspected may be counted toward the annual minimum number of units required for
inspection until all units have been inspected.
All units under common ownership or management will be required to be reinspected on a rotating
basis after all units receive an initial inspection and occupancy permit.
Any multifamily structure with five or less total units, which is under common ownership or
management, will be required to have one unit inspected annually, with the stipulation that no unit
must be inspected more than once every five years.
Any multifamily dwelling units, whether owner occupied or rented, which is located in a structure
where all units in the structure are not under common ownership or management, shall be bound
by the requirements for one- and two-family dwellings.
§ 124-9. Commercial units and structures.
No commercial structure or unit may be sold, leased, rented or otherwise reinhabited prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit after the tenants legally occupying the premises at the time of
adoption of this article vacate the premises.
All commercial structures shall be bound by these requirements. Each unit in a commercial
structure shall be treated separately by this article and each shall require its own occupancy
permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 185/483
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
All units in a commercial establishment must be inspected by the Township of Wilkins and brought
up to current code standards upon the sale of the commercial establishment.
Individual units in a commercial establishment must be inspected by the Township of Wilkins and
brought up to current code standards upon the change of lease, transfer of ownership, or change
of tenants or occupants of the individual unit of a commercial structure.
The property owner or agent for the property owner shall make application for an occupancy
permit to the Township of Wilkins on a Township supplied form and return it to the Township prior
to the requested inspection.
The Township shall conduct an inspection of the premises and shall make note of all deficiencies
from the applicable codes including the Zoning Code[1] and the International Property
Maintenance Code 2003 Edition. If the unit or commercial establishment is found to be in
compliance with the aforementioned codes, then the property owner or agent shall be issued an
occupancy permit for the unit or commercial establishment.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Zoning.
If deficiencies are found, the Township shall reinspect the property after notification that all
deficiencies are corrected by the owner or agent. If deficiencies are found to be corrected, the
owner or agent shall be issued an occupancy permit for the structure.
Interior corridors of all commercial establishments whose units share common interior corridors
are subject to inspection and code compliance at the same time as the inspection of the first unit
in the structure requested for inspection.
No commercial establishment or unit shall be required to be inspected more than once every two
years regardless of the number of changes in occupancy of the unit.
§ 124-10. Fees.
Fees for occupancy permits shall be set by the most recent fee schedule adopted by the Township
of Wilkins. The fee listed in the fee schedule shall apply to one- and two-family dwellings only and
one unit commercial establishments only.
The Township shall reserve the right to charge a reinspection fee after two visits to the same units
as set forth in the Township fee schedule.
Fees shall be due and payable at the time of application for all occupancy permits, or application
for reinspection as the case may be.
§ 124-11. Violations and penalties.
Basis for violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner or manager of a unit or
structure for which a permit is required, to operate or occupy a structure or unit without a valid,
current permit issued by the Township authorizing such operation or occupancy.
Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof
by a district justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions of this article and the permit nonrenewal
procedures provided in this article shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive separate
remedies, all of which shall be available to the Township as may be deemed appropriate for
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 186/483
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
carrying out the purposes of this article. The remedies and procedures provided in this article for
violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies and
procedures available to the Township in the case of a violation of any other code of ordinance of
the Township, whether or not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this article and
whether or not an ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying
ground for a finding of a violation of this article.
§ 124-12. Liability of Township.
The occupancy permit shall be compiled from the records of the Township and from an inspection of
the property. Neither the enactment of this article nor the preparation and delivery of any permit
required hereunder shall impose any liability upon the Township for any errors or omissions contained
in such permit nor shall the Township bear any liability not otherwise imposed by law.
§ 124-13. Appeal rights.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may request, and shall
then be granted a hearing before the Wilkins Township Code Enforcement Appeals Board;
provided he files with the Township within 10 days after notice of the Code Enforcement Officer's
decision, a written appeal requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor. The hearing shall commence no later than 30 days after the date on which the
petition was filed unless postponed for sufficient cause.
After such hearing, the Appeals Board shall sustain, modify or overrule the action of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 124-14. Miscellaneous provisions.
Notices.
For purposes of this article, any notice required hereunder to be given to a manager shall be
deemed as notice given to the owner.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be given to the owner
under this article shall have been received by such owner if the notice was given to the owner
in the manner provided by this article.
A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation hereunder cited shall be no
defense to permit nonrenewal, suspension or revocation proceedings as long as all notices
prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been given and deemed received in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.
Changes in ownership occupancy.
It shall be the duty of each owner of a unit or structure to notify the Code Enforcement Officer
in writing of any change in ownership of the premises or of the number of units on the
premises.
It shall also be the duty of the owner to notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of any
increase in the number of occupants or of the changing of a unit from owner-occupied to nonowner-
occupied, which thereby transforms the unit or structure into a unit or structure for
purposes of this article.
Owners severally responsible. If any unit or structure is owned by more than one person, in any
form of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each person shall be jointly and severally
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 187/483
A.
(1)
B.
responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this article, and shall be severally subject to
prosecution for the violation of this article.
§ 124-15. through § 124-20. (Reserved)
Article III. Residential Rental Registration and Annual
Licensing
[Added 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 1010]
§ 124-21. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning hereafter designated.
LANDLORD
One or more persons as defined by this section, jointly or severally, in whom all or part of the legal
title to the premises is vested or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use
and enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder in possession of a residential rental
unit (same as "owner").
OCCUPANT
An individual who resides in a unit or structure, whether or not the individual is the owner of the
unit or structure thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the owner or landlord of the unit or
structure is established by a written lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
RENTAL LICENSE
The license issued to the owner of residential rental units under this article, which is required for
the lawful rental and occupancy of residential rental units.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
Any structure within the Township which is occupied by someone other than the owner of the real
estate as determined by the most current deed and for which the owner of the said parcel of real
estate received any value, including but not limited to money, or the exchange of services.
TENANT
An individual who resides in a rental unit, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, with
whom a legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as "occupant").
§ 124-22. Registration.
General. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all rental units in compliance with
all applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances and to keep such property in good
and safe condition. The owner/landlord shall be responsible for regularly performing all
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and for making any and all
repairs in and around the premises.
Registration. Every owner of a residential rental unit must register the unit with the Code
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following schedule:
All owners of residential units must register the unit with the Code Enforcement Officer by
January 10 of each year.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 188/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
Any individual, entity or firm which converts any structure to a residential rental unit or units
shall register the residential rental unit or units with the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township upon the earliest occurrence of the following scenarios:
Within 30 days of the completion of the conversion;
Within 30 days of the time when any rent, including the exchange of other services for
the unit or units is obtained;
Within 30 days of the date which a tenant or tenants occupies the unit or units.
It shall be the responsibility of the grantee and the grantee's agent to notify the Township
within 72 hours of any purchase or transfer of a rental unit.
The owner of a residential rental unit must update the registration information on record with
the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days of any changes of the information set forth
below.
Registration information shall be provided by all owners and shall include the following:
Owner's name, address, telephone number;
Property address and number of units;
Maximum occupancy per unit;
A floor plan with the measurements of each room within the residential rental unit;
Emergency telephone number;
Actual number of occupants;
Names and addresses of current tenants.
Any owner of a residential rental unit shall notify the Township within 10 days of a new tenant
occupying, renting or residing in the landlord's or owner's residential rental unit.
Licenses.
As a prerequisite to entering into a rental agreement or permitting the occupancy of any rental
unit (except as provided in Subsection (C)(2) below, the owner of every such rental unit shall
be required to apply for and obtain a license for each rental unit whose fee shall be set from
time to time, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
The following categories of rental properties shall not require licenses, and thus, shall not be
subjected to Subsection C(1) of this article:
Hotels and motels;
Hospitals and nursing homes;
Bed-and-breakfast units.
The application for the license shall be in a form as determined by the Township.
The owner shall maintain a current and accurate list of the occupants in each rental unit.
§ 124-23. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 189/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Wilkins.
Basis for violation. An owner that rents a residential rental unit requiring a license without a valid,
current license, issued by the Township of Wilkins authorizing such use, is in violation of this
article.
Penalties. Any landlord or owner of a residential rental unit which violates any provision of Article
III, together with all of the subsections thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine up to $500 for each and every offense. Each day an owner operates a rental unit in
violation of this article shall be treated as a separate offense.
Fines imposed through this article shall be collected by any means allowable by law.
Each day an owner of a residential rental unit violates any provision of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
This article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the right of the
Township, its agents and representatives from seeking any other equitable or legal remedies that
may otherwise exist under applicable law.
In addition to the fines set forth herein, the Township of Wilkins shall be entitled to reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of collection incurred in enforcing this article. Said fees shall be added to
any penalties set forth above.
Article IV. Mobile Home Park Permitting and Licensing
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1045]
§ 124-24. Mobile home park permit.
Application for a mobile home park permit to establish or enlarge a mobile home park shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer. The applicant shall file with the application proof of ownership of
the premises, a lease, or written permission from the property owners.
An application for a mobile home park permit to establish or enlarge a mobile home park shall be
accompanied by copies of a preliminary plan as set forth in Chapter 148. If the proposed mobile
home park is located in a zoning district permitting mobile home parks as a conditional use, then
the applicant shall follow the procedures set forth for a conditional use application as set forth in
Chapter 173.
A mobile home park permit to establish or enlarge a mobile home park shall not be issued until
there is approval of the mobile home park by the Board of Commissioners in the case of a
conditional use application, or approval by the Zoning Hearing Board in the case of a variance
application.
The making of extensions or alterations to an existing mobile home park without obtaining a permit
from the Building Inspector shall be cause of immediate revocation of the mobile home park
license.
§ 124-25. Mobile home park license.
No mobile home park shall be in operation or shall be occupied without a valid license issued by
the Township of Wilkins.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 190/483
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A license for the operation of a new or existing mobile home park shall be issued annually by the
Township, provided that such park conforms with all the health and sanitation requirements of all
applicable local, state, and federal laws.
A license for a mobile home park shall expire annually. Before the Township may issue a renewal
of the license, the park shall be inspected by the Property Maintenance Officer, who shall certify in
writing whether the park continues to conform to the provisions of this article and all other
applicable ordinances. If the park fails to so conform, said license shall not be renewed.
Each application for a renewable license or a renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a fee set
forth by the Board of Commissioners in a separate resolution, as amended from time to time,
known as the Schedule of Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: The Schedule of Fees is on file in the Township offices.
§ 124-26. Occupancy permit.
It shall be the duty of every mobile home park owner to keep and maintain all mobile homes and
structures in compliance with all applicable codes and provisions of all other applicable state laws
and regulations and local ordinances, and to keep such property in good and safe condition.
It shall be the duty of every mobile home park owner to apply for an occupancy permit upon the
construction, reoccupancy, and change in occupancy of every mobile home in the mobile home
park. The procedure to obtain an occupancy permit for each mobile home shall follow the same
procedure as a one- or two-family residential structure as set forth in Article II, Chapter 124.
§ 124-27. Violations and penalties.
Basis for violation. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, as either owner or manager of a
mobile home park, to establish or enlarge a mobile home park without obtaining a mobile home
park permit. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, as either owner or manager of a mobile
home park, to operate a mobile home park without a mobile home park license issued by the
Township of Wilkins.
Penalties. Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof by a district
justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The remedies and procedures for a
violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace the remedies and procedures available to
the Township in the case of a violation of any other code or ordinance of the Township, whether or
not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this article and whether or not an ongoing
violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a
violation of this article.
Article V. Abandoned Real Property
[Added 1-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1051]
§ 124-28. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Township to establish a process to address the deterioration and
blight of the township neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or
distressed real property located within the Township and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the
number of abandoned properties located within the Township. It is the Township's further intent to
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 191/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted due
to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and foreclosed properties.
§ 124-29. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ABANDONED OR REAL PROPERTY
Any real property located in the Township, whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a
mortgage, has had a lis pendens (NOTE: Lis pendens is Latin for "suit pending." This may refer to
any pending lawsuit or to a specific situation with a public notice of litigation that has been
recorded in the same location where the title of real property has been recorded. This notice
secures a plaintiff's claim on the property so that the sale, mortgage, or encumbrance of the
property will not diminish plaintiff's rights to the property, should the plaintiff prevail in its case.)
filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on the property, is subject to an ongoing
foreclosure action by the lender, is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax
assessor's lien sale, or has been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such time as the property is
sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure action has been dismissed, and any default on
the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE
A property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a
structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space
by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES
To include but not be limited to the Township's Zoning Code, the Township's Property Maintenance
Code, solid waste ordinances, residential and commercial recycling ordinances and the
Pennsylvania Building and Fire Codes, including the Municipality's Codified Book of Ordinances.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY
Means:
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls or roofs which create
hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing; or
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the maintenance of other
neighboring properties causing a decrease in value of the neighboring properties; or
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Township codes; or
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because the properties or
improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated or violate minimum health and safety
standards or lack maintenance as required by the applicable codes.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any law enforcement officer, Building Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire
Inspector or Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Township to enforce the
applicable code(s).
MORTGAGEE
The lender in a mortgage, usually a bank.
MORTGAGOR
The borrower in a mortgage, typically a homeowner.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 192/483
A.
B.
A.
(1)
B.
OWNER
Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership interest whether legal or equitable, in
real property. This term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the
construction, maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY
A local property manager, property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
SERVICER
A private company that collects payments on a loan, responds to customer service inquiries and
performs other administrative tasks associated with maintain a loan. Loan servicers also disburse
loans/funds, monitor loans, responds to borrower inquiries, maintain records and ensure that the
loans are administered in compliance with federal regulations and other legal requirements.
VACANT
Means:
Any building or structure that is not legally occupied and is not currently being offered for sale,
rent or lease evidenced by a sign posted on the subject property advertising the property for
sale, rent or lease with contact information, ownership information, and current phone number
and/or an active listing on an electronic database accessible to Municipal staff. This shall also
include those properties subject to the provisions of § 124-32 of this article, which shall be
defined as vacant and abandoned and subject to the requirements of registration and other
provisions of this article.
Exception: This definition shall not apply to properties where the owners have, for reasons
such as extended vacations, nursing home care, or temporary employment, not occupied
their homes for over 90 days but intend to return and have notified Wilkins Township of their
intention.
§ 124-30. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or
provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy available to the Township above and beyond
any other state, county or local provisions for the same.
§ 124-31. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 124-28, the Township or designee shall establish a registry cataloging
each abandoned property within the Township, containing the information required by this article.
§ 124-32. Registration of abandoned real property.
Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the Township of Wilkins shall
perform an inspection of the property to determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the
mortgagor. The mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the
Property Enforcement Officer, or other Township designee, on forms provided by the Township
and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for
each property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the mortgagee or his
designee monthly until:
The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 193/483
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned,
and the mortgagee shall within ten (10) days of that inspection, update the property
registration to a vacancy status on forms provided by the Township.
Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the mortgagee and the servicer, the
direct mailing address of the mortgagee and the server, a direct contact name and telephone
number for both parties, facsimile number and email address for both parties, the PIN or tax
number, and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the property management
company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property.
All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, servicer, trustee or owner. Thirdparty
registration fees are not allowed without the consent of the Township and/or its authorized
designee.
This section shall apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the
title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The provisions of this section shall also apply
to owners, servicers, trustees, property managers, and agents of all vacant and/or abandoned
property whether or not the subject of a mortgage.
Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, and the
inspection, security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in
default.
Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this section must report any change
of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change.
Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify the registration form from
time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the
article and shall be subject to enforcement.
Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination that any property is in violation
of this article, the Township may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a
lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and bring it into
compliance.
§ 124-33. Maintenance requirements.
Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation,
trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices,
except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items, including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that
give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over
with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
Front, side and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained in accordance with the
applicable code(s) at the time registration was required.
Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs,
hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for
residential installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not include
weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering irrigation, cutting and mowing of required
ground cover or landscape and removal of all trimmings.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 194/483
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris
and shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the Codified Book of Ordinances, Chapter
152, as well as the Uniform Construction Code and International Property Maintenance Code as
amended from time to time.
Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of
the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with the
applicable code of the Township. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the Township's Code
Enforcement Officer, magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Township may take the
necessary action to ensure compliance with this section.
In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in accordance with the
applicable codes of the Township, including but not limited to all other provisions of Chapter 124 of
the Wilkins Township Codified Book of Ordinances, Property Maintenance, Building Code, Fire
Code and other applicable codes of the Township.
§ 124-34. Security requirements.
Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons.
A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors,
gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property
or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child
to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be
secured by reglazing of the window.
If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become vacant or abandoned, a
property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring
the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform
regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and any other
applicable laws.
Posting.
The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of
the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than an eight-inch-byten-
inch sign containing the name of the management company and the name and telephone
number of an individual to whom to report problems or concerns.
The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the
property so it is visible, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to
the front of the property so it is visible. If no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location as close as possible to the main door entrance to the
property. Exterior postings shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant
materials.
The local property management company shall inspect the property on a monthly basis to ensure
that the property is in compliance with this section. Upon the request of the Township, the
company shall provide a copy of the inspection reports to the Township.
§ 124-35. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which
pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 195/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
the residents of the Township.
§ 124-36. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other obligations
set forth in any applicable code(s), which may apply to the property. Upon offer for sale or transfer of
title to the property, the owner shall be responsible to apply to the Township's Property Maintenance
Officer for a presales inspection.
§ 124-37. Additional authority.
If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject to the provisions of this
article is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement
Officer may temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or owner, and
may bring the violations before the magistrate as soon as possible to address the conditions of the
property.
The Code Enforcement Officer or magistrate shall have the authority to require the mortgagee
and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures, including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors,
windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious threat to the public health,
safety and welfare, then the Code Enforcement Officer or magistrate may direct the Township to
abate the violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the abatement.
If the mortgagee does not reimburse the Township for the cost of temporarily securing the property
or for any abatement directed by the Code Enforcement Officer or magistrate within 30 days of the
Township sending the mortgagee the invoice then the Township may lien the property with such
cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the Township's fee resolution to recover
the administrative personnel services.
§ 124-38. Opposing or obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in the applicable code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 124-39. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Township to enforce the sections here within
shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property
while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article.
§ 124-40. Fees; violations and penalties.
A nonrefundable registration fee in the amount of $50 per property shall accompany the
registration form.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 196/483
B.
C.
A.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article may be cited and fined. Failure to
register abandoned real property on an annual basis and/or any violation of the sections stated
within this article shall result in a penalty of $500 per property per offense.
Amendments. Registration and penalty fees outlined in this article may be modified by a
resolution, passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
Chapter 131. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 144.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
Article I. Connections From Outside District
[Adopted 4-14-1975 by Ord. No. 579]
§ 131-1. Application.
Any owner of property not within an ordained sanitary sewer district of the Township of Wilkins and
which has not been assessed for any costs of construction for a sanitary sewer may make application
to the Board of Commissioners for permission to drain sanitary sewage from such property through the
sanitary sewer system constructed in any district.
§ 131-2. Plan required.
The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the dimensions of the property, the location of
any buildings existing or proposed, the number of dwelling units constructed or to be constructed within
said buildings and the method of flow and connection to any existing sanitary sewer.
§ 131-3. Review of application.
The application shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, and if it appears that the sanitary sewage
system through which the applicant's property will drain is capable of carrying the proposed sewage
and that the proposed drainage is otherwise in conformance with the Township's Master Sewage Plan,
the Board of Commissioners may authorize the requested connection.
§ 131-4. Connection fee; formula.
Each applicant for connection to the Township's sanitary sewage system under the aforesaid
circumstances shall pay concurrently with the issuance of a connection permit one connection fee or
sewer rental fee based upon the following formula:
The total costs of construction of any sanitary sewage system in any one or more districts through
which the applicant's sewage will flow shall be divided by the total number of feet of sewer line
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 197/483
B.
A.
B.
A.
constructed therein.
The foot frontage of the applicant's property shall be multiplied by the quotient, and the applicant
shall pay 1/2 of the product or the sum of $1,000 dollars, whichever is greater.
§ 131-5. Use of fees.
In those cases where the Township of Wilkins has not recovered the total costs of construction of
the sewage system in any one or more districts related to a connection as above described, the
fee paid therefor shall be deposited in the Township's Sewer Fund.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
In those cases where the Township of Wilkins has recovered the total costs of construction of the
sewage system in any one or more districts related to a connection as above described, the fee
paid therefor shall be distributed pro rata to the owners (at the time of payment) of the properties
originally assessable after deduction of a reasonable sum for administrative expenses.
§ 131-6. Tapping fee additional.
Payment of the connection fee or sewer rental as above set forth shall not be considered to be in lieu
of the tap-in fee required by Article V, but shall be in addition thereto.
Article II. Rates and Charges
[Adopted 1-27-1992 by Ord. No. 822]
§ 131-7. Rates established.
[Amended 2-10-1997 by Ord. No. 898; 3-31-1997 by Ord. No. 900; 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 960; 12-12-
2011 by Ord. No. 1022; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1038]
There is hereby imposed and established rates or charges for the use of, and services provided by, the
various sanitary sewer systems in the Township of Wilkins, said rates or charges being based upon the
quantity of water used. The following rates or charges shall be assessed to each user of the sanitary
sewer system on a quarterly basis:
Basic service: $2.50 per 1,000 gallons of water used, with a minimum quarterly fee of $5 for up to
2,000 gallons of water used per quarter.
§ 131-8. Billing; payment.
Charges for the sanitary sewer system service shall be billed quarterly, with all bills rendered as of the
first day of the month following the quarter for which service was provided. Payment shall be due and
payable within 30 days of the date of the billing statement.
§ 131-9. Delinquent charges; penalty.
In the event that the charges or said sanitary sewage system service remain unpaid for a period of 30
days from the date of said statement, such charges are hereby declared to be delinquent, and a
penalty of 10% of the amount of said statement shall be added.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 198/483
§ 131-10. Interest.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
For each delinquent sanitary sewage account remaining unpaid 90 days after the date of said
statement, an interest charge of 10% per annum of the gross delinquent charge shall be added.
§ 131-11. Collection methods.
The Township of Wilkins shall pursue the collection of delinquent sanitary sewer accounts by all means
available pursuant to applicable law.
§ 131-12. Applicability.
The rates and charges herein established shall be imposed upon and collected from the owner, tenant
or occupant of each lot or parcel of land in the Township of Wilkins serviced by a sanitary sewer
owned, maintained or operated by the Township of Wilkins from which sewerage, waste or water enter
the Township's sewer system. In the event that any user of the premises is not the owner of the
premises from which sewerage, waste or water enter the Township's sewer system, the Township of
Wilkins hereby imposes said sewage service charges upon and demands payment thereof on the
record owner of such premises, and, in the event that payment is not timely made, the Township shall
and will file a lien therefor against the premises served for the amount due, plus the penalty and
interest against the record owner of the premises.
Article III. Sewage Holding Tanks
[Adopted 5-9-1994 as Ord. No. 851]
§ 131-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and maintenance of existing and new
holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses,
and it is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 131-14. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
The Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK
A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or temporary, which receives and retains sewage
conveyed by a water-carrying system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate
disposal of the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 199/483
A.
B.
C.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial of any property located in the
Township.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
§ 131-15. Rights and privileges granted.
The authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the Township the control and
methods of holding-tank use, sewage disposal and sewage collection and transportation thereof.
§ 131-16. Rules and regulations.
The authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 131-17. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with
applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the authority shall be in conformity with the provisions
herein, all other ordinances of the Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 131-18. Rates and charges.
The authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect rates and charges in
connection with the administration of this article and, in addition, collect amounts in lieu of sewer rental
fees. Such rates, charges and fees shall be established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
and amended from time to time.
§ 131-19. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property utilizing a holding tank
shall be done solely by or under the direction and control of the authority, and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from permitted holding tanks.
The authority will complete and retain annual inspection reports for each permitted tank.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 200/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 131-20. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
Apply for and obtain a holding tank permit.
Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of this Township, the
provisions of any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the authority and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Permit the authority to inspect holding tanks at its discretion.
Permit only a duly licensed waste holder approved by the authority to collect, transport and
dispose of the contents of a holding tank.
Provide to the authority on a monthly basis a record of holding-tank removal dates and the name
of the waste hauler.
§ 131-21. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Any person who violates any provisions of § 131-20 shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs and, in default of said fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in excess of 30 days.
§ 131-22. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of § 131-20 above shall
constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the municipality or the authority by either seeking
mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Article IV. Collection of Assessments
[Adopted 6-27-1994 as Ord. No. 855]
§ 131-23. Payment.
Assessments made against properties as a result of the construction of sanitary sewer projects,
whether assessed according to the foot-front rule or by Board of View, shall be due and payable in four
equal quarterly installments, the first installment due and payable on the 60th day after the amount of
assessment is set by ordinance or by Board of View. No interest shall be applied to the assessment.
§ 131-24. Low- and moderate-income households.
Property owners qualifying as low- and moderate-income households may elect to pay assessments in
12 equal quarterly installments, the first installment due and payable on the 60th day after the amount
of assessment is set by ordinance or Board of View. No interest shall be applied to the assessment.
§ 131-25. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 201/483
A.
B.
C.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INCOME
Income reported as total income on the United States individual tax returns for the household
members in the year immediately preceding the year the assessment is levied.
LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD
A household with income as follows:
Number of Persons Income
1 $20,550.00
2 $23,500.00
3 $26,400.00
4 $29,350.00
5 $31,700.00
6 $34,050.00
7 $36,400.00
8 $38,750.00
§ 131-26. Qualifications to establish low and moderate income.
Qualifications to establish low and moderate income shall be in substantially the following form:
The property owner shall reside on the subject property.
All members of the owner's household shall be identified.
All members of the property owner's household for the subject tax year shall file with the Township
copies of United States individual income tax returns, which copies shall not be shown to any
person not required to administer this article.
§ 131-27. Interest.
In the event that any property owner electing to pay an assessment under either of the installment
plans herein provided shall fail to pay an installment in fall when due, the entire balance shall become
due, with interest, at 12% per annum and penalty as provided by law.
§ 131-28. Notice.
The Township Manager shall give notice of assessments due together with a copy of this article by
mailing the same at the last known address of the owner as shown in the real estate tax duplicate
issued for the current year, said notice to be mailed forthwith when the assessment is set.
§ 131-29. Filing of items.
It shall be the duty of the Township Solicitor to file municipal liens as required by law in time to prevent
loss of the assessment by conveyance prior to collection of the assessment and upon nonpayment to
collect the assessment penalty and interest in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal liens.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 202/483
A.
Article V. Connections to Public Sewage Systems
[Adopted 9-26-1994 as Ord. No. 860]
§ 131-30. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING DRAIN
Part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER
Piping carrying liquid wastes from a building to the treatment or holding tank or to the public sewer
main.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A person or agency appointed to perform inspections and issue permits in connection with
individual sewage systems and community sewage systems.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person"
shall include the members of an association and the officers of a corporation.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM
Any system, privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature, or both, including various devices for the treatment of such sewage.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM
The sewer system owned, operated or maintained by the Township.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrementitious or other discharge from
the bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful
or inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 131-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and, in default of payment, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The Township may seek equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas.
§ 131-32. Requirement to connect to public sewer.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 203/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
All property owners whose building drain or existing building sewer or existing septic tank are within
250 feet of any public sewer line shall be required to connect thereto.
Persons claiming exemption under the two-hundred-fifty-foot distance requirement of this section
shall file an application for exemption with the Township containing a survey indicating the location
of the buildings to be exempted and the distance from the public sewer to the building drain,
building sewer or septic tank.
The application shall contain a report (dated within 60 days) by a registered engineer, certified
sewage enforcement officer or other person deemed qualified by the Allegheny County Health
Department, which report includes a dye test and establishes that the private sewage disposal
system is functioning in accordance with regulations of the Allegheny County Health Department.
A report as set forth in Subsection B above shall be delivered to the Township every six months
after approval of the exemption application.
Upon failure to file a report or upon failure of the private system to comply with Allegheny County
Health Department regulations, connection to the public sewer shall be made within 60 days.
§ 131-33. Connections made by Township; costs.
If the owner of any property, after 90 days' notice from the enforcement officer to make connection of
such property with the public sewage system, shall fail to make such connection, the Township may
make the connection and collect the costs thereof in the manner provided by law.
§ 131-34. Owners required to connect upon expansion of system.
From time to time in the future as public sewage services become available to additional properties
within the Township by reason of additions to the public sewage system or improvements on abutting
properties, each and every owner of such property shall be required to make the necessary connection
to the abutting or adjoining sewer lines, and any septic tanks, cesspools, holding tanks and similar
devices connected to an individual sewage system shall be abandoned and filled with new material.
§ 131-35. Access to premises by agents.
The enforcement officer or his authorized agent and agents of the Township shall have access at all
reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the premises to which sewage service is supplied to make
necessary inspections.
§ 131-36. Permit required to open or disturb sewer.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb
any part of the public sewage system or appurtenance thereto without first obtaining a permit from the
enforcement officer.
§ 131-37. Sewer permit fees.
Before making a connection with the sewer system, each property owner shall make a written
application therefor in the manner prescribed by the enforcement officer and pay a permit fee
established pursuant to a resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 204/483
§ 131-38. Owner responsible for connection costs.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Township from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 131-39. Separate connections required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Exceptions to this
provision shall be made where one building stands to the rear of another on an interior lot and no
sewer line is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, in which case the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building only on approval by the enforcement officer. Such connection of the two buildings to the sewer
lines shall be considered as two building sewers.
§ 131-40. Status of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with a building only when such connection is approved
by the enforcement officer and they meet the requirements of this article or rules and regulations
adopted pursuant hereto.
§ 131-41. Material and specifications for sewer pipes and joints.
The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, ASTM specifications or equal, vitrified clay sewer pipe,
ASTM specification or equal, or other suitable material approved by the enforcement officer. Joints
shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within 10 feet of a water
service pipe shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded
joints may be required by the enforcement officer where the building sewer is exposed to damage by
tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground the, building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe,
except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as
approved by the enforcement officer.
§ 131-42. Size and slope of building sewer.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the enforcement officer, but
in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less
than 1/8 inch per foot.
§ 131-43. Elevation, grade and depth of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which
might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building
sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changed in direction
shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
§ 131-44. Trap.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 205/483
A.
B.
C.
A trap shall be installed on the building lateral outside the building within four feet of the outer wall of
the building in the event that there is no existing trap. The installation of such trap, complete with vent,
is mandatory.
§ 131-45. Discharge by artificial means when gravity flow
insufficient.
In a building in which the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
§ 131-46. Excavations for building sewer.
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless
otherwise approved by the enforcement officer. Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM specifications, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected and approved.
§ 131-47. Joints and Connections.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast-iron pipe joints shall be
firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead according to federal specifications,
not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish
or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and
approved.
All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hotpoured
jointing materials or cement mortar.
Other jointing materials and methods may be used only after approval from the enforcement
officer.
§ 131-48. Connection of building sewer to public sewage system.
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewerage system shall be made at the Y-branch if
such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer line is 12 inches in diameter or less
and no properly located Y-branch is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a Y-branch in the
public sewer at the location specified by the enforcement officer. Where the public sewer is greater
than 12 inches in diameter and no properly located Y-branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into
the public sewer to receive the building sewer with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of
about 45°. A forty-five-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot and cut so as
not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation then the invert of the public sewer. A smooth,
neat joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete.
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the enforcement officer.
§ 131-49. Notification prior to connection.
The permit holder shall notify the enforcement officer when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection with the public sewer, and the connection shall be made under his supervision.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 206/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 131-50. Failure to obtain inspection.
Any connection to the Township sanitary sewer system which has been backfilled without receiving
final inspection and approval of the Building Inspector or Township Engineer or his authorized agent
will be declared unsatisfactory, and the owner will be required to uncover the trench for the necessary
inspection, and, upon failure to do so, the Township may do the necessary work and recover the cost
thereof from such owner by a municipal claim or in an action of assumpsit as provided by law, or the
Township may proceed against such owner as provided for violations in § 131-31.
§ 131-51. Safety and warning facilities.
All excavations for building sewer installation and connection shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Township Engineer.
§ 131-52. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall connect or cause to be connected with any of the public sewers in the Township
directly or indirectly any steam exhaust, boiler blowoff, sediment drip or any pipe carrying or
constructed to carry hot water or acid, germicide, grease, brewery mash, gasoline, naphtha,
benzine, oil or any other substance detrimental to sewers or to the operation of the sewerage
system or sewage disposal plant used by the Township.
No downspouts or other pipes collecting stormwater or water from underground springs and no
privy vault, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall at any time now or hereafter
be connected with any of the Township sewers nor shall sewage from any property other than that
for which a permit was issued.
Article VI. Wastewater Discharge
[Adopted 12-12-1994 as Ord. No. 862]
§ 131-53. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings hereafter designated:
ALCOSAN
The Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment facility and any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE
A waste or substance which has any of the following properties:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than or equal to 10, as
determined by a pH meter.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35 millimeters (0.250 inch)
per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130° F.).
HAZARDOUS WASTE
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 207/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as specified in 25 Pa.
Code § 261.
IGNITABLE WASTE
A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard in the sewage collection system or the
ALCOSAN treatment facility which has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. [140° F. using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21.
It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge originating in the Township which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's National Pollutant.
Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred to as "NPDES") permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section
405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" and including the state
regulations contained in and State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
PASS-THROUGH
Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives,
agents or assigns.
pH
The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, emissions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION
The man-made or man induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological
integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE
A waste or substance which can create an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or
the ALCOSAN treatment facility, which has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 208/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without detonating.
It reacts violently with water.
It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gasses, vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to
present a danger to human health or the environment.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic gasses, vapors or fumes in
a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the environment.
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a strong initiating source or
if heated under confinement.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction at standard
temperature and pressure.
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51 or a Class A explosive as defined in
49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.88.
THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et. seq.
TOXIC POLLUTANT
Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(A) of the Act.
WASTEWATER
The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed directly or indirectly into
the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border upon the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 131-54. General restrictions.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN
or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Township and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other
facilities; or
Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
§ 131-55. Unlawful discharges.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly into the facilities of
ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Township and transmitting
substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 209/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the treatment plant sewer
maintenance and plant operations personnel or which would preclude safe entry into the sewer
system or any portion of the treatment plant.
Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste except as provided for by
ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. [60° C.
Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for either alpha, beta or
gamma radiation and/or any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operations of ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the
ALCOSAN system.
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gasses or solids which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes may create a public nuisance or adversely affect public health or safety.
Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food-waste garbage resulting from the
proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer-type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good
operating condition.
Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from sewage or industrial waste
treatment plants or from water treatment plants unless the discharge of such sludges and other
materials is specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
Any pollutant including oxygen-demanding pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other product of the ALCOSAN
facilities such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including
any substance which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria,
guidelines or regulations promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations applicable to the treatment or
disposal of such effluent or such product.
§ 131-56. Applicability of other provisions.
No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in violation of any rule or
regulation of ALCOSAN.
The pretreatment regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority are incorporated into this
article by reference as though fully set forth herein.
§ 131-57. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to
exceed the sum of $1,000 for each offense, recoverable with costs, and, in default of payment of the
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County jail for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 210/483
violating any provision of the ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and administered by ALCOSAN. Such
penalties may include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day,
per violation as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law; 35 P.S. § 752.1 et
seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to
but not in place of any other remedy available to the Township.
Article VII. Dye Test Prior to Sale
[Adopted 10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 906]
§ 131-58. Title.
This article may be known and cited as the "Wilkins Township Dye Test Ordinance."
§ 131-59. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings set forth as follows:
TOWNSHIP LIEN LETTER
A written letter from the Township concerning municipal liens.
DYE TEST
Any commonly accepted plumbing test wherein dye is introduced into the storm, surface or
subsurface water collection system of real property to determine if storm, surface or subsurface
water is entering the sanitary sewer system.
EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE
An official statement from the Township stating that it has on file a written statement from a
licensed plumber that there are no illegal storm, surface or subsurface water connections into the
sanitary sewer system which would violate Township or county ordinances, state or federal
statutes or Township, county or state plumbing regulations.
ILLEGAL STORM, SURFACE OR SUBSURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS
The discharge or conduct of basement seepage or groundwater or the connection of downspouts,
roof drainage or surface or areaway drainage or subsurface water into the sanitary sewer system.
PERSON
Any person, partnership, association, syndicate, firm, corporation, institution, agency, authority or
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE
A temporary statement from the Township issued pursuant to the terms of § 131-62 of this article.
§ 131-60. Sale without evidence of compliance prohibited.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell real property within the
Township on which a building or improvement exists without first delivering to the purchaser evidence
of compliance or temporary evidence of compliance from the Township.
§ 131-61. Procedure for evidence of compliance; fee.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 211/483
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Any person proposing to sell real property located within the Township (hereinafter "applicant") shall,
no less than 14 days prior to the date set for final closing and settlement and closing of such proposed
transfer, make application to the Township for evidence of compliance, which application shall be
stated on or in a form to be provided by the Township. Immediately after making such application, the
applicant shall deliver a true and correct copy of the application to a plumber who is registered and
licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department and shall cause the plumber to perform a dye
test upon the real property proposed to be sold. The plumber, after having completed the dye test,
shall complete the appropriate portions of the application confirming that the property has been dye
tested and certifying the results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal storm, surface or
subsurface water connections existing upon the real property proposed to be sold, the Township
Manager, or his or her designee, shall, upon payment of a fee which shall from time to time be
established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the Township, issue evidence of
compliance. If the dye test reveals the existence of an illegal storm, surface or subsurface water
connection, no evidence of compliance shall be issued by the Township until such time as all illegal
storm, surface or subsurface water connections are removed from the real property proposed to be
sold and certification of the same is received by the Township from a plumber registered and licensed
as aforesaid.
§ 131-62. Temporary evidence of compliance; fee.
Temporary evidence of compliance may be issued at the Township's sole discretion when either:
The applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because of weather conditions. In
this case, the applicant shall provide the Township with security in the amount as shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the Township, to
guarantee that the dye test will be performed. The applicant will cause the dye test to be
performed within 14 days of written notification by the Township, which will be given at such
time as weather conditions permit the administration of the dye test under reliable conditions.
Further, at the time of submitting the application for temporary evidence of compliance, the
applicant shall provide the Township with a signed, written acknowledgment from the
proposed purchaser of the real property agreeing to correct, at the purchaser's sole expense,
any illegal storm, surface or subsurface water connections discovered as a result of
subsequent dye tests. Nothing in this article shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring the
applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs incurred; provided, however, that primary
liability for correction of any illegal connection shall run with the land, and no agreement
between the applicant and the purchaser shall affect the Township's enforcement powers or
effect a discharge of the duties or obligations of the applicant or of the proposed purchaser as
imposed pursuant to this article; or
When one or more illegal storm, surface or surface water connection or connections is or are
discovered and the remedial activities necessary to correct such connection or connections
would require work extending over a length of time such as will result in a practical hardship
for the applicant, the applicant may apply to the Township for temporary evidence of
compliance.
Temporary evidence of compliance may only be issued when, after having demonstrated the
existence of the condition described herein, the applicant additionally provides to the Township all
of the following:
A bona fide executed contract between the applicant and a registered licensed plumber to
complete the necessary remedial work and granting the borough the legal power to enforce
the contract.
Cash security in the amount of said contract, posted with the Township.
An agreement by the proposed purchaser of the real property to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work, together with a license to enter upon the property to
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 212/483
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
complete the work in case of default by the contractor. The Township Manager shall
determine by regulation when such temporary evidence of compliance shall expire, and the
applicant and the purchaser shall be advised of the expiration date. Upon expiration of the
temporary evidence of compliance without the remedial work having been completed and the
certification required in § 131-61 of this article having been received by the Township, the
security shall be forfeited to the Township and the Township may use the security to have the
necessary remedial work completed and may file a lien against the real property for any such
shortage between the cost of the work performed, including reasonable legal fees incurred by
the Township, and the amount of security posted.
§ 131-63. Township lien letters; fees.
A request for a Township lien letter must be accompanied by a valid evidence of compliance and
the appropriate fee, all of which shall be delivered at least seven days prior to the day said letter(s)
is (are) to be issued by the Township.
When requested by a property owner or his agent and subject to the same time availability, as
determined solely by the Township Manager, the Township may issue an expedited Township lien
letter on two days' notice, upon payment of the expedited fee, in addition to the fee required for
the issuance of the Township lien letter as set forth by Subsection A of this section.
§ 131-64. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Township shall promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations as approved by the Board
of Commissioners for the operation and enforcement of this article. Such rules and regulations
shall include, but not be limited to, provisions:
Establishing acceptable forms of security or guaranty;
Establishing the form of applications, purchaser acknowledgments and agreements and
plumber certifications;
Limiting the times of year in which temporary evidence of compliance may be available for
reasons of weather; and
Establishing the length of time during which a temporary evidence of compliance may remain
valid.
Rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section and subsection shall be in writing and
distributed as necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 131-65. Construction and interpretation of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall limit in any fashion whatsoever the Township's right to enforce its
ordinances or the laws of the commonwealth. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation
issued by any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any law or ordinance.
§ 131-66. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article or of any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto
and authorized thereby shall, upon conviction, be subject to the maximum penalty provided by law.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 213/483
[1]
A.
Chapter 133. Smoking
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins: Art. I, 6-26-1995 as
Ord. No. 874. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Municipal Building
[Adopted 6-26-1995 as Ord. No. 874]
§ 133-1. No-smoking area designated.
The enclosed area of the Municipal Building of the Township of Wilkins is hereby designated as a nosmoking
area, and smoking of any tobacco products shall be prohibited in said area.
§ 133-2. Posting of signs.
This Article shall be implemented by posting signs, which shall read "No Smoking - Violations Subject
To $50.00 Fine" near the building entryways and in the main meeting room of the building.
§ 133-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person smoking or in possession of lighted tobacco products in the enclosed area of the Municipal
Building shall be guilty of violating the Act of April 27, 1927, as amended by the Act of December 21,
1988,[1] and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided in said Act.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1230.1 et seq.
Chapter 135. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins: Art. I, 7-29-1991 as
Ord. No. 814; Art. II, 7-29-1991 as Ord. No. 813. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 74.
Vector control — See Ch. 165.
Article I. Collection and Storage
[Adopted 7-29-1991 as Ord. No. 814]
§ 135-1. Short title.
This Article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 135-2. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases as used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed herein
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 214/483
(1)
ACT or ACT 97
The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).[1]
AGRICULTURAL WASTE
Poultry and livestock manure or residual materials in liquid or solid form generated in the
production and marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided that such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the residual materials
generated in producing, harvesting and marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural
and agricultural crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and accepted as
farms, forest or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE
Large items of solid waste, including but not limited to appliances, furniture, trees, branches
or stumps, which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but
not limited to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
COMMISSIONERS
The Township Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE
All municipal and residual waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings
and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
DISPOSAL
The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid waste into
or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste
enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE
Solid waste comprised of garbage and rubbish which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE
Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable matter that is capable of being
decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as odors,
gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR
Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation who has been licensed by the
township or its designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse for a fee
as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, as defined in the Act, which because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in
either an individual or the total population; or
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 215/483
(2) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
The Allegheny County Health Department.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities, and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air
pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, state
institution and agency or any other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. In any provisions of this Article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty,
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING
Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal or residual
waste or any technology used to convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse.
"Processing facilities" include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities
and resource-recovery facilities.
REFUSE
All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials, resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
The term "residual waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined in the "Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act.[2] "Residual waste" shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine
drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in
compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams Law.[3]
RUBBISH
All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other decomposable matter. This
category includes but is not limited to ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass,
paper, wood and yard cleanings.
SCAVENGING
The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of material placed for collection or from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 216/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
SECRETARY/MANAGER
The Secretary/Manager or Assistant Secretary/Manager of the Township of Wilkins.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES
Any coarse screenings, grit and dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants
and pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid waste and require
proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE
Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE
The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute
disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of
one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing
evidence to the contrary.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
TRANSFER STATION
Any supplemental transportation facility used as an adjunct to solid waste route collection
vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION
The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time after generation.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101.
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
In this Article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 135-3. Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to accumulate upon any public or
private property within the township any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or
residual solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this Article, any Department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the township except in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the township except in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove any solid waste from public
or private property within the township without first securing a license to do so in accordance with
the provisions of this Article.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 217/483
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any solid waste that is stored or
deposited for collection within the township.
It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid wastes within the township
except at an approved and permitted resource-recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown,
placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of water or public
or private property within the township except as provided in this Article.
§ 135-4. Storage of solid waste.
The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create
safety hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient number of approved containers to
store all waste materials generated during periods between regularly scheduled collections and
shall place and store all waste materials therein.
Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the following preparation
standards:
All municipal waste shall be drained free of liquids before being placed in storage containers.
All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in paper, plastic or similar
material or placed in properly tied plastic bags.
All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of food particles and drained
before being placed in storage containers.
Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved containers or shall be cut
and tied securely into bundles. Bundles shall be not more than three feet in length, not more
than three feet in diameter and not more than 60 pounds in weight.
Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers or shall be tied securely
into bundles of not more than 60 pounds in weight.
When specified by the township or its designated representative, special preparation and
storage procedures may be required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
Carpet and/or carpet padding shall be placed in an approved closed container or must be cut
in lengths not exceeding eight feet and securely tied. No single piece shall be more than 60
pounds in weight.
All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the township or its designated
representative. Individual containers and bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste
shall comply with the following standards:
Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight, rust- and corrosion-resistant
material such as plastic, metal or fiberglass in such a manner as to be leakproof,
weatherproof, insectproof and rodentproof.
Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tight-fitting cover and suitable
lifting handles to facilitate collection.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 218/483
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity of not less than 10
gallons nor more than 35 gallons and a loaded weight of not more than 60 pounds.
Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers, provided that the bags are
designated for waste disposal. Plastic bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain
physical integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for collection and
shall have a capacity of not more than 35 gallons and a loaded weight of not more than 60
pounds.
Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the following storage
standards:
Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid waste shall not protrude
or extend above the top of the container.
Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. The interior of the
containers shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed, drained and disinfected as often as necessary
to prevent the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides of the
containers.
Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public nuisances.
Containers that do not conform to the standard of this Article or which have sharp edges,
ragged edges or any other defect that may hamper or injure collection personnel shall be
promptly replaced by the owner upon notice from the township or its designated
representative.
Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection point specified by the
township or its designated representative.
With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed for collection, the
containers shall be properly stored on the owner or customer premises at all times.
Bulk waste items such as furniture, appliances and tires shall be stored in a manner that will
prevent the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents, safety hazards and
fire hazards. Doors must be removed from appliances.
The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units, commercial establishments,
institutions and industrial lunchroom or office waste sources is subject to the regulations and
standards set forth in this Article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk containers
shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste hauler and are subject to approval by
the township.
§ 135-5. Standards and regulations for collection.
The township shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish and bulky wastes from
individual residences, duplexes and townhouses, or it may contract with a private collector or
collectors to provide this essential residential collection service. Remodeling and repair waste will
be collected only when generated within the residence submitting it for collection.
All single-family, duplex and townhouse residences shall utilize the residential collection service
provided by the township.
All multifamily, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate and
individually contract collection service with the township's collector or any other properly licensed
waste hauler of their choice.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 219/483
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
A.
B.
A.
B.
All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a week.
All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office waste containing garbage
shall be collected at least once a week. Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as
often as necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly conditions. The township
may require more frequent collection when deemed necessary by duly adopted regulation.
Residential collection schedules shall be published as deemed necessary by the township or its
contracted hauler.
Placement of container(s) at curbside may be no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the
designated collection day and must be removed from curbside to the storage place no later than
6:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
All waste-collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through Saturday between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless prior approval or any exception has been granted by the
township. No collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday.
All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the township shall comply with the following
standards and regulations:
All municipal waste collected within the township shall ultimately be disposed only at a landfill
cited in the Allegheny County Solid Waste Plan, 1990, or on subsequent revisions thereto.
Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and transportation of municipal waste
must comply with the requirements of Act 97 and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department.
All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall be watertight and suitably
enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and
other nuisances.
All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent public health hazards,
safety hazards and nuisances.
All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
§ 135-6. Collection and disposal charges.
The township may make funds available in accordance with applicable law for the establishment,
maintenance and operation of a municipal solid waste collection and disposal system or for the
contracting of such service to a private collector.
Licensed haulers not under contract with the township shall be responsible for the collection of any
fees for private arrangement or private-contract solid waste collection and disposal services
provided to any individual, residential, commercial, institutional or industrial source within the
township.
§ 135-7. Appeals.
All appeals shall be made, in writing, to the Secretary/Manager of the township.
Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the Secretary/Manager shall remain effective
and enforceable.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 220/483
C.
[1]
D.
Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation issued by the township may appeal
within 10 days after the township gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard or
regulation.
Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 and 751 et seq.
§ 135-8. Injunction powers.
The township may petition the appropriate court for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to
enforce any of the provisions of this Article.
§ 135-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $600.
Each day of violation occurring after filing of suit by the township shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
Article II. Recycling
[Adopted 7-29-1991 as Ord. No. 813]
§ 135-10. Title.
The short title of this Article shall be the "Township of Wilkins Recycling Ordinance," and the same may
be cited in that manner.
§ 135-11. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this Article shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988.[1]
ALUMINUM
All empty aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS
Empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel and aluminum and cans commonly referred
to as "tin cans."
COLLECTOR
The entity or entities authorized by the township to collect recyclable materials from residences or
authorized by commercial, municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services from the township to collect recyclable materials from those properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Those properties used primarily for commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMISSIONERS
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 221/483
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals that include but are not
limited to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER
Structural paper materials with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS
Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS
Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass; expressly excluded are noncontainer glass,
plate glass, automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
All white paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Those facilities that house or serve groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing
homes, orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES
Includes but is not limited to automotive, truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE
Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden residues, chipped shrubbery and tree
trimmings but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS
Printed matter containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals;
expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES
Any properties having four or more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT
Public facilities operated by the municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting the
definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act[2] from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS
Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at fixed intervals, having
printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest;
expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, colored comics, glossy advertising
inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other than black and white often included with
newspapers.
PERSON(S)
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 222/483
[1]
[2]
Owners, lessees and occupants of residences and commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments. In any provisions of this Article prescribing a fine, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC BAG
Any container used for carrying, storing or disposing of groceries, wearing apparel, other
retail/wholesale purchased items and yard waste.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS (HDPE)
Containers used for milk, clothes and dish-washing soaps and other cleaning products.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS (PET)
Containers used for soft drinks.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Materials generated by residences and commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
which are specified by the township and can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products. "Recyclable
materials" may include, but are not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum,
steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste,
plastics and any other items selected by the township or specified in future revisions to Act 101.
The recyclable materials selected by the township may be revised from time to time as deemed
necessary by the township.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale or use of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics
and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and
creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCE
Any occupied single-family dwelling, duplex or double house for which the township provides
municipal waste collection service.
SECRETARY/MANAGER
The Secretary/Manager or Assistant Secretary/Manager of the township.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
SUPER-MIX PAPER
An unseparated mix of all recyclable grades and types of paper items used in offices for which one
unit price is offered by a recycling broker or market.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
WASTE
A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or
processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials or material approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources for beneficial use.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 135-12. Program established.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 223/483
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
The township hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory separation and collection
of recyclable materials and the separation, collection and composting of leaf waste from all
residences and all commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located in the township
for which waste collection is provided by the township or any other collector. Collection of the
recyclable materials shall be made at least once per month by the township, its designated agent
or any other solid waste collectors operating in the township and authorized to collect recyclable
materials from residences or from commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. The
recycling program shall also contain a sustained public information and education program.
Specific program regulations are provided in this Article. The Commissioners are empowered to
make changes to program regulations as necessary as described in § 135-19. Subsequent
changes in the program regulations may be made through approval of the Commissioners.
§ 135-13. Lead-acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead-acid batteries with other municipal wastes is prohibited and shall be a
violation of this Article.
§ 135-14. Separation and collection.
All persons who are residents of the township shall separate all of those recyclable materials
designated by the township from all other municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments
and other residential establishments, store such materials for collection and shall place the same
for collection in accordance with the guidelines established hereunder.
Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from other refuse. Recyclable
materials shall be placed at the curbside in containers provided by the township for collection.
Any containers provided to residences for collection of recyclable materials shall be the
property of the township and shall be used only for the collection of recyclable materials. Any
resident who moves within or from the township shall be responsible for returning the
allocated container(s) to the township or shall pay the replacement cost of the township
container. Use of recycling containers for any purpose other than the designated recycling
program or use of the recycling containers by any person other than the person allocated
such container(s) shall be a violation of this Article. Residents may, if necessary, purchase
additional containers of their choosing for recyclable materials. However, any such container
must bear the self-adhesive recycling logo label. The labels are available at the township
office free of charge.
An owner, landlord, manager or agent of an owner, landlord or manager of a multifamily
housing property with more than four units not serviced by the township program shall comply
with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each property. The
collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords,
managers and agents of owners, landlords or managers who comply with this Article shall not
be liable for noncompliance of occupants of their buildings. Leases shall contain provisions
requiring occupants to comply with recycling laws and regulations. If recyclable materials are
collected by a collector other than the township or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and
agents of owners or landlords shall submit an annual report to the township reporting the
tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year. This requirement may be fulfilled by
submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies that recyclable materials are
being collected from the multifamily housing property.
All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their houses,
apartments and other residential establishments for collection.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 224/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
C. Commercial, industrial, multifamily and other entities not serviced by the Township Collector must
separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste, clear, green and brown
glass and such other materials as may be designated by the township generated at commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable
materials until collection and provide for collection and removal of recyclable materials periodically
as mandated in township regulations. These entities shall:
Provide for the recycling of high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste,
clear green and brown glass and other materials deemed appropriate by the township.
Submit, at a minimum, an annual recycling report to the Secretary/Manager of the township.
The report shall document the amount of municipal waste generated per year as well as the
type and weight of materials that were recycled in the previous calendar year. Valid
documentation shall include information from an end use, recycler or waste hauler which
describes the type and weight of each recyclable material that was collected and marketed.
Documentation may be in the form of one of the following: copies of weight receipts or
statements which consolidate such information; a report from the provider of recycling
collection services which identifies the amount of each material collected and marketed. The
type and weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment may be
approximated based on a representative sample of its source-separated materials; or a report
from the provider of waste collection services that identifies the type and weight of each
recyclable material collected and marketed in cases where recyclables are commingled with
the establishment's waste. The type and weight of recyclables generated by an individual
establishment may be approximated based on a representative sample of its waste. For
reports from providers of recycling or waste collection services and where recyclables from
several establishments are collected in the same vehicle, an individual establishment's
contribution to the load may be apportioned. Only the weight of materials marketed for
recycling purposes can be credited to an establishment.
If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the township or its authorized
agent, occupants of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the township
reporting the type and weight of materials recycled during the previous calendar year. This
requirement may be fulfilled by submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies
that recyclable materials are being collected from the establishment.
All employees, users (patrons) and residents of commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments must be informed of the recycling program. The education program should
describe the program's features and requirements and should include at a minimum an
annual program meeting and an orientation to the program upon the arrival of a new
employee or resident. Receptacles should be clearly marked with the recycling symbol and
the type of recyclable material that is to be placed in the receptacle, and signs should be
prominently displayed stating the requirements of the program.
Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which generate more than 2,200
pounds of municipal waste per month should also implement a waste-minimization
opportunity assessment which includes:
Waste characterization, including source, generation rate, management techniques and
management costs. The assessment should expressly consider high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste, clear green and brown glass and any other
materials generated in significant quantities.
A description of all possible waste-minimization options, including use and waste
reclamation.
An evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility of each option and a ranking of
each option.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 225/483
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
D.
E.
An estimate of the payback period for each feasible option.
A statement of which options will be implemented, including an explanation and a
timetable.
Identification of the individual(s) who will be responsible for implementing the plan.
The waste-minimization plan should be periodically updated. Implementation of the plan
should include:
Recycling or composting of materials, to the greatest extent feasible, either privately or
through a municipal recycling program.
Use, to the greatest extent feasible, of products and materials which are recyclable or
made of postconsumer materials.
Substitution, to the greatest extent feasible, of durable and reusable products and
materials for products that are not durable or reusable.
Appropriate education materials and signs should be made available to employees or the
public to encourage participation in recycling and waste reduction.
All recycling collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through Saturday between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless prior approval or any exception has been granted by the
township. No collection, hauling or transporting of recyclables shall be permitted on Sunday.
Holders of liquor licenses issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania need not include bottles
as recyclables if such inclusion is in violation of applicable liquor laws.
§ 135-15. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the township or an authorized collector
pursuant to this Article shall from the time of placement at the curb become the property of the
township or the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by § 135-17 of this Article. Nothing
in this Article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by the
generator unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside for collection.
§ 135-16. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this Article for any person, firm or corporation other than the township or one
authorized by the township or other entity responsible for providing for collection of recyclable
materials to collect recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments for collection by the township or an authorized collector unless such
person, firm or corporation has prior written permission from the generator to make such collection. In
violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences or commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 135-17. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may donate or sell recyclable
materials to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit or not, provided that the
receiving person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the
collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment without prior
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 226/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
written permission from the township or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable
materials to make such a collection.
§ 135-18. Recycling of materials.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and shall be a violation of this
Article. The collected recyclable materials shall be taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or
operators of recycling facilities of source-separated recyclable materials in landfills or to be burned in
incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have notified the
Secretary/Manager in writing.
§ 135-19. Enforcement and administration; violations and
penalties.
The Secretary/Manager is hereby authorized and directed to make reasonable rules and
regulations for the operation and enforcement of this Article as deemed necessary, including but
not limited to:
Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and recycling by residences
and additional recyclable materials to be separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials recycled.
Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and collection of recyclable
containers.
Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this Article shall receive an
official written warning of noncompliance for the first and second offense. Thereafter, all such
violations shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $600. Each day of violation occurring after filing of suit by the
township shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
The township reserves the right not to collect municipal waste containing recyclable materials in
combination with nonrecyclable materials or not to collect municipal waste from any residence not
being registered as having obtained a township recycling container.
§ 135-20. Franchise or license.
The township may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private agencies or firms to authorize
them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from curbside.
§ 135-21. Amendments.
The township may from time to time modify, add to or delete from the standards and regulations herein
and as authorized in § 135-19.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 227/483
[1]
Article III. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Collection Fees and Charges, adopted 12-27-1994 as Ord. No. 864, was
repealed 11-27-1995 by Ord. No. 877, said repeal to be effective 1-1-1996.
Chapter 138. Speed-Timing Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 4-12-1982 as Ord. No.
685. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 168.
§ 138-1. Usage authorized.
An excessive speed preventer (ESP), Model TK 100 or any future models of this or similar electrical
devices (as long as such devices are approved as speed-timing devices by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania), may be used at the discretion of the Wilkins
Township Police Department in the township as speed-timing devices for the purpose of controlling and
enforcing the speed of all traffic on all township roads. As used in this chapter, the term "ESP" will
include ESP Model TK 100 and all future models of this or similar electric devices.
§ 138-2. Calibration and testing.
All ESP or similar devices shall be properly calibrated and tested in the manner required by applicable
law.
Chapter 141. Storage Yards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 11-12-1973 as Ord.
No. 549. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 141-1. Compliance required.
No person, partnership or corporation shall establish or maintain or permit to exist in the Township of
Wilkins any storage yard or other place used for the storage of goods, materials, machinery,
equipment, things or vehicles (whether operable or inoperable) except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
STORAGE
The placing and keeping of goods, materials, machinery, equipment, things or vehicles within a
specific area without movement outside that area for 48 hours or more. As applied to vehicles, this
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 228/483
[1]
[2]
[1]
[1]
section shall mean without movement for one week or more.
§ 141-3. Use of front yard restricted.
No portion of the front yard ordained in Chapter 173, Zoning, § 173-13, of the Code of the Township of
Wilkins shall be used for the storage of goods, materials, machinery, equipment, things or vehicles.
§ 141-4. Fence required; locking device.
All storage yards shall be enclosed by a web-type metal fence not less than six feet in height, securely
anchored to the ground and provided with a gate and locking device which shall be securely fastened
during times when such yard is unattended or not in use.
§ 141-5. Fire prevention standards.
All storage of goods, materials, machinery, equipment, things or vehicles shall be established and
maintained in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code of the township.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Fire Prevention.
§ 141-6. Notice of violation.
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall give 30 days' written notice to any person, partnership or
corporation found to be operating a storage yard or other place used in a manner not complying with
this chapter, and it shall be the duty of the person, partnership or corporation to bring such yard or
place into compliance within 30 days of the receipt of said notice.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment of the fine and costs, such person, the members of
such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-8. Additional remedies.
In the event that any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins may, in addition to other remedies, institute in the name of
said township any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such illegal
storage or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation.
Chapter 144. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 229/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Driveways — See Ch. 79.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 148.
Public utilities — See Ch. 161.
Abandoned or nuisance vehicles – See Ch. 167.
Vehicles and traffic – See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
Article I. Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1058[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. I, Sidewalk Construction,
adopted 11-11-1957 by Ord. No. 240, as amended.
§ 144-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sidewalk Ordinance of the Township of Wilkins."
§ 144-2. Purpose.
This article has been adopted in order to:
Ensure that all sidewalks within the municipal corporation limits situated within public rights-of-way
which are utilized and serve as pedestrian walkways will be adequately maintained and kept in a
state of good repair, in order to reduce or otherwise eliminate any condition that would constitute a
hazard to or result in possible injury to the pedestrian public.
Prescribe the general minimum condition or conditions which constitute a hazard in an existing
sidewalk which would require remedial action on the part of the property owner to correct.
Prescribe minimum standards and specifications for the construction of new sidewalks or sections
thereof and for the repair and/or reconstruction of existing sidewalks or sections thereof which
may be required to be corrected under this article.
Prescribe a method for the equitable administration and enforcement of this article, including
penalties for the violation thereof.
Generally promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and general welfare and further
promote the sound development of an important community facility.
§ 144-3. Definitions and word usage.
Words and phrases in the singular number include the plural and vice versa. Words and phrases
used in the present tense include the future. The words "used for" include the meaning "designed
for." The word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. The word "abut" shall include the words
"directly across from." The word "building" shall include the word "structure."
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given herein:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 230/483
BUILDING OFFICIAL
The individual who, in addition to other duties, shall have responsibility for administering and
enforcing the provisions of this article.
ENGINEER
A registered professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
duly appointed as the Engineer for the Township.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Commissioners of Wilkins Township.
HARDSHIP
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the property and that
the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions; and that, because of such physical
conditions, there is no possibility that sidewalks can be installed on the property in strict
conformity with the provisions of this article; and that such unnecessary hardship has not
been created by the applicant; and that the relief granted will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located and will represent the minimum
relief and least modification of this article.
LOT WIDTH
The horizontal distance between side lot lines at the front street property line.
PROPERTY OWNER
The person, firm, company, corporation, or individuals who are the owners in fee simple of
property, whose name(s) appear last in the Recorder of Allegheny County Tax Assessor's
office. For the purpose of this article, the "property owner" may also include any individual
who is a legal agent of the owner.
SIDEWALK
That portion of the street, road or highway lying within the public right-of-way, primarily
constructed for the use of pedestrians.
SIDEWALK INSPECTOR
The Building Official or a duly appointed agent.
SIDEWALK PERMIT
The legal permit issued by the sidewalk inspector upon application by a property owner or his
authorized agent to open, repair, replace or extend an existing sidewalk, or any portion
thereof, or construct a new sidewalk. No work on any of the above shall commence until such
permit has been issued.
SIDEWALK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
The standards and specifications for the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks
contained in and hereby made a part of this article.
STREET
Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, land, alley, viaduct and
any other public right-of-way used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
VIOLATION, NOTICE OF
The legal notice issued to a property owner by the Building Official informing said property
owner of any violation of the provisions of this article or a violation or departure from the
sidewalk standards and specifications contained in this article in cases where sidewalk
construction or reconstruction has been commenced or completed.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 231/483
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 144-4. Areas in which sidewalks are required.
Sidewalks shall be required within the public right-of-way for all properties abutting arterial streets
in the C Commercial District upon the transfer of ownership of property, the new development of
property, a subdivision or reverse subdivision of property, or a major renovation of infrastructure
located on the property.
Sidewalks shall be required along new streets in new development as set forth in § 148-21P of the
Wilkins Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
All sidewalk construction and maintenance shall comply with this article.
§ 144-5. Applicability.
Sidewalk standards adopted by this article shall take effect immediately.
§ 144-6. Hardship appeals for required sidewalks.
Application. Upon submission of a sidewalk hardship appeal application and fee to the Township
Manager, and providing supporting documentation demonstrating the allegations that strict
compliance with these regulations will result in a hardship, the hardship appeal shall be referred to
the Township Manager for an administrative investigative review, determining whether or not a
hardship, as defined herein, has been established by the applicant. The Township Manager shall
review the hardship appeal and, if necessary, consult with any municipal staff, Solicitor or
consultants to review the hardship appeal, conveying those additional review costs for time and
expenses to the applicant. Hardship shall be judged on a case-by-case basis and will be subject to
final plan approval by the governing body. However, such variation of the regulations will not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the spirit of this article. Such hardship appeals
must be submitted to the Township Manager 30 days prior to the governing body's action on the
land development application. Failure to make such appeal due to alleged hardships prior to the
governing body's action shall constitute a waiver of any hardship then existing.
Findings. Written findings regarding the hardship appeal shall be generated by the Township
Manager and forwarded to the governing body for review and action prior to the final approval of
the land development application.
In-lieu-of action. Should it be determined in the findings of the Township Manager that there are
unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions, and that, because of such physical conditions, sidewalks
cannot be constructed, the governing body may approve that a hardship, as defined herein, does
exist, and in lieu of the construction of sidewalks, the applicant shall make payment to the
Township of a sum equal to the costs of constructing the sidewalk should the hardship not exist,
calculated at an annual bid price for sidewalks, at a per square yard/foot multiplied by the amount
of surface area of sidewalk. Said money shall be escrowed and put into a fund known as the
"Township of Wilkins General Sidewalk Fund" and be used to fund sidewalks in various locations
in the Township as directed by the governing body. Said findings and sidewalk fee shall be entered
into the record as part of the resolution and conditions of approval for the land development.
Substitute regulations action. In the event that, upon review of the application and supporting
documentation, the Township Manager finds that a hardship exists but there is a substitute or
alternate method or manner of complying with the regulations of this article, then the governing
body may approve the adoption of the substitute or alternative method or manner of complying
with the regulations contained in this article. Said findings and substitute regulations shall become
part of the applicant's land development application and site plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 232/483
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Denial of hardship appeal. Upon review of the findings of the Township Manager, the governing
body may determine that a hardship, as defined herein, does not exist, and the applicant will be
required to install sidewalks. Said findings and the location of sidewalks shall become part of the
applicant's land development application and site plan.
§ 144-7. Duties of property owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to keep the sidewalk, together with
any portion of his property paved and used as a sidewalk or public walk, immediately in front of his
property in good order and repair and, at all times, free and clear of all obstruction to safe and
convenient passage. This shall include keeping and maintaining such sidewalks free and clear of all
dirt, trash and similar debris, including the reasonable removal of snow and ice, and shall also include
keeping and maintaining the sidewalk free of any merchandise, signs or other unauthorized structure
or appurtenance when the removal of the same is ordered by the sidewalk inspector.
§ 144-8. Permit required; bond.
No person, property owner, firm, corporation or public utility shall open or remove, in part or in
whole, any existing sidewalk or portion thereof for any purpose, including the repair and/or
reconstruction of such sidewalk, until the property owner or his authorized agent or the public
utility company legally authorized makes application and obtains a sidewalk permit from the
sidewalk inspector.
Prior to the issuance of any permit or the granting of any approvals of any property on which
sidewalks are to be constructed, a surety bond or other security which, in the opinion of the
Solicitor, is legally adequate must be posted with the Township Manager, naming the Township of
Wilkins as the claimant or beneficiary, in an amount which, in the opinion of the Township
Manager, is sufficient to pay for the entire cost of the installation of the sidewalk in the event that
the same is not properly completed by the owner, developer or builder.
§ 144-9. Correction of violations.
Upon being issued a notice of violation, the property owner shall take the necessary steps to correct
such violation(s) within a reasonable period of time, but in no case shall any violation remain
uncorrected for a period of more than 20 days beyond the date of receipt of such legal notice. Failure
to comply shall subject such property owner to any or all penalties contained in this article.
§ 144-10. Failure to comply.
If a property owner fails to comply with the requirements of a notice of violation, the enforcing
authority of the Township may serve a written notice upon him requiring him to do what is
necessary. The notice provided for in this section may be served on the property owner in person,
by leaving the same at his place of residence or, if he has no residence in the Township, then by
posting the same on the premises and mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known
address as obtained from the Allegheny County Tax Assessor's office.
If such property owner fails to comply with such notice after 30 days from the date of its service,
the Township's Ordinance Enforcement Officer or a police officer shall cite the property owner for a
violation of this article.
§ 144-11. Conditions requiring repair or replacement.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 233/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
If one or more of the following conditions, as set forth below in Subsections A through D, is evidenced
in an existing sidewalk or portion thereof, it shall constitute sufficient notice to the property owner that
such condition(s) shall be corrected voluntarily by the property owner by making application for a
sidewalk permit and performing the necessary work. In lieu of such action, the sidewalk inspector may,
in the course of conducting his normal duties or upon complaint, make inspection of such condition and
issue a notice of violation to the property owner. Any property owner, agent of said owner or legal
tenant of occupied premises may request the sidewalk inspector to authorize an inspection of a faulty
sidewalk and make a determination of the need and extent of any required repairs.
The removal of all or any portion of a sidewalk panel(s) for any reason. Any removal panel or
section thereof shall be immediately replaced to restore the sidewalk to a condition for safe
pedestrian travel.
When 50% or more of a sidewalk panel(s) has cracked lines or is spalled, weathered or
deteriorated, rendering the section(s) unsafe underfoot. This does not include hairline cracks that
have not disturbed the grade and level of the sidewalk.
When one or more edges of a sidewalk panel(s) have been raised one inch or more along 50% or
more of its length above an adjacent panel at grade level, whether such defect has been caused
by frost section, root growth, cracking or actual breaking.
When a sidewalk panel or adjacent panels have sunk below or tilted above or below the general
original grade more than one inch out of level of the general grade of the balance of the sidewalk.
§ 144-11.1. Safety warning procedures and devices.
When a hazardous condition exists in a sidewalk and/or a sidewalk permit or notice of violation shall
have been issued, the property owner and/or contractor shall provide for the following minimum
warning procedures and devices:
Prior to beginning actual work, if a sidewalk condition exists which presents a particularly
hazardous condition, a suitable barrier and/or warning signs shall be placed at the sidewalk
section where the danger exists. This may include night lighting (see Subsection C) if work cannot
be commenced immediately.
During the workday when actual repair or construction work is underway, a suitable pathway shall
be maintained around the work area to allow free and clear pedestrian travel. Preferably, such
pathway should be provided for around the inside of the work area as opposed to the street side,
unless an adequately barricaded pathway is provided.
At the end of the workday, newly poured concrete shall be adequately covered, suitable
barricading shall be erected (portable or semipermanent), and the required pathway shall be free
and clear of obstructions and suitable warning lighting placed which shall be illuminated between
dusk and sunrise of the following day. Suitable lighting shall include, but need not be limited to,
two standard red-globed kerosene lanterns, battery-operated blinking reflectors and/or electric
lighting.
In cases where construction work is underway adjacent to the proposed sidewalk construction
area, the required pathway shall be a suitably constructed semi-open passageway (Saf-way type)
that affords safe separation from the adjacent building site along its entire length and overhead.
This type of passageway shall be inspected and approved by the sidewalk inspector.
§ 144-11.2. Placement of sidewalks.
Commercial. Sidewalks shall be placed on grade abutting the rear of the curb. If no curbs exist,
the owner shall install curb to prevailing specifications prior to installation of the sidewalk.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 234/483
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
All other. Sidewalks shall be placed on grade at a uniform distance from the curb as
recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the governing body. The intent is to
have a uniform, aesthetically pleasing expanse of sidewalk parallel to the curb.
§ 144-11.3. Excavated materials.
During the construction period, all excavated concrete pieces, old fill material and/or earth shall be
temporarily stored at a point suitably removed from the sidewalk area and any required pedestrian
pathway or passageway. This shall also include the similar storing of all construction materials, i.e.,
wood or metal forms, concrete bags, sand, gravel, etc., including concrete boxes or mixers. In no case
shall any of these materials be left at the curbline or in the street gutter overnight. All such materials
shall be completely removed at the time of final cleanup.
§ 144-11.4. Cement concrete sidewalks.
This work shall consist of constructing cement concrete sidewalks in accordance with these
specifications and within reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades and dimensions shown
on the drawings or established by the Engineer.
Minimum size requirements.
Along residential streets. Sidewalks along minor residential streets shall be a minimum of four
feet in width; and on residential collector streets, the minimum shall be increased to five feet.
Along commercial streets. Sidewalks along minor streets shall be a minimum of four feet in
width. On all other higher-classification streets, including arterial streets, the minimum shall be
increased to five feet.
§ 144-11.5. Materials.
Materials shall be as follows: Section 704 (please refer to PennDOT Publication 408, current edition),
Class A, cement concrete, other materials and aggregate. In general, concrete utilized shall be airentrained
and shall develop a compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days as per these specifications.
§ 144-11.6. Construction requirements.
The Township Engineer shall review and provide comments on all sidewalk permit applications.
The Township Engineer shall review and monitor sidewalk construction as requested by the
Township Manager in writing. Where indicated, material and construction requirements shall be as
specified in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Publication 408 and
Standard Drawings. Section and drawing reference numbers are current as of the date of this
article.
Preparation of foundation. The foundation for the sidewalk subbase shall be formed at a depth of
eight inches below and parallel with the finished surface of the sidewalk, unless otherwise
indicated on the drawings or specified. Unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with
approved material, and the foundation shall be thoroughly compacted and finished to a firm, even
surface.
Placing aggregate for bed. The approved aggregate shall be spread on the prepared foundation to
form a compacted bed four inches in depth, unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or
specified. This material shall be thoroughly compacted. Satisfactory outlets for draining the
subbase shall be provided where this type of drainage structure is required.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 235/483
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
(1)
I.
Forms. Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and of sufficient strength when
staked to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing. If wood, they shall be nominal twoinch
planks surfaced on the inside and the top, or if metal, they shall be of approved section.
Forms shall have a depth equal to the depth of the concrete and shall be thoroughly cleaned and
oiled before concrete is placed against them. Forms that are worn, bent or damaged shall not be
used.
Joints. Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs not more than 30 feet in length, except for
closures. These slabs shall be separated by transverse premolded expansion joint filler, 1/2 inch in
thickness, for the full depth of the concrete. Transverse premolded expansion joint filler shall also
be placed adjacent to existing structures where directed. The slabs between expansion joints shall
be divided into blocks not more than six feet in length by scoring transversely. Where the slabs are
more than six feet in width, they shall be scored longitudinally in the center. Transverse and
longitudinal scoring shall extend for a depth of at least 3/8 inch into the concrete slab. In the case
of large areas of new concrete walks, the transverse and longitudinal scoring shall extend to a
depth of at least 1/5 the thickness of the concrete slabs. Premolded expansion joint filler, 1/2 inch
in thickness for the full depth of the concrete, shall be placed longitudinally where the sidewalk
slab is to be constructed in contact with curbs. Where existing light standards, poles, fire hydrants,
trees and similar structures are within the limits of the sidewalk area, the concrete around such
structure shall be separated in a block eight inches wider than the maximum dimension of the
structure at the sidewalk elevation. In the case of trees, two rows of blocks at least four inches
wide shall be placed. Prior to placing the concrete around such structures, premolded expansion
joint filler, 1/2 inch in thickness, shall be placed around the structure for the full depth of the
concrete in the sidewalk.
Placing concrete.
The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed and placed in accordance with specifications for
Section 704, Class A concrete. The concrete shall be four inches in depth, unless otherwise
indicated on the drawings or specified. In commercial districts, the concrete shall be six
inches in depth and include 6/6 x 6/6 reinforcement. The concrete shall be struck off, finished
and tested, except that manual operations may be permitted by the Engineer. Unless
otherwise directed, an edger having a one-fourth-inch radius shall be used for edging all
joints. The concrete shall be cured and protected in accordance with the latest Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Section 501.3(N) specifications.
At residential driveways, the concrete shall be six inches, including 6/6 x 10/10 wire mesh
reinforcement placed 1 1/2 inches above the base of the concrete. In commercial and
industrial district driveways and alleys, the concrete shall be seven inches, including designrequired
wire mesh and/or reinforcement base.
Removal of forms. Side forms shall not be removed within 12 hours after the concrete has been
placed. After removal of the forms, minor honeycombed areas shall be filled with mortar
composed of one part of cement and two parts of fine aggregate. Major honeycombed areas will
be considered as defective work and shall be removed and replaced.
Backfilling. After the concrete has cured for a period of not less than 72 hours, the spaces
adjacent to the sidewalk shall be backfilled with approved material, which shall be thoroughly
compacted to the required elevation and cross section.
Curb ramps.
As required, construct cement concrete sidewalk for curb ramp configurations as indicated in
the PennDOT Standard Drawing RC 67M, or current edition thereof, except for the detectable
warning surface at the bottom of each ramp. Construct the detectable warning surface as
specified in Section 695 of PennDOT Publication 408, current edition.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 236/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
J.
Create a slip-resistant, textured surface for the full width and length of the curb ramp and any
side flares, excluding the detectable warning surface. Use a coarse, stiff-toothed broom to
create a textured pattern that is worked perpendicular to the slopes of the curb ramp.
Shape rounded edges instead of sharp, angled edges while the concrete is still plastic for all
slope changes of the curb ramp, especially where the top of the curb ramp meets adjacent
sidewalk surfaces.
Embed the detectable warning surface in fresh, wet concrete at the proper location for the
curb ramp before the wet concrete has set.
Final cleanup. Upon the completion of all work items, removal of forms and final inspection and
approval where required, the property owner or contractor shall remove all dirt, trash, debris,
unused materials and other appurtenances from the sidewalk and surrounding work area and
leave the same in a clean and usable condition.
§ 144-11.7. Amendments.
This article may be amended from time to time, in whole or in part, by action of the governing body. All
such amending ordinances shall be prepared by the Township Solicitor with the advice of the sidewalk
inspector. Notice of such amendment shall be published at least once in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Township not more than 60 nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of
any proposed amendments to this article shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief
summary prepared by the Township Solicitor setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail and a
reference to a place within the Township where copies of the proposed ordinance may be examined.
All other publication requirements set forth in the First Class Township Code shall be complied with.
§ 144-11.8. Enforcement.
In the case of any sidewalk hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or
maintained in violation of this article or any ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the legislative authority or other proper official may, in addition to other remedies contained
herein, institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, remove or correct such violation.
§ 144-11.9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, property owner, firm, corporation or public utility who or which shall violate any
provision(s) of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation is continued from the date of
receipt of the notice of violation shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected for the violation
of this article shall be paid over to the general fund of the Township.
§ 144-11.10. Fees.
The fee for a general sidewalk permit shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the governing body.
§ 144-11.11. Construal of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this article, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the use, maintenance, repair, construction or reconstruction of sidewalk and
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 237/483
A.
B.
C.
are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances; provided,
however, that when this article imposes greater restrictions or requirements regarding sidewalks, the
provisions of this article shall prevail.
Article II. Deposits on Roads
[Adopted 8-5-1968 by Ord. No. 433]
§ 144-12. Debris on roads prohibited.
The discharge of dirt, earth or other debris into and upon the public roads within the township is
prohibited.
§ 144-13. Intentional discharges.
Intentional discharge of dirt, earth or other debris on any public road within the township is deemed an
automatic violation of this article.
§ 144-14. Accidental discharges.
Where such discharge occurs through accident or negligence, the persons responsible as hereinafter
defined shall immediately and completely remove such discharges from the public roads using
sufficient water to remove any residue which could result in dust or mud. Failure of such removal is
deemed a violation of this article.
§ 144-15. Responsibility for removal.
The following persons are declared to be responsible for removal of discharges of dirt, earth or other
debris and shall be liable for any violation of this article:
When such discharges occur in connection with grading, excavation, filling or other work on real
estate, the owner of the land and the person with whom the owner contracts for work causing said
discharge on the public streets shall both be liable for removal and cleaning as set forth in § 144-
14 hereof, and where such discharge comes from the operation of trucks or other earthmoving
equipment, the operator of such equipment or truck shall also be liable along with the owner and
contractor aforesaid.
Where the owner or contractor aforesaid are corporations, the executive officers of the corporation
as well as the corporation itself shall be responsible and liable for any violation of this article.
Where the owner or contractor aforesaid are partnerships, all partners shall be responsible and
liable for any violation of this article.
§ 144-16. Enforcement.
The Township Police may without warrant and on view arrest and commit for hearing any person
violating the provisions of this article.
§ 144-17. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 238/483
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be fined or penalized in an amount not to
exceed $1,000 and costs. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction or by
proceedings by summons, on default of payment of the fine or penalty imposed by said judgment and
the costs, such person may be sentenced to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 144-18. Failure to remove.
In the event that the persons responsible for removal of discharges as above defined fail to remove the
same from the public roads, the township may cause the same to be done and collect the cost thereof,
together with a penalty of 10% of such cost in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims or by action of assumpsit, without the filing of a claim, or may seek relief by bill in
equity.
Article III. Guarding of Construction
[Adopted 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 541]
§ 144-19. Warning and protective devices.
The Township Manager, Engineer or Road Department Supervisor may erect or cause to be erected
barricades, signs, signals or other approved warning or protective devices, and they may post flagmen
for the protection of the public or of workmen or the work itself during the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or repair of any township road or bridge, whether such work is done by township
employees or by persons or corporations under contract with the township.
§ 144-20. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
The operator of any vehicle who breeches any barricade or disobeys the instructions of any sign,
signal or flagman shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Article IV. Maintenance of Municipal Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 562]
§ 144-21. Use of unused portion of right-of-way.
The owners of property abutting rights-of-way belonging to the Township of Wilkins may place in the
unused portion thereof plantings, shrubs, trees, fences, walls and mailboxes, all at the owner's
expense and risk of loss.
§ 144-22. Removal of objects in right-of-way.
When removal of any object or vegetation is found necessary by the township in the maintenance,
repair, construction or reconstruction of any township right-of-way or other improvement or for reasons
of public health and safety, the owner of property abutting any township right-of-way shall remove from
the right-of-way any object or vegetation therefrom within 10 days' written notice so to do.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 239/483
A.
B.
§ 144-23. Failure to remove.
Should the owner of such property fail to remove any object or vegetation as required aforesaid, the
Township of Wilkins may enter upon such right-of-way and remove such object or vegetation and
collect the cost of such removal by a municipal claim to be filed in the manner provided by law.
Article V. Curb Cuts; Excavations in Streets
[Adopted 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 144-24. Definitions and word usage.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON
Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, utility company and
municipal authority.
STREET
Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other public place located in the
Township of Wilkins, and shall include the entire width of any right-of-way as laid out,
ordained, dedicated and heretofore or hereafter accepted as a public street by the Township
of Wilkins.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 144-25. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation or curb cut of any kind in any of
the streets in the Township of Wilkins without first securing a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 144-26. Application.
Any person who shall desire to make any curb cut, opening or excavation in any of the streets in the
Township of Wilkins shall make application to the Township Secretary, in writing, for the purpose. Such
application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the township and shall set forth the name of
the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation and the approximate size or
depth thereof and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the township and the laws of the commonwealth in relation
thereto, and that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the township from
and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed curb cut, opening or excavation and all damages to persons or property
resulting in any manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith or
from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 144-27. Permit fee.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the township, the applicant shall
pay to the Township Secretary a permit fee in the amount set by resolution of the Board of
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 240/483
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Commissioners to cover the cost of inspection and other incidental services in connection therewith.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 144-28. Refilling of excavations.
Any person who shall open or excavate any improved street in the township shall thoroughly and
completely refill the opening or excavation, puddling and ramming so as to prevent any settling
thereafter, and shall compact to ninety-percent density with optimum moisture and shall restore
the surface to the same condition as it was before the opening or excavation, and such restoration
shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications of the Township Engineer, which are on
file in the office of the Township Secretary at 110 Peffer Road where they may be examined.
As restored, the surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface covering as
the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. If within two years after the
restoration of the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear therein resulting from defective
backfilling by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the township for the cost of all necessary
repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 144-29. Supervision of work; work done by township.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including excavation, protection, refilling and
temporary paving, shall be done by the applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to
the provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the Township Engineer, provided
that the Township Manager may require that cutting of the surface of improved streets and the
backfilling of all excavations therein shall be done by the township, and the charge therefor shall be
paid by the applicant on the basis of actual cost of the work, plus 20%.
§ 144-30. Limitations on openings.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline into the highway a distance
greater than one foot beyond the center line of the street before being refilled and the surface of
the highway restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
No more than 300 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time except upon
written permission of the Township Engineer.
The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains, sewers or
their connections with the houses or any other subsurface lines or constructions until permission
of the proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions shall have been
obtained.
No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Township Engineer and
permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be
made only in the presence of the Township Engineer or an inspector designated by him/her and
shall be done only in a method approved by him/her.
All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with suitable materials and thoroughly
compacted in layers, each of which shall not exceed six inches in depth. On improved streets, the
backfilling shall be placed to within 10 inches of the surface.
On improved streets, a temporary paving of suitable stony materials, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining paving.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 241/483
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and reasonable precaution
shall be taken by the applicant and the parties making the same to keep the street in a safe and
passable condition both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and all
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express condition that the person to
whom the same is issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the township from any loss in
damages or otherwise whatsoever which may or shall be occasioned at any time by said
excavation or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other
matter placed in said excavation.
Whenever any excavation is made within the street right-of-way and vehicular travel is affected
thereby, the applicant shall place a metal cover over the excavation during any period when work
is temporarily discontinued. The metal cover shall be of sufficient size and strength to permit
passage of all vehicular traffic.
The applicant shall notify the Township Manager when the opening or excavation is ready for
backfilling before any backfilling is done and when the work is completed by proper backfilling in
the case of unimproved streets and by temporary paving in the case of improved streets.
In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be corrected in accordance with his
instructions within the time fixed by him/her or in the event that the work for which the permit was
granted is not completed within the time fixed by the permit, the township may proceed to correct
such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed and charge the cost thereof,
plus 20%, to the applicant.
Upon failure to keep the street right-of-way in a safe and passable condition as required in
Subsections G and H above, the township may install the required guards, barriers, lanterns,
metal covers or other devices and charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
§ 144-31. Leaks or accidents in subsurface facilities.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or
apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business day
thereafter and that all other provisions of this article are fully complied with. If any such emergency
condition shall not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the Township Manager, after such notice as he/she shall deem necessary
under the circumstances of the particular case, may proceed to do the work necessary and required by
such emergency and charge the same on the basis of cost, plus 20%, to such owner or person.
§ 144-32. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the installation or erection of any gas pipe, water pipe, telephone pole,
electric light pole, power pole, cable television pole, cable television vault, box or housing, cable
television cable or similar utility, whether public or private.
This article is not intended to apply to excavations made between the improved or paved portion
of any highway or sidewalk and abutting private property for the purpose of planting grass, trees or
other vegetation or for the purpose of erecting mailboxes, fences or other structures now or
hereafter permitted in the public right-of-way by rule, regulation or ordinance of the township.
None of the facilities designated in Subsection A above shall be laid or erected or extended in any
of the streets of the township until the exact location thereof and the plan therefor shall have been
first approved by the Township Engineer.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 242/483
§ 144-33. Payment for work done by township.
Payment for all work done by the township under the provisions hereof shall be made by the person
made liable therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such
person by the township. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be
collectible by the township in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 144-34. Performance guaranty.
Prior to issuance of any permit by the Township Secretary, all persons applying for the same shall
deliver to the Township Secretary security to guarantee performance of the applicant's duties imposed
by this article in the form of a surety bond, cashier's check or other form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor and in an amount approved by the Township Manager, but not in excess of $5,000. Prior to
release of said security, the applicant shall provide the township a three-year maintenance bond as
determined by the Township Engineer in connection with maintenance of any resurfaced excavation.
When the applicant is a township property owner and the application involves work in connection with
service to the applicant's property, the performance and maintenance bonds may be waived if the
applicant executes an agreement and note ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 144-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $600 for each offense, recoverable with costs, and, in
default of payment of the fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate
offense. In the case of firms or associations, the penalty may be imposed upon the partners or
members thereof, and in the case of corporations, upon the officers thereof.
Article VI. Dumpsters in Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1034]
§ 144-36. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CARTWAY
That portion of the public right-of-way as shown on the Township Map.
CURBLINE
The line in the right-of-way, constructed or proposed, that separates the portion of the right-of-way
dedicated to vehicular traffic from that dedicated to pedestrian traffic.
DUMPSTER
Any container used for the purpose of temporarily holding debris.
GARBAGE
All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat, fish and fowls, fruits, vegetable and
parts thereof and other articles and materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for
such use or which are for any reason discarded.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 243/483
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Any garbage, refuse or a combination thereof, as defined in Act 97[1] which because of its
quantity, concentration or its physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in
either an individual or total population; or
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
LESSOR
One who rents dumpsters to another (that is, a licensed, commercial waste hauler).
OBSTRUCTION
Any structure or other object whatsoever that impedes, obstructs, or otherwise limits or prevents
the full and unrestricted use, whatsoever, by the public on any right-of-way.
OWNER/LESSEE
A property owner or agent thereof who owns or leases a dumpster as defined herein.
PERSON
An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or similar entity. For the purpose of this
article, this definition includes the dumpster owner and the dumpster lessee.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
For the purpose of this article, the area between property lines that is set aside for public use or
ownership as a street, alley, crosswalk, easement, or other similar facility.
SIDEWALK AREA
That portion of the sidewalk area for which paving is currently installed or may be installed in the
future.
STREET PROPERTY LINE
The line that is coincident to and identical with the line marking the extremity of the right-of-way as
shown on the Township Map.
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER
Any dumpster not permanently affixed intended to be used for a specified period of time for the
purpose of construction, demolition, or rehabilitation.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 144-37. Administrative authority.
This article shall be enforced under the jurisdiction and auspices of the Wilkins Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 144-38. Interpretation and application.
All standards established in this article are to be interpreted as the minimum standards required.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher standards. In interpreting
and applying the provisions of this article, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
When in the administration of this article, the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., and certain Township codes, such as the Building and Property Maintenance codes (Chapter
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 244/483
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
A.
B.
124) and the Zoning code (Chapter 173) impose greater restrictions than this article; the stricter
law shall take precedent.
§ 144-39. Regulations.
No person shall put, place, maintain, erect or cause or allow to be put, placed, maintained, or
erected any dumpster in the public right-of-way, except as hereinafter allowed and provided for;
provided, however, that no such dumpster shall violate any other provision of the ordinances of the
Township of Wilkins.
Dumpsters shall be allowed to be placed on a public right-of-way when no reasonable alternative
trash storage method is available. Dumpsters shall not be placed within the public right-of-way if a
driveway is available. A path that is 1/2 of the width of the sidewalk and/or sidewalk area shall be
kept clear for pedestrian travel.
Property owners or dumpster lessees shall be responsible for the debris in and around the
dumpster and shall maintain the sanitary conditions required by the Property Maintenance code.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Property Maintenance.
All dumpster units shall be painted, leakproof, in good repair and free of offensive odors. The
dumpster lessor shall place and maintain on the outside of each dumpster, in legible letters not
less than one inch in height, his name or company logo and telephone number.
Each dumpster shall be fully covered at all times by a clean, leakproof properly fitting and
functioning cover.
No person shall put, place, maintain, erect, or cause or allow to be put, placed, maintained, or
erected any dumpster in excess of eight feet wide on any cartway.
Dumpsters placed in the cartway shall be illuminated with a warning light, light reflector or
reflector material on the front and rear surfaces and in the direction traffic is flowing in such a
manner as to indicate the height and width of it and shall be visible for a distance of not less
than 300 feet between sunset and sunrise.
Traffic control devices shall be positioned around the dumpster when it is in the public right-ofway
in a manner that provides for a smooth and gradual transition of traffic around the
dumpster. Traffic control devices shall be properly maintained during the time they are in
place.
Dumpsters shall not be permitted to be placed in any area that a motor vehicle would be
prohibited from stopping, standing or parking by either ordinance or statute. The dumpster
shall be kept at least 20 feet from a crosswalk and from any intersection and must be placed
so it does not block the view of any motorist pulling into a roadway.
Hazardous waste and garbage as defined in this article shall not be stored in a dumpster.
§ 144-40. Permits and fees.
Permits shall be required for each dumpster in any public right-of-way in the Township. The
owner/lessee shall provide to the Township, upon request, a copy of the lease agreement, if
applicable, and the agreement with the hauler with schedule of pickups.
The dumpster owner/lessee or an agent thereof may apply to the Township for the permit. The
permit shall be displayed on the premises in a conspicuous location.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 245/483
C.
A.
B.
The cost of a permit shall be in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners. The Chief of Police or designated representative shall issue a permit for
a period of time not to exceed 15 calendar days. Permits may be renewed for fifteen-day
increments at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police or his designated representative if in his
opinion the work has not been completed or abandoned, or if it is deemed to be in the best interest
of the public. Applications for renewal permits must be filed at least three days before the
expiration of the original permit. The cost of each renewal permit shall be in such amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 144-41. Removal of dumpster.
Any person who has placed, places or causes to be placed any dumpster in the public right-of-way
without obtaining the proper permit authorized in this article shall immediately remove such dumpster
and shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed by this article. The failure of the trash hauler to
remove the dumpster, upon notice by the lessee or by Wilkins Township to do so shall be a violation of
this article and subject to penalties herein.
§ 144-42. Property and liability insurance.
Prior to the issuance by the Township of any permit or other authority to erect a dumpster in the public
right-of-way in conformity with § 144-40 the lessor and/or owner must execute a hold harmless
agreement in such form as the Township shall provide, guaranteeing to defend, protect, and
compensate Wilkins Township as a result of any cause of action which may be brought or perfected
against Wilkin Township in connection herewith. The lessor and/or owner shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance covering such general liability insurance on an occurrence basis with a
combined single limit of no less than $500,000 and naming Wilkins Township as an additional insured.
Said certificate shall be for continuous coverage unless canceled by the insurance company at which
time the Township shall be notified, in writing, by such insurance company.
§ 144-43. Promulgation of regulations.
The Chief of Police or a designated representative may promulgate such regulations as are necessary
for the proper administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 144-44. Revocation of permit.
Without limitation as to the utilization of any other legal or equitable remedy or action available to
the Township, civil or criminal, noncompliance with any of the requirements or provisions set forth
in this article or any material false statement or omission made in connection with the application
for a permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article.
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 148. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 10-8-1990 by Ord. No.
802. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 246/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 35.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Driveways — See Ch. 79.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 131.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 144.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
Appendix A: Assigned Release Rate Percentage
Stormwater Management References
Operation and Maintenance Agreement
Article I. General Provisions
§ 148-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Wilkins Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 148-2. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the Township.
To guide the future growth and development of the Township in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger
and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.
To protect the character and social and economic stability of the Township and to encourage the
orderly and beneficial development of the Township.
To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Township and the value of buildings and
improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient
transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public
requirements and facilities.
To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic within the Township, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in
the streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of
land and buildings and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivision and resubdivisions in
order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land.
To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision.
To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds, to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, to
safeguard the water table and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources in
order to preserve the community and value of the land.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 247/483
K.
L.
M.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Township and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of the land.
And finally, to ensure that documents prepared as part of a land-ownership transfer fully and
accurately describe the parcel of land being subdivided and the new parcels thus created.
§ 148-3. Legislative authority.
Authority of the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners of the Township is vested
by law with the control of the subdivision of land and land development within the Township by Act
247 of 1968, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.[1] The Board of
Commissioners shall retain the authority to approve all subdivision plans and land development
plans as required herein, except minor subdivisions.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Authority of the Township Planning Commission. The Township Planning Commission is hereby
designated by the Board of Commissioners as an agency which shall review and make
recommendations on preliminary and final subdivision and land development plans as required
herein prior to action by the Board of Commissioners and, when provided by ordinance, make
other recommendations.
The Planning Commission shall render final approval of minor subdivisions without reference to
the Board of Commissioners.
§ 148-4. Applicability.
Subdivision control. No subdivision as herein defined of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be
effected and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in
connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting or to abut thereon except in strict
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No lot in any subdivision may be sold and no
permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued and no
building may be erected in a subdivision unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved
and recorded and until the improvements required by the Board of Commissioners in connection
therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as herein provided in § 148-43.
Land development control.
Land development as herein defined must comply with the regulations contained herein. Such
compliance shall include, but not be limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plats, the
dedication and improvement of rights-of-way, streets and roads and the payment of fees and
charges as established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
Land development plans shall indicate the location of each structure and clearly define each
unit and shall indicate public easements, common areas and improvements, all easements
appurtenant to each unit and improvements to public rights-of-way. Developments are subject
to the zoning regulations as they apply to use and density requirements, setbacks, parking
and other features and shall be indicated on the land development plans.
It is stated Township policy to review a development in one proceeding when possible. Therefore,
when Township ordinances require a grading permit, the applicant for a grading permit (other than
for a single residential lot) shall file a land development application as required by this chapter but
limited to compliance with §§ 148-16, 148-24, 148-25, 148-30 and 148-31.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 248/483
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
§ 148-5. Interpretation; conflicts with other provisions.
Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be
minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare.
Conflict with public and private provisions.
Public provisions. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation
or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards shall control.
Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this chapter are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or
other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where
the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties
and obligations more restrictive or higher standards than the requirements of these
regulations or the determinations of the Board of Commissioners in approving a subdivision or
in enforcing this chapter and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental
to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.
§ 148-6. Modifications.
The Board of Commissioners may grant a modification of the requirements of one or more
provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be part of the application
for development. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved and
the minimum modification necessary.
The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory comments.
The Board of Commissioners shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modifications.
No modification shall be granted except after a public hearing by the Board of Commissioners.
Notice of this public hearing shall be sent by certified mail or given by personal service to all
owners of property located within 100 feet of the subdivision and posted in conspicuous places.
§ 148-7. Preventative remedies.
In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling
or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferror from such penalties or from the remedies
herein provided.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 249/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve
or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision
of real property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall
apply to any of the following applicants:
The owner of record at the time of such violation.
The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as to
whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such
owner, current owners, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the
Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
§ 148-8. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation unless the District Justice, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling
the per diem judgment pending the final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought under this section.
Article II. Definitions
§ 148-9. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall for the purpose of this chapter have the
meanings herein indicated. The present tense shall include the future, the singular number shall
include the plural, words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter; the
word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive.
§ 148-10. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 250/483
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABUT or ABUTTING
To join at a border or boundary; to share a common boundary with.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
ALLEY
A minor way, whether or not legally dedicated, intended and used primarily for vehicular service
access to the rear of properties which abut on a street and not intended for the purpose of through
vehicular traffic.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development, including but not limited to an application for a building
permit, for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK
An area divided into lots and usually bounded by streets.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
The Board of Commissioners of Wilkins Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof, including but
not limited to all mobile homes and trailers.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY
The portion of a street or alley improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive
of the sidewalk, berm or shoulder.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a
given distance from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within a
development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
CONDOMINIUM
Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain parts of a building thereon which
would normally be used by all the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee of a
particular unit or apartment in such building or on such parcel of land, and may include dwellings,
offices and other types of space in commercial and industrial buildings or on real property.
COUNTY
The County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the County of Allegheny.
CUL-DE-SAC
A minor street intersecting another street at one end and terminated at the other by a vehicular
turnaround.
CUT
An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground and designated point of lower
elevation on the final grade; also, the material removed in excavation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 251/483
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES (DER)
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, its bureaus, divisions, departments
and/or agencies as may from time to time be established or such department or departments as
may in the future succeed it.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial
or complete inundation in a one-hundred-year flood as designated in Chapter 173, Zoning, as
amended.
DETENTION POND
An area in which surface water runoff is temporarily stored pending its release at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner who
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a plat of
subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter
shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means and
includes control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development.
DRAINAGE FACILITY
Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or other structure designed, intended or constructed for the
purpose of carrying, diverting or controlling surface water or groundwater.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY
The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY
A private vehicular passageway providing access between a street and a private parking area or
private garage.
DWELLING
Any building which is designed for human living quarters, but not including hotels,
boardinghouses, tourist cabins, motels and other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
EASEMENT
A grant of limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose.
ENGINEER
A registered professional engineer in Pennsylvania designated by the Township.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 252/483
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
The engineering criteria of the Township regulating the installation of any improvement or facility.
In the absence of such Township engineering criteria, the applicable standards of the Allegheny
County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall apply.
EROSION
The removal of surface materials by the action of natural elements.
EXCAVATION
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FILL
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on
top of the stripped surface. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of
higher elevation of the final grade.
The material used to make fill.
FLOODPLAIN
The area along a natural watercourse which may from time to time be overflowed by water
therefrom.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and
discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN
A plan showing all existing ground features and proposed grading, including existing and
proposed surface and subsurface drainage facilities, described by grades, contours and
topography.
IMPROVEMENTS
Those physical additions, installations and changes required to render land suitable for the use
intended, including but not limited to grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire hydrants,
water mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks,
driveways, culverts and street shade trees.
INTERIOR WALK
A right-of-way or easement for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a
block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 253/483
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units unless such units are
intended to be a condominium; or
The addition of an accessory building, including a farm building, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law
and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER
A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, the front of which shall be considered
to be the frontage of least dimension of a street, except that where any two frontages shall each
exceed 150 feet in length, either frontage may be designated as the "front" of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE
An interior lot which abuts streets in both the front and rear.
LOT, INTERIOR
A lot having side lot lines which do not abut on a street.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH
The distance between the side lot lines measured at the building setback line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING
A lot which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter or an amendment
heretofore or hereafter enacted where such lot was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of
such chapter or amendment or prior to the application of such chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
LOT OF RECORD
A lot described in a deed or shown on a plan of lots which has been recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE
A lot extending between and having frontage on an arterial street and a local access street and
with vehicular access solely from the latter.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY
Any security, other than cash, which may be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR RENOVATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
An activity that involves more than 2,000 square feet of impervious area, to include both newly
created impervious area and any reconfiguration of existing impervious area, and results in a total
earth disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION
Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
MARKER
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 254/483
A wood or metal stake placed to designate the boundary and corners of lots in the subdivision of
land for the purpose of reference in land and property survey and to facilitate the sale of lots.
MINOR SUBDIVISION
The subdivision of land into not more than two parcels located on an existing improved street that
does not involve: installation of improvements as required by this chapter, extension of utilities,
frontage on an arterial or collector street, adverse effect to the development of the remaining
parcel, adverse effect to adjoining properties and conflict with the Township's Comprehensive
Plan, Chapter 173, Zoning, any portion of this chapter or other state, county or Township
ordinances, laws or regulations.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE
That document issued annually by the Township of Wilkins for the operation of a mobile home
park.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1046]
MOBILE HOME PARK PERMIT
That document issued by the Building Inspector granting permission to establish or enlarge a
mobile home park.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1046]
MONUMENT
A concrete, stone or other permanent object placed to designate boundary lines, corners of
property and rights-of-way of streets and utilities for the purpose of reference in land and property
survey.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164),
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as reenacted and amended.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE
Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, as amended.[1]
NEW DEVELOPMENT
An activity that involves more than 2,000 square feet of impervious area, to include both newly
created impervious area and any reconfiguration of existing impervious area, and results in a total
earth disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that on the average is likely to occur once every 100 years.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 255/483
A.
B.
C.
OWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he/she is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the owner or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land shall be deemed to be an "owner" for the purpose of this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY
Any security which may be in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the
Board of Commissioners approves a final subdivision or land development plan, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, corporation or other legally recognized entity.
PLAN, FINAL
A complete and exact subdivision plan or land development plan prepared for official recording as
required by statute to define property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the Township of Wilkins.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY
A tentative subdivision plan or land development plan in lesser detail than a final plan showing
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plan.
PLAN, SKETCH
An informal subdivision or land development plan not necessarily to scale indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision.
PLAN, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
A plan for controlling erosion and sediment during construction which shall provide all steps,
including scheduling, to assure erosion and sediment control during all phases of construction,
including final stabilization.
PLAT
A map or plan of a subdivision or use indicating the location and boundaries of individual
properties.
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes:
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated
facilities; and
Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Commissioners or Planning
Commission intended to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance
with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the
"Sunshine Act," 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 256/483
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RESERVE STRIP
A narrow parcel of ground having inadequate area for building purposes separating a street or a
proposed street from other adjacent properties.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER
Any individual maintaining a voting address in the Township within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision and owning real estate in his own or joint names.
RESUBDIVISION
Any subdivision or transfer of land laid out on a plan which has been approved by the Township
which changes or proposes to change property lines and/or public right-of-way not in strict
accordance with the approved plan.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Land legally dedicated for public purposes, including but not limited to a street, alley or interior
walk.
RUNOFF
The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow
that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION
The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by moving wind,
water or gravity. Once this matter is deposited or remains suspended in water it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SEPTIC TANK
A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down into solid, liquid and gaseous phases to
facilitate further treatment and final disposal.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE)
The line within a property defining the required minimum distance between any structure and the
ultimate adjacent right-of-way and the line defining side and rear yards where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-SITE
A system of piping tanks or other facilities serving a lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PUBLIC
A sanitary sewage collection method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant.
SHOULDER
The portion of a roadway (cartway) between the curb or gutter and the travelway intended for
emergency and parking use.
SIGHT DISTANCE
The extent of unobstructed vision in a horizontal or vertical plane along a street as defined in
§ 148-22 of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 257/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
SLOPE
The face of an embankment of a cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the
plane of the horizon. "Slopes" are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical
difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST
A field test conducted to determine the absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given
location for the purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage disposal.
STREET
Includes a street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any
other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or
private.
LOCAL ACCESS STREETS
Those used primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
COLLECTOR STREETS
Those which, in addition to giving access to abutting properties, intercept local access streets
and provide routes to community facilities and to arterial streets.
ARTERIAL STREETS
Those serving large volumes of comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic and
includes facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS
Minor streets parallel and adjacent to arterial streets providing access to abutting properties
and control of intersections with the arterial street.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET
A street generally parallel and adjacent to a property line having a lesser right-of-way width
than normally required for satisfactory improvements and use of the street.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land
for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED
Where in the judgment of the Township Engineer at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter)
of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been completed in
accordance with the approved plan so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR
A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to carry surface water runoff.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 258/483
[1]
A.
B.
TOPSOIL
Surface soils and subsurface soils which normally are fertile soils and soil material ordinarily rich
in organic matter of humus debris. "Topsoil" is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the
"A Horizon."
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TRAILER
Trailer shall mean any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being used as conveyance
on the public streets and highways and duly licensed as such and constructed in such a manner
as will permit occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling for one or more persons. A trailer shall
not be construed as a mobile home for purposes of this article.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1046]
UNDEVELOPED LAND
Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been graded or in any other manner prepared for the
construction of a building or other improvement.
UNIT
A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended for any type of independent use,
which has direct exit to a public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public
street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements which is
assigned to the property, structure or building.
WATERCOURSE
A stream of water, a river, brook, creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade.
WATER FACILITY
Any waterworks, water supply works, water distribution system or part thereof designed, intended
or constructed to provide or distribute potable water.
WATER SURVEY
An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of groundwater and surface water resources
within the Township.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article III. Procedures
§ 148-11. General procedures.
Classification of subdivision. Whenever any subdivision of land or land development is proposed,
before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof and before any permit for the erection
of a structure in such proposed subdivision or land development shall be granted, the owner or his
authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision or land
development in accordance with the following procedures for subdivision and land development.
Preapplication consultation. Prior to filing an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development within the Township, the owner or his authorized agent shall meet with the Township
Engineer for an official classification of his proposed subdivision or land development. The
Township Engineer shall determine whether the proposal shall be classified as a minor
subdivision, a major subdivision or a land development. At this time, the Township Engineer shall
advise the owner or his authorized agent as to which of the procedures contained herein must be
followed.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 259/483
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
Official filing date.
For the purpose of these regulations, the official filing date shall be the date of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the application and plans are
received in the office of the Township Secretary, Municipal Building, provided that, should said
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the submission of the application, the
official filing date shall be the 30th day following the day the application has been submitted.
Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or land development approval, the Township
Secretary or the Secretary's designated agent shall affix to the application the official filing
date.
County Planning Commission review. All plans shall be submitted to and reviewed by the County
Planning Commission in accordance with its then-prevailing rules and regulations. The Township
shall forward to the subdivider a copy of any report of the County Planning Commission. The
Township Secretary shall mail a copy of the preliminary plan to the County Planning Commission
forthwith upon filing by a developer.
§ 148-12. Fee schedule.
All filing, inspection and engineering fees shall be submitted to the Township.
Plan filing fee. A filing fee shall accompany the preliminary plan. No application shall be accepted
or acted upon unless payment is made to the Township. The Board of Commissioners shall create
by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by the subdivider or land developer to defray the cost
of administering and processing of plans. The schedule of fees may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
Review fees. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the Township's
professional consultants or engineer for review and report to the Township and shall be set by
resolution. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township Engineer or consultant for similar service in the community,
but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the
Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with
the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of
billing, notify the Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary,
in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
application or any approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's request
over disputed engineer expenses.
If within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the applicant cannot agreed on the
amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Township
shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a determination as to
the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such
documentation as the professional engineer in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and
render a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the
entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the professional engineer to
be appointed within 20 days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party, the
President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas (or if at the time there is no President Judge,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 260/483
(5)
D.
A.
B.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
B.
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer who, in that case, shall
be neither the Township Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or
performed services for the Township or the applicant within the preceding five years.
The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the reasonable and necessary
expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is
equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in the decision is
less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the professional
engineer, but otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay one-half (1/2) of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
An applicant shall, by filing a plan, be then obligated to pay the fees herein provided. The
engineering fees required to be paid by this section shall be promptly submitted to the Township
by the applicant upon the submission of bills therefor to the applicant from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 148-13. Minor subdivision procedure.
Minor subdivision plans shall be initiated and submitted for review in the form of a final plan as
specified in § 148-17 and shall be otherwise reviewed in accordance with the procedures and
standards of § 148-14, provided that final approval of minor subdivisions shall be made by the
Planning Commission.
Additional subdivision. Any additional subdivision of a tract from which a minor subdivision has
already been formed shall be deemed to be a major subdivision and shall follow the procedure
applying thereto.
§ 148-14. Major subdivision and land development procedure.
Sketch plan. Prospective subdividers and developers are strongly urged to discuss possible
development sites with the Planning Commission prior to submission of a preliminary plan. A
sketch plan shall be presented for review not less than 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. Submission of a sketch plan will not
constitute a formal filing of a subdivision or land development plan with the Board of
Commissioners. Sketch plans should include those items listed in Article IV, Plan Requirements.
Preliminary plan.
Submission of preliminary plans.
The preliminary plan and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in all
respects be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. It is the
responsibility of the subdivider or developer to coordinate his plans with the respective
private and public service agencies.
The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite fee as set forth in § 148-12 of
this chapter and by not less than three copies of all required material and not less than
nine prints of the preliminary plan of the subdivision or development as required by
Township resolution from time to time.
The Township Engineer shall forward one copy of the preliminary plan prints and one
copy of the required material to the County Planning Commission and such other
agencies as he/she deems appropriate for review and comment.
The Engineer shall forward the remaining copies of the preliminary plan prints and
required materials to the Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 261/483
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(d)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
When applicable, the application form shall be accompanied by a planning module for
land development as required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
Review of preliminary plans.
In cases where the subdivision or land development adjoins an existing or proposed state
highway or has proposed streets entering onto state highways, the developer shall
submit the plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for review.
The Planning Commission will consider the plan to determine if it meets the standards
set forth in this chapter and Chapter 173, Zoning.
The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plan within 60 days of the official
filing date but in any event shall act on the plan in time for the Board of Commissioners to
render its decision within 90 days from the official filing date. In the event that any
variance from this chapter is requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary for
approval, the variance and the reasons for its necessity shall be entered into the records
of the Board of Commissioners.
The Planning Commission shall act on minor subdivisions pursuant to Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
Planning Commission recommendation.
The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the preliminary plan shall be
approved, approved with modifications or disapproved and shall notify the Board of
Commissioners, in writing, thereof, including, if disapproved, a statement of reasons for
such action.
In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall consider the
recommendations of the Township Engineer, Township staff, the County Planning
Commission, interested residents and the recommendations of any agency or agencies
from which a review was requested under Subsection B(1)(c) of this section.
Engineer review. All plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, which review shall
precede the transmission of such plans to the Board of Commissioners.
Resubmission of preliminary plans. A revised plan submitted after disapproval shall be
considered and processed as a new plan submission.
Approval of preliminary plans.
The Board of Commissioners shall act on the preliminary plan within 90 days of the
official filing date. Failure to do so shall be deemed an approval. Before acting on a
preliminary plan, the Board of Commissioners may hold a hearing thereon after public
notice.
The Board of Commissioners shall notify the applicant of its decision to approve, approve
with conditions or disapprove the preliminary plan in writing. Such notice shall be given to
the applicant in person or mailed to him/her at his last known address not later than 15
days following the decision. If the plan is approved with conditions acceptable to the
developer and accepted by him/her, in writing, or disapproved, the Board of
Commissioners shall specify in its notice the conditions which must be met and/or the
defects found in the plan and the requirements which have not been met, including
specific reference to provisions of any statute or ordinance which have not been fulfilled.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 262/483
(c)
[2]
(a)
(b)
(c)
[3]
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(a)
(b)
[4]
(c)
(2)
C.
Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of the subdivision or land
development as to the character and intensity of development, the arrangement and
approximate dimensions of streets, lots and other planned features. The approval binds
the subdivider or developer to the general scheme of the subdivision shown unless a
revised preliminary plan is submitted and permits the subdivider to proceed with final
detailed design of improvements, to arrange for guaranty to cover installation of the
improvements and to prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does not
authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the preliminary plan.
Final plan.
Submission of final plans.
After the subdivider or developer has received official notification from the Board of
Commissioners that the preliminary plan has been approved, he/she must submit a final
plan in accordance with the provisions of Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
The final plan shall conform in all respects with the approved preliminary plan. If it does
not, the plan submitted shall be considered as a revised preliminary plan and shall be
forwarded by the Township Engineer to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation as a preliminary plan.
The subdivider or developer must submit with the final plan a guaranty for the installation
of improvements which meets the requirements of Article VI.
The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite inspection and engineering
fees in accordance with Section 510 of the Municipalities Planning Code.[3]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
Documented approval of the planning module for land development by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources shall be a part of the requisite materials
accompanying the final plan submission.
The subdivider or developer shall submit a reproducible original of the plans, nine prints
of the final subdivision or land development plans and at least three copies of all other
required information.
Upon receipt of the final plan, the Engineer shall forward the original plans and five
copies of the plans and one copy of all the other material to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation, one copy of the plan and one copy of all other material to
the County Conservation District for review and comments, one copy of the plan and one
of all other material to the County Planning Commission and copies to such other
agencies whose recommendations would be pertinent to the processing of the plan.
Review of final plans.
The Planning Commission will review the plan and requisite materials for compliance with
the approved preliminary plan and for conformance to the requirements of this chapter.
The Planning Commission shall act on the final plan within 60 days of the official filing
date.
The Planning Commission shall act on minor subdivisions pursuant to Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.[4]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 263/483
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
Planning Commission recommendation.
The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the final plan shall be approved,
approved with modifications or disapproved and shall notify the Board of Commissioners,
in writing, thereof, including, if approved with modifications or disapproved, a statement
of reasons for such action.
In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall consider the comments of
the Engineer, the County Planning Commission, the County Conservation District, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) and the recommendations of any
agency or agencies from which a review was requested under Subsection C(1)(g).
Township Engineer review. All plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, which
approval shall precede the transmission of such plans to the Board of Commissioners.
Resubmission of final plans. A revised plan submitted after disapproval shall be considered
and processed as a new plan submission.
Approval of final plans.
The Board of Commissioners will not take official action to approve a final plan unless it
is accompanied by a guaranty for the installation of improvements which meet the
requirements of Article VI.
The Board of Commissioners shall take action within 90 calendar days from the official
filing date of the final plan. Failure to do so shall be deemed an approval.
The Board of Commissioners shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision to
approve, approve with conditions acceptable to the developer and accepted by him/her,
in writing, or disapprove the final plan. Such notice shall be given to the applicant in
person or mailed to him/her at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision. If the final plan is disapproved, the Board of Commissioners shall specify the
defects found in the plan and the requirements which have not been met, including
specific reference to the provisions of any statute or ordinance which have not been
fulfilled.
If the final plan is approved subject to conditions, the Board of Commissioners shall not
endorse the plan until all of the conditions have been met.
If the Board of Commissioners approves the final plan or grants a conditional approval, it
shall set the amount of bonding or other security necessary to guarantee the construction
of improvements and community facilities and shall state such amount in the notice to the
applicant.
Recording of final plans.
Upon approval of the final plan, the subdivider or developer shall prepare one transparent
reproduction of the original final plan on stable plastic-base film and no less than four
prints thereof which shall be submitted to the Township not later than 30 days after
approval. These plans, upon satisfaction of all conditions attached to the approval, will be
signed by the Board of Commissioners or, in the case of minor subdivisions, by the
Planning Commission. A copy of the signed final plan shall be recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days after approval of the final plan. The final
plan must be recorded before proceeding with the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
Recording the final plan shall be an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other
public ways to public use and to dedicate or reserve all park reservations and other
public areas to public use unless reserved by the subdivider as hereinafter provided. The
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 264/483
(c)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
approval of the final plan shall not impose any duty upon the Board of Commissioners or
Township concerning maintenance or improvements by ordinance or resolution.
The subdivider shall place a notation on the final plan if there is no offer of dedication to
the public of streets and certain designated public areas, in which event the title to such
areas shall remain with the owner, and the Township shall assume no responsibility for
improvement or maintenance thereof, which fact shall be noted on the final plan.
Article IV. Plan Requirements
§ 148-15. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan may be submitted by the subdivider or developer as a basis for informal discussion
with the Planning Commission, which may comment upon such sketch plan, but no approval or
disapproval shall be given.
Data furnished in a sketch plan shall be at the discretion of the subdivider. For fullest usefulness, it
is suggested that a sketch should include the following information:
Tract boundaries.
Location within the Township.
North point.
Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
Significant topographical physical features, including floodplains if any.
Proposed general street layout.
Proposed general lot layout, including location of proposed open space and other
preservation areas.
A subdivision sketch plan need not be to scale nor are precise dimensions required.
§ 148-16. Preliminary plan.
[Amended 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 896]
The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch.
The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
The proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
The Township name.
The North point, scale and date of preparation.
The name(s) and addresses of the owner(s) of the property, including reference to deed book,
volume and page of current legal owner.
The name of the registered engineer or surveyor or other person responsible for the plan.
The tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 265/483
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
The existing contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of relatively level tracts, at
such lesser intervals as may be necessary for satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
Datum to which contour elevations refer shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
datum. (The Township will furnish elevations of nearest known bench marks.)
All existing watercourses, floodplains or tree masses and other significant natural features.
All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, petroleum or petroleum products lines,
fire hydrants and other significant man-made features.
All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way width and cartway
width.
All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the purpose for which the
easements or rights-of-way have been established.
The location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and easements; proposed
lot lines with approximate dimensions and areas of all lots; proposed minimum setback line
for each street; playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land proposed to be
dedicated or reserved for public use; proposed street names; proposed watercourses and
detention ponds; proposed phasing of land development; and typical section of all streets.
The total acreage, number of lots, average lot size, density, open space and existing zoning
classification.
The names of owners of all adjoining properties and the names of all abutting subdivisions.
A location map at a scale of 400 feet to the inch showing the proposed development and
adjoining areas.
Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a sketch shall
be submitted of the prospective street layout for the remainder.
Where applicable, a plan revision module for land development shall be the responsibility of
the applicant and shall be prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The completed module shall
accompany the preliminary plan submission.
When on-lot waterline water supply is proposed, the location of all well sites.
When required by § 148-30 of this chapter, a proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan.
When required, the information required by § 148-31 of this chapter, which may be by
separate plan.
A block for signatures of the reviewing agency membership and date of recommendation.
A block for signatures of the Board of Commissioners and date of approval.
Land development plans shall show building locations, elevation drawings, building floor plan,
cross-section drawings and parking areas in addition to the above information.
A letter from the subdivider specifically requesting any waiver from the regulations herein
established and citing the reasons for the same.
Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or development, applicants
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 266/483
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
shall present evidence to the Board of Commissioners that the subdivision is to be supplied
by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission of an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
A report on steep slopes, including a description of existing soils and vegetation and methods
to prevent disturbance and otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.
A report including a map supplied by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Mines, showing the location of mines under the development or within
500 feet thereof. The report shall indicate how the development will affect or be affected by
any mines, with particular concern to public health, safety and welfare.
When a development involves a parcel of land of one acre or more, the developer shall
submit a report with information as required by Chapter 173, Zoning, § 173-26.
Existing and proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation system serving the development,
including streets, driveways and walkways, showing proposed ownership, rights-of-way and
cartway widths and type of construction.
Existing and proposed parking and loading areas, including street access points and internal
circulation pattern, showing number of spaces, typical space dimensions, type of construction
and landscaping.
Proposed site landscaping showing location, type and illustrative details of all landscaped
areas, including open spaces, riverside setbacks and buffer areas.
Proposed design details and materials for all fences, walls, screens, lighting fixtures, signs
and other outdoor structures.
Statement of the approvals and permits that will be required for the proposed development
from the county, commonwealth or federal agencies.
Location and effect of outdoor lighting on highways and residential properties in sights line of
proposed lighting.
For properties located in a C Commercial District and abutting an arterial street, the location
and width of the proposed sidewalks when a property owner purchases property, develops
property, subdivides property, or performs a major renovation of infrastructure. The
construction, dimensions, and building materials must be specified on the plan and comply
with § 148-23 and Chapter 144.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
§ 148-17. Final plan.
[Amended 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 896]
Final plans shall be drawn, annotated and sized in conformance with the regulations of the
Allegheny County Planning Agency and Recorder of Deeds.
The final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following:
The subdivision name or identifying title.
The Township name.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 267/483
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
The North point, scale, date of preparation and date of preliminary plan approval.
The name(s) and addresses of the owner(s) of the property and subdivider or land developer,
including reference to deed book, volume and page of the current legal owner.
The name and seal of the registered professional engineer or surveyor responsible for the
plan.
The tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
All existing streets and driveways on or adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way
width, cartway width, street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas dedicated or
proposed to be dedicated to public use.
Sufficient data, including bearing and length, to locate every street, lot, easement, right-ofway
and boundary line upon the ground.
The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and tangent bearings for each street.
All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of each lot proposed to be
dedicated to public use.
The proposed building setback line for each street and the proposed placement of each
building, except placement for single-family dwellings.
The location and width of all rights-of-way, easements and the purpose for which the rights-ofway
and easements were established.
The location of all sanitary and storm sewer easements and the location of all watercourses
and detention ponds, whether public or private.
All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
Lots within a subdivision shall be numbered and their area shown within the lot boundaries.
The typical section for all proposed streets.
Permanent reference monuments shall be shown on the plan and designated existing or
proposed.
The names of the adjoining subdivisions shall be shown.
The names of the owners of any adjoining unplotted land shall be shown.
An approval block providing for the signatures of the reviewing agency and the Board of
Commissioners and the date of approval.
An appropriate statement signed by the owner unequivocally indicating his intention either to
dedicate for public use all streets, roads, easements and rights-of-way so intended and
designated or to reserve as private any streets, roads, easements or rights-of-way intended
not to be dedicated for public use.
A statement of acknowledgment in legal form, executed by a notary, stating that the
subdivider is the owner or equitable owner of the land proposed for subdivision and that the
subdivision as shown on the final plan is the act and deed of the subdivider and that it is
desired to record the same.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 268/483
[1]
(23)
(24)
(25)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(2)
C.
A copy of the sewage plan revision module for land development or other equivalent
documentation approved by the Department of Environmental Protection in compliance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or development, applicants
shall present evidence to the Board of Commissioners that the subdivision is to be supplied
by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
For properties located in a C Commercial District and abutting an arterial street, the location
and width of the proposed sidewalks when a property owner purchases property, develops
property, subdivides property, or performs a major renovation of infrastructure. The
construction, dimensions, and building materials must be specified on the plan and comply
with § 148-23 and Chapter 144.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
The final plan shall be accompanied by an improvement and construction plan including, but not
limited to, elevation drawings, building floorplans and cross-section drawings.
The improvement and construction plan(s) shall be at any of the following scales:
Horizontal
(feet per inch)
Vertical
(feet per inch)
50 5 or 10
40 4
100 10
It shall show the following:
The subdivision name or identifying title.
North point, scale and date.
The name of the owner of record, the subdivider and telephone number.
The name and seal of the registered professional engineer or surveyor responsible for
the plan.
The center line of streets with bearings, distances, curve data, sight distances and
stations corresponding to the profile.
Right-of-way and curb lines of streets with radii at intersections.
The beginning and end of proposed construction of streets.
Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all public roads with their names and
widths.
The location of all monuments with reference to them.
Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 269/483
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
The location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities, street name signs and
shade trees.
The location and size of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines with stations corresponding to
the profile.
The location of storm and/or sanitary sewer manholes or inlets with grade between and
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
Property lines and ownership with details of easements where required.
The beginning and end of proposed construction of storm and/or sanitary sewer.
The location of storm and/or sanitary sewer laterals, Y's, etc.
The location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
The profile of existing ground surface along the center line of a street.
The proposed center-line grade of streets with percent of grade of tangents and
elevations at fifty-foot intervals, including grades at intersections, control points, etc.
The vertical curve data of streets, including length and elevations and sight distance as
required by the Township Engineer.
The profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of manholes or inlets.
The profile of storm drains or sewers showing the size of pipe, grade cradle (if any),
manhole or inlet locations and elevations at flow line.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a grading and drainage plan prepared in accordance with
§§ 148-24 and 148-25 of this chapter.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan when
required by § 148-30 of this chapter.
When required, the information required by § 148-31 of this chapter, which may be a separate
plan, shall be submitted.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a copy of final deed restrictions or protective covenants.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a copy of any and all proposed written easements or
deeds to be granted, including but not limited to storm drainage easements, recreation easements
or dedication, or agreements to pay a fee in lieu thereof, and sanitary sewer easement.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a written agreement of land developer or subdivider in a
form approved by the Board of Commissioners including an agreement to construct in form and
substance agreeable to Township-required improvements, including but not limited to streets,
curbs, sidewalks and storm drainage facilities.
The final plan shall be accompanied by an approved Department of Environmental Protection
planning module where on-lot sewage disposal systems or community treatment systems are
proposed or written proof of the Department of Environmental Protection's approval for the
extension of existing sanitary sewer service.
The final plan shall be accompanied by, if required, a highway occupancy permit or review and
written approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 270/483
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
N.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
The final plan shall be accompanied by an approval by the United States Postal Service of street
names.
The final plan shall be accompanied by plans of bridges and other improvements and shall contain
sufficient information to provide complete working plans for the proposed construction.
The final plan shall be accompanied by a typical cross section of streets showing:
The right-of-way width and location and the width of paving.
The type, thickness and crown of paving.
The type and size of the curb.
The grading of the sidewalk area.
The location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks.
The typical location of sewers and utilities, with sizes.
§ 148-18. As-built plans.
The subdivider or developer will furnish the Township with as-built plans for sanitary sewer systems
and storm sewer systems within the subdivision or land development.
Article V. General Design Principles
§ 148-19. Applicability.
The following principles, standards and requirements will be applied by the Board of Commissioners
and Planning Commission to evaluate plans for proposed subdivision or land developments. The
standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Where literal compliance
with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the Board of Commissioners may modify or
adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial
conformance with the objectives of this chapter.
§ 148-20. Land requirements.
Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be subdivided or developed.
Land which is unsuitable for development because of hazards to life, safety, health or property
shall not be subdivided or developed until such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided for in the subdivision or land development plan.
Land included as having unsuitable characteristics would be the following:
Land subject to flooding or which has a high groundwater table.
Land which, if developed, will create or aggravate a flooding condition upon other land.
Land subject to subsidence.
Land subject to underground fires.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 271/483
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Land containing significant areas of slopes greater than 10%.
Land which, because of topography or means of access, is considered hazardous by the
Board of Commissioners based on the review and report of the Township Engineer or other
experts.
Land which is subject to ground pollution or contamination.
Proposed subdivisions of land developments shall be coordinated with existing nearby
neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously.
Proposed land uses shall conform to Chapter 173, Zoning.
§ 148-21. Street system.
Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts thereof as have been
officially prepared and adopted by the Township and shall be coordinated with existing or
proposed streets in adjoining subdivisions or land developments.
Proposed streets shall further conform to such county and state road and highway plans as have
been prepared, adopted or filed as prescribed by law and to Township ordinances.
Streets shall be related to the topography so as to produce usable lots and acceptable grades.
Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivisions or land development
and to adjacent unsubdivided territory unless the topography clearly indicates that such
connection is not feasible. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the limits of the
subdivision or land development and shall be improved to Township specifications. Reserve strips
and landlocked areas shall not be created.
Streets shall be laid out to preserve the integrity of their design. Local access streets shall be laid
out to discourage their use by through traffic, and, where possible, arterial streets shall be
designed for use by through traffic.
Developments with frontage on arterial streets shall not use any other street for ingress or egress
to the development.
Where the proposed subdivision or land development contains or is adjacent to an existing or
proposed arterial street or a highway designated as a limited access highway by the appropriate
highway authorities, provisions shall be made for marginal access streets at a distance acceptable
for the appropriate use of the land between the arterial street or limited access highway and the
marginal access streets. The Board of Commissioners may also require rear service areas, double
frontage lots or such other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in
the number of intersections with primary streets and separation of local and through traffic.
Half or partial streets will not be permitted in new subdivisions or land developments except where
essential to reasonable subdivision or development of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
Wherever a tract to be subdivided or developed borders an existing half or partial street, the entire
street shall be shown on the plan.
Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs (with adequate turning capability) to permit
future street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as culs-de-sac.
New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall be forbidden.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 272/483
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
Q.
Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a proposed subdivision or
land development shall be made to provide for the proper projection of streets into the
unsubdivided land.
Street names shall be coordinated with existing or platted street names, and if a new street is a
continuation of or is aligned with an existing or platted street, it shall bear the same name as the
existing or platted street.
No street shall be laid out or opened which extends to or crosses any boundary between the
Township and any other municipality except with the specific approval of the Board of
Commissioners and upon such condition as the Board of Commissioners may impose. If the street
is proposed to serve a commercial area, an industrial area or a residential area of 50 dwelling
units or more located in another municipality, the street shall not be approved unless the area is
also served by a street in the other municipality and unless the relevant traffic facilities of the
Township are adequate to handle the anticipated volume.
All streets shall have a uniform width throughout their respective lengths except where otherwise
required by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to § 148-22B.
All streets must have appurtenant sidewalks.
The requirements for sidewalks as above provided may be waived in whole or in part by written
application to the Board of Commissioners.
No waiver shall be granted unless all of the following conditions are found to exist:
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions consisting of exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that a
waiver is required due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the sidewalk provisions of this chapter.
That because of the physical circumstances or conditions, installation of a sidewalk
cannot be done without cost and expense substantially disproportionate to the cost and
expense applicable in the absence of the exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions.
That the exceptional conditions have not been created by the developer or his
predecessor.
That the waiver, if authorized, will apply only to that part of the property on which the
unique physical circumstances or conditions exist.
That the waiver, if authorized, will not create a risk to the public health, safety or welfare.
The Township Engineer has reviewed the application and has certified that all of the
conditions in Subsections Q(1)(a) through (d) apply to the waiver applied for.
The application for waiver shall contain sufficient plans and documentation to indicate that all
conditions of the waiver do exist.
The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners from time to time.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
Affirmative action on waiver applications shall be taken by resolution.
§ 148-22. Street design.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 273/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Street classification. Three functional classifications are hereby established for the streets and
roads in the Township:
Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide intracounty or intermunicipal
traffic of substantial volumes where the average trip lengths are usually five miles or greater.
Generally, these highways should accommodate operating speeds of 35 to 55 miles per hour.
Collector. This classification is intended to include those highways which connect local access
highways to arterial highways. They may serve intracounty and intramunicipal traffic. They
may serve as traffic corridors connecting residential areas with industrial, shopping and other
service. They may penetrate residential areas. Generally, these highways will accommodate
operating speeds of 35 miles per hour.
Local access. This classification is intended to include streets and roads that provide direct
access to abutting land and connections to higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will
be low and travel distances generally short. These streets and roads should be designed for
operating speeds of 25 miles per hour or under.
Right-of-way widths.
Right-of-way widths shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Cartway Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 to 120 46
Collector 60 34
Local access 50 30
Minimum widths for each type of public street shall be as follows:
Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing public street or road having
a right-of-way width less than would be required if said street or road were created under
this chapter, sufficient additional width for the right-of-way shall be provided and
dedicated to meet the foregoing standards.
Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the Board of
Commissioners to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions
require it and to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.
Cul-de-sac streets.
Cul-de-sac streets, whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided at the closed end with
a turnaround having a minimum radius to the edge of the finished street or curbline of not less
than 50 feet.
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-way shall
be placed adjacent to a property line, and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall
be carried to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the
adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the overage created by the
turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the
property owners fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.
Commercial and industrial culs-de-sac shall be reviewed for adequacy by the Township
Engineer. His recommendations will be given to the Board of Commissioners, who shall have
final authority in this matter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 274/483
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be kept to a minimum and shall not exceed 600 feet in
length.
A minimum width of the right-of-way may be reduced to 40 feet by the Board of
Commissioners after review by the Planning Commission, but only when these criteria exist:
The street ends in a cul-de-sac and, by reasons of topography, abutting use or otherwise,
it conclusively appears that the street will not be extended in the future.
The street is no longer than 1,000 feet.
Street alignment.
Whenever street lines are deflected by more than five degrees, connection shall be made by
horizontal curves.
The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves on collector and arterial streets
shall be 300 feet, and for local streets, the minimum radius shall be 100 feet.
On local access streets, the minimum tangent between reverse curves shall be at least 100
feet; on collector and arterial streets, the minimum tangent shall be at least 250 feet.
Minimum vertical sight distance measured four feet above grade shall be 300 feet for collector
and arterial streets and 100 feet for local access streets.
Street grades.
The minimum grade on all streets shall be five-tenths percent (0.5%).
The maximum grade on collector or arterial streets shall be 7% and on local access streets
10%.
Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and shall provide proper
sight distances as specified herein above.
Street intersections.
Local streets shall not intersect with collector or arterial streets on the same side at intervals
of less than 800 feet as measured from center line to center line.
The distance between center lines of streets opening onto the opposite side of a proposed or
existing street shall be not less than 150 feet unless the streets are directly opposite each
other.
Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where
this proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
Streets shall be all laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. Local streets
shall not intersect collector or arterial streets at an angle of less than 75°. The intersection of
two local streets shall not be at any angle of less than 60°.
Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least 20 feet, and
minimum curve radius at an intersection of a local street and a collector or arterial street shall
be at least 25 feet.
There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections clear sight triangles of 75 feet in all
directions measured along the center line from the point of intersection. Nothing which
obstructs the vision of a motorist shall be permitted in this area.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 275/483
(7)
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
A.
Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. Where the grade of any
street at the approach to an intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having
a grade of not greater than 4% for a distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest right-ofway
line of the intersecting street.
Pavement design.
All components of the pavement structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408.
Minimum requirements. The following shall be considered to be minimum standards for street
construction in the Township.
Alternates Type
Local
Access
Streets
(inches)
Collector
and Arterial
Streets
(inches)
Rigid pavement Plain cement concrete
subbase
6 6
Flexible pavements
Surface
Base
Subbase
ID-2
Bituminous
1 1/2
4
6
(if required)
1 1/2
6
6
(if required)
Surface
Base
ID-2
Crushed aggregate
(regular or dense
grade)
3
6
3
10
Subbase 6 (if
required)
9 (if
required)
Surface
Base
ID-2 Modified stone
aggregate
3
8
3
10
Subbase 6 (if
required)
9 (if
required)
Alleys and driveways.
Alleys are prohibited in residential developments.
Driveways serving properties located adjacent to an intersection shall be offset from the
intersection of the curbline a distance not less than the required setback dimension.
§ 148-23. Curbs and sidewalks.
Curbs.
Curbs shall be provided on all streets and parking compounds located within multifamily and
apartment building developments. Curbs shall also be required on new streets in subdivisions
or land developments in which the average lot width of interior lots at the required building
setback line is 100 feet or less. Curbs may also be required in any subdivision in which the lot
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 276/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
A.
areas or lot widths exceed the above minimum, when the center line street grade of any street
exceeds 3%. In such cases, curbs or other drainage controls shall be installed to properly
control surface drainage and protect the streets from erosion. The requirement of the curbs
may be waived at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
All curbs shall be depressed at intersections to sufficient width to accommodate wheelchairs.
Depressions shall be in line with sidewalks where provided.
Curbs may be either the vertical type or rolled curb and gutter type. Rolled curb and gutter
shall not be used on collector streets. The transition from one type of curb to another shall
occur only at street intersections.
All curbs shall be constructed of portland cement concrete with expansion joints every 20 feet
and shall follow PennDOT standards where applicable.
Sidewalks shall be required within the public right-of-way for all properties abutting arterial streets
in the C Commercial District upon the transfer of ownership of property, the new development of
property, a subdivision or reverse subdivision of property, or a major renovation of infrastructure
located on the property. All required sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the design
standards of Chapter 144.
[Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1052]
§ 148-24. Stormwater management.
[Added 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1029]
General provisions.
Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Wilkins MS4
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
Statement of findings. The governing body of the Township finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source
pollution of water resources.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation
of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public
health, safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides groundwater recharge for
water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface
water quality.
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of
stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater
discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the
Township and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 277/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(5)
in Subsection B of this section through provisions designed to:
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa.
Code § 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of
the waters of this commonwealth.
Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and
management.
Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater
quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are implemented within
the Township.
Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
Statutory authority. The Township also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as amended.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Applicability. All regulated activities within the Township, and all stormwater runoff entering the
Township's separate storm sewer system from lands within and tributary to the municipal
boundary, including the sources of such runoff, and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by
this section. Activities regulated by this section include, but are not limited to, the following:
Land development;
Subdivision;
Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious surfaces, to include
driveways and parking lots, for example;
Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
Installation, maintenance, and alterations to stormwater management facilities or
appurtenances thereto;
Any earth disturbances or other activities that involve the alteration or development of
land, or removal of trees and vegetation in a manner that may affect post-construction
stormwater runoff;
New earth disturbance activities on previously developed properties, which includes
properties that have been graded, altered, and/or compacted, whether or not any
structures have been built;
The demolition or partial demolition of an existing facility; however, such work required for
building or site maintenance, parking lot resurfacing, roof replacement, building exterior
repairs, etc., shall not constitute regulated activities unless deemed so by the Township;
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 278/483
(i)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Construction of new buildings or facilities in existing impervious or semipervious areas,
including the full or partial redevelopment of existing properties.
Repealer. The Township, with the adoption of this section, hereby repeals Section 506 and
506-A of Township Ordinance No. 802, as amended. Ordinance No. 964 and any other
ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent with any of the provisions of
this section is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Severability. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this section invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of this section.
Compatibility with other requirements. Approvals issued and actions taken under this section
do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
Erroneous permit. Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any
proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit
or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of
the Township purporting to validate such a violation.
Definitions.[2] For the purposes of this section, certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
ACT 167
The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 No. 167; 32 P.S.
§ 680.1 to 680.17, as amended).
ACT 167 PLAN
The Plan for managing stormwater runoff throughout a designated watershed, adopted
by Allegheny County as required by the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act (Act
167). Activities in Wilkins Township are governed under the provisions of the Turtle Creek
Water Act 167 Storm Water Management Plan.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural
operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops,
including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or
pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT
A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the Township for
approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater
impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 279/483
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this section. Stormwater
BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural"
or "nonstructural." In this section, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with
stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a
physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters,
detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S.
§ 851(c)] that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
§ 102.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION VOLUME
The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of this commonwealth
at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE)
See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA
An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has
occurred.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
All facilities and natural features used for the movement of stormwater through and from
a drainage area, including, but not limited to, any and all of the following; conduits, pipes
and appurtenant features, channels, ditches, culverts, streets, swales, and gutters, as
well as all watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including,
but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION
The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or
chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION
The dominant land cover during the five-year period immediately preceding a proposed
regulated activity.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 280/483
(a)
(b)
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN
Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated
by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also
includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from
time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the
contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of
the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site
preparation, and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well
as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to
their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States
and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or
conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D
(NRCS, References 3 and 4[3]).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA)
A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or
areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks,
parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not
prevent infiltration.
KARST
A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions, sinkholes, rock
pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT)
Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land
for any purpose involving a group of two or more buildings or the division or
allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
Any subdivision of land;
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 281/483
(c) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.[4]
MS4
Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY
Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA
Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE
The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the Township are planned,
conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL
Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by
law to perform the work required by this section.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or
development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code § 92, 25 Pa.
Code § 102, or the Clean Streams Law.[5]
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF
The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of
this commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be
expected to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would
be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the
probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a fourpercent
chance).
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT
Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.[6]
STORMWATER
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 282/483
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[2]
[1]
(a)
(1)
C.
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice
melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this section.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels;
storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this section. The
stormwater management site plan will be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this
section.
SUBDIVISION
As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247.[7]
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERSHED
Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this
commonwealth.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See also § 148-10, Definitions.
Stormwater management standards.
General requirements.
For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is specifically
exempted in Subsection C(2):
Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is required.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 283/483
[2]
(b)
[8]
(c)
[9]
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(e)
(f)
[1]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[2]
[3]
(g)
No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues written approval of
an SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this
section.
SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with Subsection D(6), shall be
on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state
water quality requirements other than those in this section, provided that they meet the
minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to,
the Clean Streams Law.[8]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
section and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the
Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual, Reference 2[9]), No. 363-
2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Impervious areas:
The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in
the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used
in determining conformance with this section.
For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the
parcel is subject to the requirements of this section.
Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, decreased,
relocated, or otherwise altered without written notification of the adjacent property
owner(s) by the developer. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of
this section.
All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
Protect health, safety, and property;
Meet the water quality goals of this section by implementing measures to:
Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.
Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever
possible.
To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for low-impact
development practices described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual (BMP Manual, Reference 1[10]).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 284/483
[10]
(h)
(i)
(j)
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[1]
[11]
[2]
[12]
[13]
[3]
(k)
[14]
(l)
(a)
(b)
(2)
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize
adverse effects.
Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other
requirements of this section.
Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control
and rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72
hours from the end of the design storm.
Storm values.
The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall
be as follows:
One-year, twenty-four-hour storm: 2.00 inches.
Two-year, twenty-four-hour storm: 2.50 inches.
Ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm: 3.61 inches.
Twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm: 4.31 inches.
One-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm: 5.71 inches.
Other storm volumes and intensities should be obtained from the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, U.S.
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center,
Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14 (Reference 5[11]) can be accessed at:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated,
and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this section and to meet
all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,
[12] and the Storm Water Management Act.[13]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual (Reference 1[14]),
subject to any requirements of this section.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Exemptions. Some activities may be exempted from the full requirements of this section as
detailed below. Unless specifically noted as automatic, exemption requests must be submitted
to and approved by the Township. Any exemption granted shall apply only to the portions of
this section specifically noted. All other stormwater management design elements, such as a
storm sewer system, culverts, erosion and sedimentation controls, etc., shall still be required.
There shall be no exemptions for activities resulting in earth disturbance exceeding one
acre.
Activities that do not require a site plan or land development plan approval from the
Township may be exempt, subject to the review of the exemption request by the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 285/483
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
Township.
Individual detached single-family homes that are not part of an existing or planned
subdivision with an approved SWM site plan shall be exempt from the requirement to
submit a complete SWM site plan.
The subdivision of one single-family detached residential lot into two such lots, or a
subdivision including only the revision of the lot line(s) between two such lots, shall be
exempt from the requirement to submit a complete SWM site plan. Should the Township
suspect that repeated such subdivisions are being used to circumvent the planning
requirement, the Township reserves the right to revoke the exemption.
The work required to return a property to its previous condition following a loss resulting
from an act of nature, fire, or accident, etc., shall be exempt from the requirement to
submit a complete SWM site plan.
Emergency maintenance work performed for the protection of public health, safety, and
welfare may be exempted from the requirements in this section to obtain approval for a
SWM site plan prior to the commencement of the activity. A written description of the
scope and extent of such work shall be submitted to the Township within two calendar
days of the commencement of the activity. If the Township deems that the work does not
constitute an emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and not resume until a
SWM site plan is submitted to and approved by the Township. The purpose of this
exemption is to allow emergency work to proceed immediately only. All work must
otherwise comply with all applicable provisions of this section.
Maintenance work performed on an existing stormwater management facility that was
installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Township may be
exempted from the requirements of this section. The facility owner shall notify the
Township a minimum of three working days in advance, with such notice to include a
description of the work to be performed. All work should be completed in accordance with
the approved operation and maintenance plan for the facility and shall only be performed
to bring the facility back into conformance with the original approved plan. Any work that
would alter the configuration, capacities, or operation of the facility must be submitted to
the Township for approval.
Activities related solely to property maintenance, such as resurfacing an existing parking
lot, replacement of existing sidewalks, roof replacement, building exterior repairs, etc.,
shall be automatically exempt from the requirements of this section if no additional
impervious area is added as a result of the activities.
The use of land for home gardening for home consumption shall be automatically exempt
from the requirements of this section.
Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation requirements of this
section, provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code § 102.
Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this section, provided the activities are performed according
to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code § 102.
Exemptions from any provisions of this section shall not relieve the applicant from the
requirements in Subsection C(1)(d) through (k).
The following activities may be exempt from the requirements to submit a complete SWM
site plan and/or control the peak runoff volumes and rates, but shall not be exempt from
the water quality treatment requirements of this section. In all cases, appropriate
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 286/483
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
(n)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(3)
stormwater quality BMPs must be implemented on the site. The applicant shall submit a
narrative describing the proposed use of BMPs on the site, including any calculations or
justification for his or her selection, as well as the operation and maintenance plan and
agreement for the facilities. Exemptions will not be granted if the activity is found to
contribute pollution to the waters of the commonwealth, or if the runoff from the activity
impacts an adjacent property:
Minor impact activities.
This shall apply to an activity not classified as a single-family detached home on
a single lot.
An activity shall be classified as a "minor impact" if it involves less than 2,000
square feet of impervious area, to include both newly created impervious area
and any reconfiguration of existing impervious area, and results in a total earth
disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet.
This exemption can only be applied once for each parcel. Subsequent, or
phased, regulated activities on the same or contiguous properties which result in
an overall total of 2,000 square feet or greater of impervious surface, or 5,000
square feet or greater of earth disturbance shall be subject to the full
requirements of this section.
The area of any existing impervious surfaces that may be permanently replaced
with pervious surfaces on a project site may not be deducted from the area of
impervious surface created/reconfigured to qualify for this exemption.
Vertical extensions.
This shall apply to an activity not classified as a single-family detached home on
a single lot.
Such activities must involve only the vertical extension of a structure or portions
thereof, with an addition of the same size and shape as the structure or portion
thereof directly beneath the addition, and which require no earth disturbance
activities other for the construction of said addition.
The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this subsection at any time
for any project that the Township believes may pose a threat to public health and safety
or the environment.
Volume controls. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
(Reference 1[15]) shall be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent
practicable. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection C(3)(a) or the Simplified Method in Subsection C(3)(b) below. For regulated
activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic routing to design
the stormwater facilities, this section establishes no preference for either methodology;
therefore, the applicant may select either methodology on the basis of economic
considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated
with each methodology, and other factors.
The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual, Reference 1[16]) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site
conditions.
Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all storms equal to or
less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
For modeling purposes:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 287/483
[a]
[b]
[16]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[17]
(b)
[15]
(a)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(1)
D.
Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow in good condition.
Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered
meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual, Reference 1[17]) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not
followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for
projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of runoff from all new
impervious surfaces.
At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the
surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate
infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases, at least
the first 0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
This method is exempt from the requirements of Subsection C(4), Rate controls.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Rate controls.
Areas covered by a release rate map from the Turtle Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, and onehundred-
year storms, the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the
applicable approved release rate maps. For any areas not shown on the release rate
maps, the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
Stormwater management (SWM) site plan requirements.
Plan requirements. For all regulated activities not eligible for exemptions pursuant to this
section, the applicant shall submit a stormwater management (SWM) site plan and report
prepared and sealed by a professional engineer or landscape architect licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Appropriate sections from the Wilkins Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site
plans. These include, but are not limited to, the requirements relating to mapping and
plan preparation and submittal.
The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in meeting the
requirements of this section. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this subsection,
when a SWM site plan is found to be deficient, the Township may either disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
Township may accept submission of modifications.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 288/483
(c)
(d)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[18]
[2]
[a]
[b]
[3]
(e)
Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements must be made for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to
implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan discussed in Subsection D(1)(e)
[9] below. All such easements and access points shall be clearly delineated in the SWM
site plan.
The following signature block shall be included in the SWM site plan:
"The Wilkins Township municipal engineer, on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of Municipal Ordinance No. 1029."
The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
A grading plan, indicating all areas of earth disturbance for the proposed activity.
A listing of all permits and other authorizations that will be required for the
project, including the status of permit applications and approvals.
A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual, (Reference
1[18]). A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of
carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas,
such as brownfields.
Hydrologic (watershed) and water feature boundaries, including all areas flowing
to the proposed project, existing streams, springs, lakes, ponds, or other bodies
of water within the project area.
Existing and proposed topographical information with contours and elevations.
Locations of existing standing water, seepage, wetlands, and hydrologically
sensitive areas.
One-hundred-year flood elevations for any floodplains on or within 100 feet of
the property.
Existing and proposed ground cover and land use. The total area of and percent
impervious cover shall be noted.
Wetlands delineation report, if required.
Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this
section, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable
measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this section, including the
recommendations and general requirements in Subsection C(1).
Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the time of
concentration for the pre-developed and post-developed conditions.
The design professional's selection of a specific runoff calculation method shall
be based on the suitability of the method for the given project site conditions
with due consideration to the limitations of the method chosen. The municipal
engineer reserves the right to stipulate the runoff calculation method for any
project site.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 289/483
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[g]
[h]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[A]
[B]
[i]
[a]
[7]
A plan of the proposed stormwater drainage system, stormwater management
practices to be applied both during and after construction, and the expected project
time schedule.
Where practicable, storm sewers shall be designed to traverse under seeded
and planted areas. If constructed within 10 feet of roads, sidewalks, or other
paved surfaces, storm sewers shall be installed within the narrowest trench
possible and backfilled with select material to prevent surface settlement.
Storm sewers shall be designed with a concrete cradle when traversing fill areas
of questionable stability.
Storm sewers shall be designed with pipe anchors when the pipe slope exceeds
20%.
The minimum storm sewer size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
Pipe material, trenching, bedding, and backfilling requirements shall conform to
the requirements of the municipal engineer and/or applicable sections of
PennDOT Publication 48.
Storm sewers shall be either reinforced concrete or high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) pipe, subject to cover requirements and the approval of the municipal
engineer.
Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel or close to the
top or bottom of an embankment to avoid the possibility of failure of the facility
or the embankment.
All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey the twenty-fiveyear
frequency storm peak flow rate and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet.
The conveyance capacities of any downstream facilities to which this flow is
tributary must be verified.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and
submitted to the Allegheny County Conservation District.
The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows)
on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater
conveyance system that may be affected by the project.
Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes,
open channels, and swales.
For any sites with existing stormwater management facilities or BMPs, the
nature and condition of such facilities must be discussed in the SWM site plan
narrative. If the existing facilities are proposed to remain intact and function as
all or part of the facilities required for the project, the following information must
be included in the SWM site plan:
Inspections and/or certifications that the existing facilities are sized and
capable of operating as required, including:
Surveys of all pertinent elevations associated with the facility, including
but not limited to inverts or channel bottoms, outlet controls,
embankments, and receiving streams or structures;
Internal conditions of all underground pipes and structures, including
the use of photographs or video for documentation;
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 290/483
[C]
[D]
[ii]
[iii]
[i]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[vi]
[vii]
[viii]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[g]
[h]
[i]
Design calculations from the facilities' original construction, if available;
Operation and maintenance records, if available.
Plans and descriptions of any alterations proposed for the facilities.
Runoff and design calculations.
If proposing infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall consider the following:
Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
Slope and depth to bedrock.
Seasonal high water table.
Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
Erodibility of soils.
Land availability and topography.
Slope stability.
Effects on nearby properties and structures.
A detailed soils evaluation of the project site must be performed to determine
the suitability of infiltration BMPs. The evaluation shall be performed by a
qualified professional.
If proposing underground detention facilities, the design must incorporate
appropriate access features and means to inspect, maintain, and ensure the
proper operation of the facilities and their ability to control discharge rates to the
levels mandated in the SWM site plan.
The design of BMPs incorporating embankments must be completed and sealed
by a professional engineer with relevant experience licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Detention facilities and impoundments must provide a total storage volume
allowance equal to 110% of the maximum required one-hundred-year storm
storage volume to allow for the accumulation of sediment. Appropriate means of
access and the ability to maintain the BMP shall be incorporated into the design.
Detention facilities must include an emergency spillway or outlet configuration
sized and located to permit the safe passage of stormwater flows from the
unattenuated one-hundred-year post-development storm with one foot of
freeboard, and assuming that all other facility outlets are clogged or otherwise
out of service.
All ground surface, open detention facilities, BMPs or other facilities where
water depths could exceed 24 inches must incorporate fencing in accordance
with § 152-5 of the Township Code.
Water quality inlets shall be utilized in parking areas and/or loading areas that
discharge to stormwater management systems. At least one water quality inlet
shall be installed on any project proposing storm inlets, with no less than one
installed for each acre of drainage area. The purpose of such inlets is to remove
oil, grease, heavy particulates, total suspended solids, hydrocarbons, and other
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 291/483
[8]
[9]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
floating substances from stormwater runoff. Methods other than water quality
inlets may be permitted if the applicant demonstrates to the Township's
satisfaction that any such alternative will be as effective and as easily
maintained. Periodic cleaning of these systems shall be addressed in the
operation and maintenance plan for the facility.
The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and proposed physical
stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and
responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
Plan submission.
The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the SWM site plan as follows:
Nine copies to the Township of Wilkins.
One copy to the Wilkins Township municipal engineer.
One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District.
One copy to the Allegheny County Economic Development Department.
Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township or DEP.
Plan review.
SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Township for consistency with the provisions of
this section.
The Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 45 days whether the SWM site
plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision and land
development plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Township.
If the Township disapproves the SWM site plan, the Township will state the reasons for
the disapproval in writing. The Township also may approve the SWM site plan with
conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
Modification of plans. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that
is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan as
determined by the Township shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in
accordance with this subsection.
Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans. A disapproved SWM site plan may be
resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Township's concerns, to the Township in
accordance with this subsection. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
Authorization to construct and term of validity. The Township's approval of a SWM site plan
authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of
validity of five years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a term of
validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity
shall commence on the date the Township signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If an
approved SWM site plan is not completed according to Subsection D(7) within the term of
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 292/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[19]
(a)
(2)
E.
validity, then the Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any
and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be
resubmitted in accordance with Subsection D(5) of this section.
As-built plans, completion certificate, and final inspection.
The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all SWM BMPs included
in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Township.
The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications.
After receipt of the completion certification by the Township, the Township may conduct a
final inspection.
Operation and maintenance.
Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan. The Township may require a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan.
Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The
Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility
for any portion of the stormwater management controls.
Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or conservation easements that run with the land.
The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy
the provisions of this subsection.
Operation and maintenance agreements.
Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall sign and record an
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (See Appendix A.),[19] covering all
stormwater control facilities which are to be privately owned.
The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule in the O&M plan.
The owner shall convey to the Township conservation easements to assure access
for periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance, as necessary.
The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address, and telephone
number of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the
event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Township
within 10 working days of the change.
Editor's Note: A copy of the Operation and Maintenance Agreement is included at the
end of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 293/483
(b)
[20]
(3)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
G.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the
owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the Township may perform the services
required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien
against the property.
Performance guarantee. For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development,
the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM
site plan and this section in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510 and 511 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.[20]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511, respectively.
Fees and expenses.
General.
Fees may be established from time to time by the Township in accordance with
applicable laws to defray plan review and construction inspection costs incurred by the
Township. All fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of submission of the SWM
site plan.
Any fees established pursuant to this section may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, any of the following:
Administrative costs.
Review of the SWM site plan by the Township and the municipal engineer.
Site inspections.
Inspection of stormwater management facilities and stormwater management
improvements during construction.
Final inspections.
Any additional work required to enforce provisions of this section, correct violations,
and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
Should the Township's actual costs exceed the fees submitted by the applicant, the
Township may invoice the applicant for the difference. Such payment will be submitted by
the applicant to the Township within 30 days of invoice receipt.
Prohibitions.
Prohibited discharges and connections.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the Township's storm drainage system or the waters of this commonwealth is
prohibited.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Township's storm drainage
system, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are not composed
entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection G(1)(c) below and discharges
allowed under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant
contributors of pollution to the Township's storm drainage system or to the waters of this
commonwealth:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 294/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
(d)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
H.
Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
Irrigation drainage.
Air-conditioning condensate.
Springs.
Water from crawl space pumps.
Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have
not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are
not used.
Diverted stream flows.
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
Lawn watering.
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
Uncontaminated groundwater.
Water from individual residential car washing.
Routine external building wash down (which does not use detergents or other
compounds).
In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection G(1)(c) significantly contribute pollutants to the Township's storm drainage
system or to the waters of this commonwealth, the Township or DEP will notify the
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
Roof drains and sump pumps. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs.
Alteration of SWM BMPs. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM
BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the Township.
Enforcement and penalties.
Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at reasonable
times upon any property within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this section.
Inspection. SWM BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of
minimum frequencies:
Annually for the first five years.
Once every three years thereafter.
During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year-or-greater storm.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 295/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(6)
Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in
an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically exempted in Subsection C(2).
It shall be unlawful to violate Subsection G(3) of this section.
Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a responsibility of the
landowner. Written documentation of all inspections, including any necessary corrective
actions, will be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the inspection.
Suspension and revocation.
Any approval or permit issued by the Township pursuant to this section may be
suspended or revoked for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM site
plan or O&M agreement.
A violation of any provision of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance,
rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated
activity which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the
life or property of others.
A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that
caused the suspension.
The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant
may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this section.
If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole
discretion, the Township may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the
violation. In these cases, the Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee,
with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct
the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the
Township may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining
to any provision of this section.
Penalties.
Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a summary offense, and
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $ 1,000 for each violation,
recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense
and penalties shall be cumulative.
In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this
section. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining
orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
Appeals.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 296/483
(a)
(b)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
(1)
G.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee, relevant to the
provisions of this section, may appeal to the Township within 30 days of that action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the provisions of this
section, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the
activity has taken place within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 148-25. Lot grading for subdivisions and land developments.
Blocks and lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from buildings and to prevent the
collection of stormwater in pools. A minimum of two-percent slopes away from structures shall be
required.
Lot grading shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm
drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to deliver surface waters away
from buildings, their grade shall not be less than 1% nor more than 4%. The swales shall be
sodded, planted or lined as required. A grading and draining plan shall be required for all
subdivisions and land developments, except minor subdivisions.
No final grading shall be permitted with a cut face steeper in slope than two horizontal to one
vertical except under one or more of the following conditions:
The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable to sustain a slope of
steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion control, to that effect is
submitted to the Township Engineer and approved by him/her. The statement shall state that
the site has been inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified hereinbefore will
not result in injury to persons or damage to property.
A concrete or stone masonry wall, constructed according to sound engineering standards for
which plans are submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval, is provided.
No final grading shall be permitted which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two
horizontal to one vertical except under one or more of the following conditions:
The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not result in property damage or be
hazardous to adjoining property, streets, alleys or buildings.
A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
experienced in erosion control, certifying that he/she has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not endanger any property or result in
property damage, is submitted to and approved by the Township Engineer.
A wall is constructed to support the face of the fill.
The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of three feet from property or right-of-way
lines of street or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on
the abutting property. All property lines where walls or slopes are steeper than one horizontal to
one vertical and five feet or more in height shall be protected by a protective fence no less than
three feet in height approved by the Township Engineer.
All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances whatsoever.
The following regulations shall apply to all grading:
Definitions.[1] As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 297/483
[1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
A.
AVERAGE PERCENT SLOPE
The average slope of the area of environmental disturbance determined by dividing the
difference in elevation at the limits of the environmental disturbance by the horizontal
distance between the limits of the environmental disturbance as determined by an actual
field topographical survey of the elevations within the areas of environmental
disturbance.
STEEP SLOPE
Areas where the slope is from 15% to 25% between adjacent contour lines [i.e., where
the scaled horizontal distance between the five-foot contour lines is between 20 feet and
33 1/3 feet or between adjacent contour lines having an interval of five feet or less as
shown on detailed site plans prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor based on
actual field topographical surveys.
VERY STEEP SLOPES
Areas where the slope exceeds 25% between adjacent contour lines (i.e., where the
scaled horizontal distance between the five-foot contour lines is less than 20 feet) or
between adjacent contour lines having an interval of five feet or less as shown on
detailed site plans prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor based on actual field
topographical surveys.
Editor's Note: See also § 148-10, Definitions.
Steep slopes and very steep slopes shall be protected as follows:
Very steep slopes. No environmental disturbance of any kind shall be permitted on these
areas.
For steep slopes where any portion of the steep slope contains soils identified by any
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America as having
a high landslide-prone risk, no environmental disturbance of any kind shall be permitted
in the steep slope areas containing the high-risk landslide-prone soils.
For steep slopes where any portion of the steep slope contains soils identified by any
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America as having
a moderate landslide-prone risk, disturbances not exceeding 25% of the steep slope
areas containing the moderate-risk landslide-prone soils may be permitted, provided that
the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer that such
disturbances will not adversely impact the stability of the soils.
For steep slopes not involving any areas identified as having landslide-prone soils, no
more than 25% of the steep slope area may be environmentally disturbed.
In instances where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer
that no adverse environmental impacts will occur, the determination of the percent slope
may be calculated using the average percent slope.
Landslide-prone soils shall be further protected and excavations, cuts and fills shall be
regulated as provided in Chapter 94, Grading.
§ 148-26. Blocks and lots.
The length, width, shape and design of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the provision
of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed, to the land use and/or zoning requirements of
the Township, the topography of the land being subdivided and the requirements for safe and
convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 298/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
B.
A.
B.
Unless the topography of the land being subdivided or the existing pattern of development in the
immediately adjacent area shall be otherwise than herein required, the following minimum
standards for the design and size of blocks and lots shall prevail:
Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length nor be less than 500 feet in length.
Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots,
except where reverse frontage lots bordering an arterial or collector street are used or where,
due to the contour of the land or the necessary layout of the subdivision, there is insufficient
depth between intersecting streets for such two-tier design.
Crosswalks or interior pedestrian walks shall be required in blocks exceeding 1,000 feet in
length to provide for pedestrian circulation or access to community facilities. Such walks shall
be paved for width of not less than four feet, shall be located in easements not less than 10
feet in width and shall, insofar as possible, be located in the center of any such block.
Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in
this section if the nature of the use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking
for employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access
to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be provided with limited access to
the street system. Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way and utilities shall be
provided as necessary.
Lot lines intersecting street lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
Lots shall, in general, front on a street which has already been dedicated to the Township or
which the subdivider or developer proposes to dedicate to the Township in connection with
approval of the final plan. In commercial or industrial subdivisions or land developments
where access is proposed to be provided by private streets within the subdivision or land
development, this requirement may be waived by the Board of Commissioners.
The Township shall assign house numbers to each lot within a subdivision.
Minimum lot sizes shall be in accordance with Chapter 173, Zoning.
Remnants of land smaller than required for a lot shall not be permitted within any subdivision.
Such remnants shall be incorporated in existing or proposed lots or dedicated to public use if
acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
Double frontage lots are prohibited except in accordance with Subsection B(2) above.
No residential lots shall be created which front upon an arterial or collector street as defined in
§ 148-22A herein.
§ 148-27. Development on private streets discouraged.
It is the policy of this Township that all subdivided lands shall have immediate access to a public
street. Because of unique property configuration and location, this Township recognizes the need
for limited exceptions to the foregoing general policy.
No subdivision will be approved on a private street or road if more than two lots already front on
such street or road or if after subdivision more than two lots will front on such private street or
road.
§ 148-28. Open space, lot siting, planting and beautifica-tion for
subdivision and land developments.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 299/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
In order to promote the highest environmental quality possible, the degree to which the applicant
of a subdivision or land development plan has preserved existing salient natural features and land
forms intrinsic to the site shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a plat may be subject to the
manner in which the layout or design of the plan has preserved existing natural features, such as
but not limited to trees, wooded areas and watercourses.
Open space. Where the applicant is offering for dedication or is required by ordinance to establish
a reservation of open space or preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a limit of work
which will confine excavation, earth moving procedures and other changes to the landscape may
be required to ensure preservation and prevent despoliation of the character of the area in open
space.
Tree preservation. Whenever possible, trees shall not be removed unless they are located within
the proposed street right-of-way, within the proposed building area or within utility locations and
equipment access areas. In areas where trees are retained, the original grade level shall be
maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the trees.
Topsoil preservation. All of the topsoil from areas where cuts and fills have been made should be
stockpiled and redistributed uniformly after grading. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting on slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes 10%
or more and planted in ground cover on slopes 20% or greater.
Landscaping. For all multifamily, apartment, office, commercial and industrial subdivisions or land
developments, a landscaping plan shall be provided and shall include sufficient plantings for the
required open space, planting strips, screenings, formal gardens, shade trees and natural barriers.
Buffer planting requirements. Buffer yard requirements should be as specified in Chapter 173,
Zoning.
Preserved landscaping. When there is a conscientious effort to preserve the existing natural
integrity and character of a site and where such preservation effectuates areas of woodland and
trees comparable to required planting improvements, i.e., landscaping and buffer screening, the
plan may be received in lieu of additional landscaping requirements.
Trees. The planting of trees within the street right-of-way line shall not be permitted. The planting
of any trees within the private property of each residential lot shall be at the discretion of the
property owner or developer.
Watercourse protection. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a natural
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage. Such easement shall be in addition to the open space required in Subsection B.
§ 148-29. Contribution for recreation purposes.
It is the policy of this Township to provide recreational facilities for all the residents of the Township
pursuant to the Township Recreation Plan. Centralized facilities are preferred over local
neighborhood facilities. New and additional facilities are required in direct proportion to increase in
population. Developers causing increases in population by new residences must share in the cost
of additional recreational facilities.
In accordance with 53 P.S. § 10503(11) of the Municipalities Planning Code, each developer of a
subdivision or development which includes residential dwelling units shall, as a condition
precedent to final plan approval, pay to the Township, in lieu of dedication of land suitable for park
and recreation purposes, the sum of $500 per dwelling unit.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 300/483
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
The fees shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities accessible to
the development.
The fee authorized under this subsection shall, upon its receipt by the Township, be deposited in
an interest-bearing account clearly identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the fee
was received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of that account. Funds from
such accounts shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost incurred to
construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds were collected.
Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection, the Township shall refund
such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the Township had failed
to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this section within three years from the date
such fee was paid.
§ 148-30. Erosion and sediment control.
General purpose.
The Board of Commissioners finds that the minimization of erosion and control of
sedimentation in connection with land development and subdivision are in the public interest,
affecting public health, safety and welfare, and therefore those regulations governing erosion
control and sedimentation control are necessary for the Township.
No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, and no grading, excavating, removal or
destruction to the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until
such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed with and
reviewed by the Township Engineer and/or County Soil and Water Conservation District or
there has been a determination by the above entities that such plans are not necessary.
No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless there has been an erosion
and sedimentation control plan approved by the Board of Commissioners that provides for
minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent with this section, and an improvement bond
or other acceptable securities are deposited with the Township in the form of an escrow
guaranty which will ensure installation and completion of the required improvement or there
has been a determination by the Board of Commissioners that a plan for minimizing erosion
and sedimentation is not necessary.
Where not specified in this chapter, measures used to control erosion and reduce
sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the County Soil
and Water Conservation District. The Township Engineer or other officials as designated shall
ensure compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are available from the
Soil and Water Conservation District.
Performance principles. The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion and
sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the control plan:
Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in such a way that will
prevent all but minor erosion.
Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-fill operations to a
minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion potential
and adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 301/483
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
development.
The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and drainage measures shall be
installed as soon as practical in the development.
Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Where necessary, the rate
of surface water runoff will be structurally retarded.
Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use
of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures.
Grading for erosion and other environmental controls. In order to provide suitable sites for building
and other uses, improve surface drainage and control erosion, the following requirements shall be
met:
Streets shall be improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition as one
of the first items of work done on a subdivision or development. The wearing surface shall be
installed in accordance with § 148-22G and as approved in the final plan.
Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of excavations
or the sloping surfaces of fills by installation of temporary or permanent drainage across or
above these areas.
Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or erosion of the soil.
Fills placed adjacent to watercourses shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control will be exercised.
Grading equipment will not be allowed to enter into flowing streams. Provisions will be made
for the installation of temporary or permanent culverts or bridges.
Responsibility.
Whenever sedimentation damage is caused by stripping vegetation, grading or other
development, it shall be the collective responsibility of the land developer and subdivider and
of the contractor, person, corporation and other entity causing such sedimentation to remove
it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage
at their expense as quickly as possible.
Maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities during the construction and
development period is the responsibility of the land developer or subdivider.
It is the responsibility of any developer or subdivider and any person, corporation or other
entity doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the
floodplain or right-of-way during the pendency of the activity to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
The subdivider or land developer shall provide and install, at his expense, in accordance with
Township requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements (temporary and
permanent) shown on the erosion and sediment control plan.
Compliance with regulations and procedures.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 302/483
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(2)
D.
The Board of Commissioners, in its consideration of all preliminary plans of subdivision and
land development, shall condition its approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment
control measures as contained in Subsections B and C hereof.
The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment control measures shall be in
accordance with standards and specifications of the County Soil and Conservation District.
Stream channel construction. Stream channel construction on watersheds with drainage areas in
excess of 1/2 square mile or in those cases where downstream hazards exist will conform to
criteria established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
§ 148-31. Floodplain area regulations.
Purpose. The specific purposes of these special provisions are:
To regulate the subdivision or development of land within any designated floodplain area in
order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be provided with a safe building site
with adequate access, and that public facilities which serve such uses be designed and
installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction.
To prevent individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use because of flooding by
prohibiting the improper subdivision or development of unprotected lands within the
designated flood plain districts.
Abrogation and greater restrictions. To the extent that this section imposes greater requirements
or more complete disclosure than any other provisions of this chapter, in any respect, or to the
extent that the provisions of this section are more restrictive than such other provisions, it shall
control such other provisions of this chapter.
Disclaimer of municipal liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed
subdivision or land development to be located within any designated floodplain area shall not
constitute a representation, guaranty, or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or
employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability
upon the Township, its officials, employees or agents.
Application procedures and requirements.
Preapplication procedures.
Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that prospective developers consult
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources concerning soil suitability
when on-site sewage disposal facilities are proposed.
Prospective developers shall consult the County Conservation District representative
concerning erosion and sediment control and the effect of geologic conditions on the
proposed development. At the same time, a determination should be made as to whether
or not any flood hazards either exist or will be created as a result of the subdivision or
development.
Preliminary plan requirements. The following information shall be required as part of the
preliminary plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:
The name of the engineer, surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing
the information required in this section.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 303/483
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
E.
A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land development with
respect to any designated floodplain area, including information on but not limited to the
one-hundred-year flood elevations, boundaries of the floodplain area or areas, proposed
lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and areas subject to special deed
restrictions.
Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or completely within any
designated floodplain area or where the subdivision or land development borders on a
floodplain area, the preliminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the
location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and building sites. All such maps
shall also show contours at intervals of five feet and shall identify accurately the
boundaries of the floodplain areas.
Such other information as is required by this chapter.
Final plan requirements. The following information shall be required as part of the final plan
and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:
All information required for the submission of the preliminary plan incorporating any
changes requested by the Board of Commissioners.
A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures,
roads and public utilities to be constructed within any designated floodplain area. All such
maps shall show contours at intervals of five feet within the floodplain area and shall
identify accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all required permits and
related documentation from the Department of Environmental Resources and any other
commonwealth agency or local municipality where any alteration or relocation of a
stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition, documentation shall be submitted
indicating that all affected adjacent municipalities have been notified in advance of the
proposed alteration or relocation. The Department of Community Affairs and the Federal
Insurance Administration shall also be notified in advance of any such proposed activity,
and proof of such notification shall be submitted in advance of the Planning Commission
meeting at which such plan is to be considered.
Design standards and improvements in designated floodplain areas.
General.
Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in any
designated floodplain area may be platted for development with the provision that the
developer construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such development.
No subdivision or land development or part thereof shall be approved if the proposed
development or improvements will individually or collectively increase the one-hundredyear
flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or accommodation shall not be
permitted in any floodway area. Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the
floodway area in a floodplain area if the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to
the regulatory flood elevation. If fill is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area
shall extend laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
structures and access shall meet the requirements of Subsection E(3) hereinbelow.
Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses shall not be
permitted in any floodway area. Sites for such structures or building outside the floodway
in a floodplain area shall be protected as provided for in Subsection E(1)(c) above.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 304/483
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
However, the Board of Commissioners may allow the subdivision or development of
areas or sites for commercial and industrial uses at an elevation below the regulatory
flood elevation if the developer otherwise protects the area to that height or assures that
the buildings or structures will be floodproofed to the regulatory flood elevation.
If the Board of Commissioners determines that only a part of a proposed plat can be
safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall require that
development proceed consistent with this determination.
When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the Board of
Commissioners determines that additional controls are required to ensure safe
development, they may require the developer to improve appropriate deed restrictions on
the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every
recorded plat.
Drainage facilities.
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without
damage to persons or property. The system shall ensure drainage at all points along
streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal
sites.
Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners may require a primary underground system to accommodate frequent
floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less-frequent floods.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with local, county and regional drainage plans. The
facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
Streets and driveways. The finished elevation of proposed streets and driveways shall not be
more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. Profiles and elevations of streets and
driveways to determine compliance with this requirement and as required by other provisions
of this chapter shall be submitted with the final plan. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
Sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any designated floodplain area,
whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
Water facilities. All water systems located in any designated floodplain area, whether public or
private, shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
Other utilities and facilities. All other public or private utilities and facilities, including gas and
electric, shall be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
Article VI. Required Improvements
§ 148-32. General requirements.
The following improvements shall be installed by the subdivider. The final plan shall not be approved
until final detailed design of the improvements is approved and the improvements are installed or
security to the Board of Commissioners is provided.
§ 148-33. Streets.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 305/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Streets shall be brought to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans, profiles and cross sections
submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Township Engineer. The subdivider must install the
required utilities and provide, where necessary, adequate subsurface drainage for the streets. The
streets shall be designed and constructed to the standards set forth in §§ 148-21 and 148-22 of this
chapter.
§ 148-34. Curbs and sidewalks.
Curbs and sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in § 148-23 of this
chapter.
§ 148-35. Sewers.
Public sewer systems. When the subdivision or land development is to be provided with a
complete sanitary sewer system connected to a public sanitary sewer system, a statement of
approval from the engineer of the sewerage system to which it will be connected shall be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners. Where required, DER planning module approval shall
also be obtained for final plan approval.
Private sewer systems. When a complete private sanitary sewer system using a treatment plant is
to be provided, a statement shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources certifying that a permit has been issued by
the appropriate agency approving the proposed facilities. Adequate security for the maintenance
of such plant shall be furnished to the Township.
On-lot sewage disposal. In subdivisions where public sewers are not available and a complete
private sanitary sewer system is not required, on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be provided.
Capped sewer system. Where the sanitary sewer system is not yet accessible but is planned for
extension to the subdivision or development, the subdivider shall install sewer lines, including
lateral connections, in order to provide service to each lot. The sewer mains shall be suitably
capped at the limits of the subdivision, and laterals shall be capped at the street right-of-way line
when not extended to houses or other structures. When laterals are extended to houses or other
structures, the internal plumbing system shall be constructed to accommodate them as well as
any septic system required. At such time as any planned construction of extensions to the existing
sanitary sewer system is under contract, the subdivider may reduce the size of any required septic
system drain fields or septic tank by 50%.
§ 148-36. Water.
Provision of system. The subdivision or land development shall be provided with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to a municipal water supply or with a community
water supply approved by the engineer of the applicable water utility company and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources with satisfactory provision for the
maintenance thereof.
Plans. The plans for the installation of the mains of a water supply system shall be prepared for
the subdivision or land development with the cooperation of the applicable water supply agency
and approved by its engineer. A statement of approval from the engineer of the water supply
system agency to which the subdivision or land development will be connected shall be submitted
to the Board of Commissioners. Upon the completion of the water supply system, one copy of
each of the plans for such system shall be filed with the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 306/483
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided as an integral part of any public water supply
system. The Township Fire Marshal shall be consulted to determine the location of proposed fire
hydrants.
The developer shall test the water distribution system which the developer intends to utilize to
ascertain that the water pressures comply with the Township fire and building codes. The
developer shall give notice to the Fire Marshal of the time and place of the test and provide a copy
of test results. Plan approval is conditioned on proof of water pressures which comply with the fire
code and building code standards.
§ 148-37. Storm drainage.
A storm drainage system shall be provided in accordance with the standards as set forth in § 148-24 of
this chapter.
§ 148-38. Utilities.
Easements for utilities shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
To the fullest extent possible, easements for public utilities shall be centered on or adjacent to rear
or side lot lines.
Telephone, electric, television cable and such other utilities shall be installed underground and
shall be provided within the street right-of-way or easements to be dedicated for such utilities and
in accordance with plans approved by the Township and the applicable utility company.
Underground installation of the utility distribution and service lines shall be completed prior to
street paving and gutter, curbing and sidewalk installation.
§ 148-39. Monuments and markers.
Monuments shall be of concrete or stone at least six by six by thirty (6 x 6 x 30) inches and
marked on top with a copper or brass dowel. They shall be set at the intersection of lines forming
angles in the boundaries of the subdivision and at the intersection of street lines. Markers shall be
iron pipes or brass 30 inches by three-fourths (3/4) inch diameter and set at all points where lines
or lines and curves intersect.
Monument replacement. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be replaced by a
registered land surveyor at the expense of the person responsible for the removal.
§ 148-40. Other improvements.
Shade trees shall be provided as specified in § 148-28E of this chapter.
Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall be provided and installed by the
subdivider or developer at all street intersections.
Open space shall be provided as specified in § 148-28B of this chapter.
Other improvements to promote public safety and health shall be made as required by the
Township as a condition of approval.
§ 148-41. Time limits.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 307/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
All improvements shall be installed according to a time schedule which shall be approved by the
Township.
§ 148-42. Inspection.
At the time each improvement is to be installed and upon its completion, the subdivider shall notify the
Township so that adequate inspections can be made. The inspections will be made by the Township
Engineer. All costs of undertaking the inspections will be borne by the subdivider.
§ 148-43. Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof
prerequisite to final plat approval.
No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat have been improved to a
mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved as may be otherwise required
by this chapter, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as may be required by this chapter
have been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees otherwise
required by chapter, the developer may deposit with the Township financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements
or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
When requested by the developer in order to facilitate financing, the Township shall furnish the
developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon
the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or record plan shall not be
signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent agreement shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security
agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted by the Township;
such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed, in writing, at the request of
the developer.
Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the Township may approve, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.
Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal- or commonwealthchartered
lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided that said
bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public the completion of any
improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval
or accompanying the agreement for completion of the improvements.
The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required improvements
shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed
and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of
completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional
security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 308/483
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
completion of the required improvements submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by
a professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such engineer to
be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the
final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.
If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date of posting of
the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the
required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one year
period by using the above procedure.
In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Board of Commissioners
may authorize submission of final plats by sections or stages of development subject to such
requirements or guaranties as to improvement in future sections or stages of development as it
finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the development.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Township to release or authorize the release from time to time of such
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing
the work. Any such requests shall be in writing, addressed to the Board of Commissioners, and
the Township shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Commissioners that such portion of the work upon
the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such
certification, the Board of Commissioners shall authorize release by the bonding company or
lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the
value of the improvements completed or, if the Board of Commissioners fails to act within said
forty-five-day period, the Board of Commissioners shall be deemed to have approved the release
of funds as requested. The Board of Commissioners may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the
aforesaid improvements.
Where the Board of Commissioners accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Board of Commissioners may require the posting of
financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of
said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plat
for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of
such improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual
cost of installation of said improvements.
If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto,
are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility
or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the
controlling public utility or municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition
the issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement of
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 309/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
G.
improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon
actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said
financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing access to and from public
roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, as
well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the approved plat, either upon
the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
§ 148-44. Release from improvement bond.
When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
developer shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of
the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of
Commissioners shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall
thereupon file a report, in writing, with the Board of Commissioners and shall promptly mail a copy
of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed
within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the
Board of Commissioners; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of
said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof shall
not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
The Board of Commissioners shall notify the developer within 15 days of receipt of the Engineer's
report, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of said Township with relation thereto.
If the Board of Commissioners or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation
provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and the
developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
If any portion of the said improvement shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Board of
Commissioners, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed. Such completion shall
satisfactorily meet the Township's statement of reasons for nonapproval or rejection.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or
question by legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of the Board of Commissioners or
the Township Engineer.
Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer, he/she shall be as a consultant
thereto.
The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and necessary
expense incurred for the inspection of improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the Township and as from time to time amended.[1] Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township
Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with
the inspection or improvements, the applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of
billing, notify the Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary,
in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 310/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
application or any approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's request
over disputed Engineer expenses.
If within 20 days from the date of billing the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the
Township shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed
as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a
determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such
documentation as the professional engineer in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and
render a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the
entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the professional engineer to
be appointed within 20 days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party, the
Court of Common Pleas shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Township Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or performed
services for the Township or the applicant within the preceding five years.
The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the reasonable and necessary
expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is
equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in the decision is
less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the professional
engineer, but otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay one-half (1/2) of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 148-45. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this
chapter or in accord with the approved final plat, the Board of Commissioners is hereby granted the
power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If
the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of Commissioners
may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete
the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation
of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other Township purpose.
Article VII. Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Homes
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1046]
§ 148-46. Scope.
This article shall regulate the establishment, enlargement and operation of mobile home parks in the
Township of Wilkins. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or enlarge a mobile home park
without a permit or shall maintain a mobile home park without a license issued in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
§ 148-47. General provisions.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 311/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
No mobile home shall be moved into a duly licensed mobile home park unless:
It complies with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
"Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards" and has been approved by the
appropriate Commonwealth of Pennsylvania inspection agency; and
The owner holds a valid permit issued by the Allegheny County Health Department in the
name of such person for the specific construction, alteration, or extension proposed; and
The owner holds a valid mobile home permit issued by Wilkins Township hereunder.
Mobile home parks shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 173, Zoning.
Where determined necessary by the Township Engineer, compliance with Article V and VI of this
Chapter shall be required prior to approval of a mobile home park.
§ 148-48. Permits and licenses.
See Chapter 124, Article IV.
§ 148-49. Procedure for submission and approval of plans.
The procedure for the submission and approval of plans for a mobile home park shall follow the
procedures set forth this chapter.
§ 148-50. Site drainage requirements.
The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface
water in a safe, efficient manner.
Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes and
other insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Allegheny County
Health Department. The preservation of wetlands is exempt from this subsection.
Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall not be deposited upon the
ground surface in any part of a mobile home park.
§ 148-51. Soil and ground cover requirements.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a lawn or other desirable vegetative growth
that is capable of preventing soil erosion and emanation of dust during dry weather.
Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which is poisonous or which may
harbor rodents, insects or other pests harmful to man.
§ 148-52. Streets.
Minimum right-of-way widths, paving widths, angle of intersection, curb radius, distances along
sides of sight triangles, horizontal alignments and vertical alignments as well as maximum grades
shall be in accordance with this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 312/483
A.
B.
A.
A.
§ 148-53. Water supply.
An adequate supply of water shall be provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other
accessory facilities as required by this article. Where a public water supply system of satisfactory
quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made hereto and its supply shall be
used exclusively. Where a satisfactory public water supply system is not available, the development of
a private water supply system shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and any other authority having jurisdiction.
§ 148-54. Sewerage system.
An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all parks for conveying and disposing
of sewage from mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities. Such system shall
be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the Allegheny
County Health Department and of local regulations established by Wilkins Township. All sewage
shall be connected to trunk lines draining into sewers operated by the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority.
Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed
sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the Allegheny County Health Department prior to
construction. However, said proposed sewage disposal facilities shall not be of the septic-tank and
tile-field disposal type without the written approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall not approve underground-type disposal until after having the mobile home
parks' engineer submit reports on said system.
§ 148-55. Community service facility.
No central toilet or washroom facilities shall be constructed in any mobile home park, and each
mobile home therein shall be equipped with toilet and washroom facilities which shall be attached
to central sewage and water facilities.
§ 148-56. Electrical system.
Every mobile home park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures,
equipment and appurtenances and shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a local electric
power company's specifications regulating such systems.
§ 148-57. Refuse requirements.
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall not be so conducted as to
create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution
and shall comply with Chapter 135 and the Allegheny County Health Department's regulations
governing mobile home parks.
§ 148-58. Fuel supply and storage.
Fuel supply and storage systems, when installed in mobile home parks shall be maintained in
conformity with accepted engineering practices.
§ 148-59. Recreation facilities.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 313/483
A.
Not less than 15% of the gross area of the park must be improved for recreational activity of the
residents of the mobile home park. The common open space shall be so dedicated or otherwise
preserved and maintained so as to always remain open and available for use by the occupants of the
development area. The land and facilities to be used for common open space may be acceptable if the
following condition is met:
The land and facilities be deeded to an organization representing the property owners of the
development. The organization shall covenant to operate and maintain the land and facilities for
their originally intended use, and should the organization at any point in the future be dissolved,
the land and facilities will be offered by dedication to the public. Should the offer be refused, the
land and facilities will be deeded or sold to another organization conceived to operate and own the
space and facilities.
§ 148-60. Common open space maintenance.
In the event that the organization established to own and maintain common open space or any
successor organization shall at any time after establishment of the mobile home park fail to maintain
the common open space in a reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved
application, Wilkins Township may take remedial actions to cause the common open space to be
properly maintained as is provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53
P.S. § 10705.
Chapter 152. Swimming Pools
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 6-11-1973 as Ord. No.
538. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 152-1. Notification required.
Any person, firm or corporation that constructs, operates or maintains a family swimming pool, pond or
open well on any property in the Township of Wilkins shall notify the Secretary of the Township of
Wilkins, in writing, of the design and material of which the same is constructed and the type and
character of safeguards permanently constructed around said swimming pool, pond or open well.
§ 152-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FAMILY POOL
A swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and
his family and by friends invited to use it without the payment of any fee.
§ 152-3. Construction permit; approval.
Before work is commenced on the construction of a family swimming pool, pond or open well or any
alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to the same, an application for a permit for the
construction of the same and the plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be
submitted to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Wilkins for his approval, and no
part of the work shall be commenced until the Ordinance Enforcement Officer has granted such
approval by a suitable endorsement upon such plans and specifications.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 314/483
A.
B.
§ 152-4. Enclosure.
Enclosure of family swimming pool, pond or open well. Every outdoor family swimming pool, pond
or open well, including those now existing or under construction, shall be surrounded completely
by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height nor more than six feet in height, which shall be
so constructed as to have no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension
except for doors and gates, and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal
dimension shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as
part of such enclosure. All gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be equipped with
a self-closing and self-latching device on the pool side for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in use, except that the door of any such dwelling which forms a part of
the enclosure need not be so equipped. The fence shall surround the pool and the deck area
exclusively. It shall be within 20 feet of the pool structure on two sides and a maximum of 25 feet
on the other two sides unless the main building provides the enclosure on that side.
When the pool, pond or well is unattended or not in use by authorized persons, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or operator to securely close and latch the gate or door or cause the
same to be done.
§ 152-5. Applicability of fencing requirement.
The fencing requirement shall be applicable to all new family swimming pools, ponds or open wells
hereinafter constructed, other than indoor pools or above-grade pools, and shall apply to all existing
pools, ponds or open wells which have a depth in excess of 24 inches of water. No person in
possession of land within the Township of Wilkins either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or
licensee upon which is situated a family swimming pool, pond or open well having a depth in excess of
24 inches of water shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or well as herein provided.
§ 152-6. Modification of fencing requirements.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins may, on application after public hearing, make
modifications in individual cases upon a showing of good cause with respect to the nature or location
of the fences, walls, gates or latches or the necessity therefor, provided that the protection as sought
hereunder is not reduced thereby.
§ 152-7. Above-grade pools.
Fencing shall not be required for above-grade pools. "Above-grade pools" are defined as pools
constructed with a wall not less than four feet in height from all surrounding grades and providing entry
only by portable ladder.
§ 152-8. Removal of ladder in above-grade pools.
When not in use by authorized persons, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of abovegrade
pools to remove or cause to be removed the portable ladder and store the same either inside the
pool or in some other structure not open to view.
§ 152-9. Electrical fixtures and wiring.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 315/483
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
All electrical fixtures, wiring and connections used in or about the pool site shall be installed in
conformance to standards of the National Electrical Code, 1970 Edition.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 152-10. Fences.
Where required by this chapter, fences shall be erected around existing pools, ponds and open wells
within 30 days of the date of the adoption of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section XI, which dealt with the period for compliance for electrical fixtures and
wiring, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 152-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, including any agent or employee of any corporation, association or
organization, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day
a violation is permitted to exist after notice, in writing, has been served by the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 156. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 5.
LERTA Eligible Area
Article I. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1019[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Earned Income Tax, adopted 5-2-1966 by Ord.
No. 386, as amended.
§ 156-1. Incorporation by reference.
Act 32 (53 P.S. § 6924.101 through 53 P.S. § 6924.901), and its definitions, duties, directives, rules,
regulations, powers and penalties, is hereby adopted by reference as if same had been set forth fully
herein.
§ 156-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases are included herein; when used in this section they shall have
the meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
DOMICILE
The place where a person lives and has a permanent home and to which the person has the
intention of returning whenever absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 316/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
A.
B.
C.
domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather
than transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until
some event occurs to induce the person to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of
a business, domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place
where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME
The compensation as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of
Revenue under Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"[1] and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in
determining earned income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The
amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as
earned income.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, other than a corporation, as required to be
reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971,"[2] and rules and
regulations promulgated under that section.
NONRESIDENT
A person or business domiciled outside the political subdivision levying the tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (TCC)
The Southeast Tax Collection Committee established to govern this tax collection district for
the purpose of income tax collection.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (TCD)
The Southeast Tax Collection District is established under Section 504 of Act 32.[3]
TAX OFFICER / TAX COLLECTOR
The agency engaged to administer and collect earned income taxes for this tax collection
district. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an employer,
the term shall mean the Tax Officer for the tax collection district within which the employer is
located or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more than one district, the tax officer for
each such district with respect to employees principally employed herein.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
In addition to the above definitions, this section incorporates by reference those words, phrases
and definitions as listed in Act 32 (53 P.S. § 6924.101 through 53 P.S. § 6924.901).
§ 156-3. Imposition of tax; rate.
Resident tax. A tax at the rate of 0.50% is hereby levied on all earned income and net profits, as
defined by Act 32, on residents of Wilkins Township.
Nonresident tax. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby levied on all earned income and net profits
earned by nonresidents for work done or services performed or rendered in Wilkins Township.
All changes shall remain in effect on a calendar year basis without annual reenactment unless the
rate of tax is subsequently changed.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 317/483
§ 156-4. Collection and administration; powers and duties of Tax
Officer.
The collection and administration of the tax provided for in this article shall be performed by the Tax
Officer appointed by the Tax Collection Committee. Said Tax Officer shall receive compensation for
services and expenses as determined by agreement between the TCC and the Tax Officer. The Tax
Officer shall have the powers as provided for by the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 156-5. Exemptions and credits.
No exemptions or credits based on age or income, or any other conditions, are granted by this article.
Nothing in this article is intended to preclude or inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act of law or
regulation.
§ 156-6. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2012. It is the intention of the governing body of the Township
of Wilkins that this article shall provide procedural modifications only to the previously adopted Earned
Income Tax Ordinance, and no gap as to imposition of the tax set forth herein should be inferred.
§ 156-7. through § 156-13. (Reserved)
Article II. Deed Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-4-1967 as Ord. No. 418]
§ 156-14. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Wilkins Township Deed Transfer Tax Ordinance."
§ 156-15. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION
Any deed, document, instrument or writing, other than a lease, agreement of sale, mortgage,
ground rent or testimentary writing, whereby the legal title to lands, tenements or hereditaments or
any real interest therein shall be granted, bargained, sold transferred, conveyed, assigned or
otherwise vested in the grantee, purchaser or any other person.
PERSON
Every natural person, partnership, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing or imposing a penalty, or both, the term "person," as applied to partnerships or
associations, shall include the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Township of Wilkins.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 318/483
[1]
TRANSACTION or TRANSFER
Any act, settlement, proceeding or process whereby the legal title to any lands, tenements or
hereditaments or other real property or any real interest therein, situate wholly or in part within the
boundaries of the Township of Wilkins, shall be deed be granted, bargained, sold, transferred,
conveyed, assigned or otherwise vested.
TRANSFER TAX COLLECTING AGENT
The person designated by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins to collect the
tax imposed by this Article.
VALUE
In the case of any transaction or transfer, "value" shall be the actual monetary worth or value of
the property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed at the time of said grant, bargain,
sale or conveyance. The actual consideration for said sale or conveyance shall be prima facie
evidence of the actual monetary worth or value of the property granted, bargained, sold or
otherwise conveyed, and said monetary value shall include all liens, mortgages or other
encumbrances on the property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed. Said actual
consideration which is prima facie evidence of the actual monetary worth or value of the property
granted, bargained, sold or conveyed shall be construed to mean, for the purpose of this Article,
the cash agreed to be paid for the execution and delivery of the deed, together with the face value
of all liens, mortgages or other encumbrances secured on the lands, tenements or hereditaments
or interest therein conveyed or transferred by said deed, together with any other evidence or
indebtedness or promises, either oral or written, give by or on behalf of the grantee or grantor or
anyone on his behalf as full or part consideration for said deed, provided, that where such deed
shall set forth a small or nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract or agreement of sale or, in the case of a
gift, from the actual monetary worth or value of the property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise
conveyed at the time of such grant, bargain, sale or conveyance, which in either event shall not be
less than the amount of the highest assessment of such lands, tenements or hereditaments for
local tax purposes.
§ 156-16. Imposition of tax.
On and after the effective date of this Article, through December 31, 1968, and for the calendar year
1969 and the following years, a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% of the total value is
hereby imposed, assessed and levied on every transaction, transfer or privilege arising therefrom,
regardless of where the instrument making the transfer is made, executed or delivered or where the
actual settlement on such transfers takes place, whereby any lands, tenements or hereditaments or
any interest therein, lying, being and situate, wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of
Wilkins, shall be granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed, provided that, in the case of any
lands, tenements or hereditaments or any interest herein located partly within and partly without the
boundaries of the Township of Wilkins, the tax herein imposed shall be due and payable at the time of
the executing, delivering or accepting of the deed, and the grantee or grantees shall be jointly and
severally liable with the grantor or grantors for the payment of said tax.
§ 156-17. Transfer Tax Collecting Agent.
The Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds or such other authority as designated by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania from time to time is hereby appointed the Transfer Tax Collecting Agent of
the Township of Wilkins and is hereby empowered and directed to collect the tax imposed by this
Article and to distribute stamps to evidence the payment of said tax. The Collecting Agent shall be
entitled to a fee as provided by applicable law.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 319/483
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 156-18. Payment of tax.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be paid to the Transfer Tax Collecting Agent at an
office from time to time established, and said payment shall be evidenced by an official stamp or
stamps affixed to every deed. Said stamp or stamps shall indicate the amount of the tax paid and the
date on which payment was made, and said stamp or stamps shall bear the initials of the person
affixing said stamps to the deed. The Transfer Tax Collecting Agent may prescribe, prepare and furnish
adhesive stamps of such denominations and quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the
tax imposed and assessed by this Article.
§ 156-19. Powers and Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this Article and is hereby
authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to:
The method and means to be used in affixing or cancelling stamps in substitution for or in addition
to the method and means provided in this Article.
The denominations and sale of stamps.
Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
Article.
§ 156-20. Affidavit of value.
Every deed upon which a tax is imposed by this Article and which does not reflect the actual value of
the land, tenements or hereditaments or interest therein granted, bargained, sold or conveyed by said
deed shall be accompanied by an affidavit executed by a responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full, complete and actual value thereof.
§ 156-21. Exempt transactions.
The tax imposed by this Article shall not apply to the following transactions and transfers:
When the transfer is by will or mortgage or the interstate laws of this commonwealth.
On a transfer by the owner of previously occupied residential premises to a builder of new
residential premises when such previously occupied residential premises is taken in trade by such
builder as part of the consideration from the purchaser of a new previously unoccupied singlefamily
residential premises.
On a transfer between corporations operating housing projects pursuant to the Housing and
Redevelopment Assistance Law[1] and the shareholders hereof.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1661 et seq.
On a transfer between nonprofit industrial development agencies and industrial corporations
purchasing from them.
On a transfer to nonprofit industrial development agencies.
On a transfer between husband and wife.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 320/483
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
On a transfer between persons who were previously husband and wife but who have since been
divorced, provided that such transfer is made within three months of the date of the granting of the
final decree in divorce and the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by
the husband and wife or husband and wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce.
On a transfer between parent and child or the spouse of such a child, or between parent and
trustee for the benefit of a child or the spouse of such child.
By and between a principal and straw party for the purpose of placing a mortgage or ground rent
upon the premises.
On a correctional deed without consideration.
On a transfer to the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to any of the
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation proceedings or
reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the
time of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided that
such reconveyance is made within one year from the date of condemnation, leases or on a
conveyance to a trustee under a recorded trust agreement for the express purpose of holding title
in trust as security for a debt contracted at the time of the conveyance under which the trustee is
not the lender and requiring the trustee to make reconveyance to the grantor/borrower upon the
repayment of the debt.
Any other transaction or transfer properly exempt from the realty transfer tax of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 156-22. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Execute, deliver, accept or record any deed or cause any deed to be executed, delivered,
accepted or recorded without the full amount of the tax thereon being duly paid.
Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a deed any official stamp, receipt or other evidence of
payment.
Fraudulently affix to any deed upon which a tax is imposed by this Article any official stamp or
other evidence of payment which has been cut, torn or removed from any other deed upon which
a tax is imposed by this Article or any official stamp of insufficient value or any forged or
counterfeit stamp or any impression of any forged or counterfeit stamp, receipt, die, plate or other
article.
Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any official stamp or restore any such official
stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after it has already been used or knowingly
buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or restored stamp to any person for use or
knowingly use the same.
Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored official stamp which has been removed
from any deed upon which a tax is imposed by this Article, provided that the possession of such
stamp shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate the provisions of this subsection.
Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession any forged or
counterfeited official stamps.
Fail to pay the tax imposed by this Article.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 321/483
H.
I.
[1]
[1]
[1]
[2]
Make use of any stamp to denote payment of any tax imposed by this Article or as prescribed by
the Secretary.
Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and regulations prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Secretary under the provisions of this Article.
§ 156-23. Interest and penalties.
[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 977]
Any tax imposed under § 156-16 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as “The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act.” The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
known as “The Fiscal Code,” or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 156-24. Collection of delinquent or redetermined realty transfer
tax.
[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 977]
The tax imposed under § 156-16 of this article and all applicable interest and penalties shall be
administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as
amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act," provided, that if the correct amount of the tax is not
paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township of Wilkins, pursuant to Section 1102-
D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
§ 156-25. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 156-25, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed 12-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 977.
§ 156-26. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 156-26, Unpaid tax to become lien, was repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 977.
§ 156-27. Audit.
The books, accounts and records of the Transfer Tax Collection Agent shall be audited, adjusted and
settled in the manner prescribed by law for the auditing, adjusting and receiving or expending funds of
the Township of Wilkins other than earned income.
Article III. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 983[2]]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Claims, Art. I, Attorney's Fees for Cost of Collection.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Emergency and Municipal Services Tax,
adopted 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 974.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 322/483
A.
B.
§ 156-28. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
DISTRICT
The area within the limits and jurisdiction of the Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity
employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commissions, or other compensation
basis, including a self-employed person.
FISCAL YEAR
The twelve-month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, who attains or is over the age of 18 years on the first day of
January, engaged in any occupation, trade, or profession within the limits of the Township of
Wilkins.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX OFFICER or OFFICER
The person, public employee, or private agency designated by the Township of Wilkins to
collect and administer the local services tax hereby imposed.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including
services, domestic or other, carried on or performed within the limits of the Township of
Wilkins, for which compensation is charged or received by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX
The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article.
"He," "his," or "him" shall mean and indicate the singular and plural number, as well as male,
female and neuter gender.
§ 156-29. Levy.
The Township of Wilkins hereby levies and imposes on each individual engaged in any occupation
within the territorial limits of the Township of Wilkins during this fiscal year and each fiscal year
thereafter, a local services tax. This tax is an addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Township of Wilkins, provided that all individuals deriving less than $12,000 per year from
all sources of income shall be exempt from the local services tax hereby levied. The local service tax in
the amount as herein levied is due in its entirety to the Township of Wilkins and is not subject to
sharing with the Woodland Hills School District.
§ 156-30. Amount of tax.
Beginning with the first day of January, each occupation as herein before defined, engaged in within
the limits of the Township of Wilkins shall be subject to a local services tax in the amount of $52 per
annum, said tax to be paid by the individual so engaged.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 323/483
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
§ 156-31. Duty of employers.
Each employer within the Township of Wilkins, as well as those employers situated outside the
Township of Wilkins, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each of his employees engaged
by him, and performing for him within the Township of Wilkins, said tax of $52 per annum, and making
a return and payment thereof to the Occupation Tax Officer. Further, each employer may not deduct
more than $1 per week from employee's salary, wages or commission, and whether or not part or all
such services are performed within the Township of Wilkins. Each employer shall deduct said tax over
the course of the year as set forth in § 156-33, herein, unless the tax has previously been withheld
from the employee in the fiscal year by the employer or the employee provides verification to the
employer that the tax has previously been withheld for a like amount in the fiscal year. In the event the
tax has been withheld in an amount less than the rate of tax herein levied, then, in such event, the
employer shall deduct an amount equal to the difference between the amount previously withheld in
such fiscal year and the tax herein levied by the Township of Wilkins.
§ 156-32. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be
supplied by the Tax Officer. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file said return, and
pay said tax, whether or not he make collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions
paid by him to said employee, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full
as though the tax had originally been levied against him. The failure to receive notice shall not
relieve the employer or any person subject to this article from the withholding or payment of any
taxes imposed by the Township of Wilkins, and such employer or taxpayer as the case may be
shall be charged with the taxes as though he had received notice.
Electronic filing.
[Added 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 995]
Employers with 50 employees or more shall electronically file their local services tax forms
with the Tax Collector.
The Township Tax Collector shall make available the local services tax electronic filing file
layout and instructions on how to file said credentials. The file layout and instructions shall be
available to the public at the Tax Collector's office and via a link provided on the Township's
official Internet website: www.wilkinstownship.com.
Upon receipt of an electronic return, the Tax Collector shall generate an electronic receipt
which will be emailed to the employer as evidence of his proof of filing.
This shall become effective for the fourth quarter reporting due April 15, 2009.
The tax collector, upon request from an affected taxpayer, may exempt the taxpayer from the
electronic filing requirement where it can be proven that the costs are excessive or other
compelling reasons exist to grant an exemption. The exemption is for one year, which may be
extended by the Tax Collector following a year-to-year review.
§ 156-33. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
For each fiscal year, each employer shall use his employment records from January 1 to March 31, in
conjunction with his employment records from April 1 to June 30, in conjunction with his employment
records from July 1, to September 30, in conjunction with his employment records from October 1, to
December 31, for determining the number and names of those employees from whom the said tax
shall be deducted and paid over to the Local Services Tax Officer. Payment of said tax when applicable
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 324/483
A.
B.
by the aggregate earnings of an employee shall be made by the employer to the Local Services Tax
Officer on or before the last day of April, July, October and January for each year this tax is in force.
Except that where the employer has in their possession local services taxes in excess of $500 then, in
such an event, the taxes shall be forwarded to the designated officer 30 days after the end of the
month the tax was withheld and in no event beyond the estimated due dates, whichever first occurs.
§ 156-34. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the Township of Wilkins shall be
subject to the payment of this tax on his principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct
this tax and deliver to him evidence of deduction on a form to be furnished by the employer and
acceptable to the officer, which form shall be evidence of deduction having been made, and when
presented to any other employer shall be authority for such other employer to not deduct this tax from
the employee's wages. However, the name of such employee shall be included in a quarterly return of
the employer to the Local Services Tax Officer by setting forth the name and address of such
employee, and the name, address and account number of the employer who actually deducted this
tax.
§ 156-35. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any kind or type, engaged in any occupation or
profession within the Township of Wilkins shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax to
the officer, on or before April 30 of the fiscal year, 30 days after the month as he is engaged in an
occupation subjecting him to the tax, and in no event after the designated due dates as set forth in
§ 156-33, herein whichever first occurs. The failure to receive notice shall not relieve any person
subject to this article from the payment of any taxes imposed by the Township of Wilkins, and such
taxpayer shall be charged with the taxes as though he had received notice.
§ 156-36. Employers and self-employed individuals residing
beyond limits of Township of Wilkins.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing and having their place of business outside the
Township of Wilkins, but who perform services of any type or kind, or engage in any occupation or
profession within the Township of Wilkins, are by virtue thereof bound by and subject to the provisions,
penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and effect as though they
were residents of the Township of Wilkins. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the
Township of Wilkins, and an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article be
considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid, the Township of Wilkins shall
have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as
hereinafter provided. Each such employer and individual as the case may be shall be subject to the
provisions of this article as it applies to payment, reporting and any other applicable provision of this
article.
§ 156-37. Administration of tax.
It shall be the duty of the Local Service Tax Officer to accept and receive payments of this tax and
to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him for each employer or self-employed
person, together with the date the tax was received.
The Local Services Tax Officer is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this
article, and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 325/483
C.
A.
B.
[1]
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with this article, and any
payment alleged or found to be incorrect or to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Local Services Tax Officer shall have the
right to appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights or to the
court of competent jurisdiction, as in other cases provided.
The Local Services Tax Officer is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll of any
employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer, or if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Local
Services Tax Officer the means, facilities and opportunity to examine such books and payroll of
the employer, and to ascertain the tax due, if any.
§ 156-38. Suits for collection.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid for 30 days after the due date
above set forth, the Local Services Tax Officer may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or
unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty.
If said tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum shall be calculated,
beginning with the due date of said tax, and a penalty of 10% shall be added to the flat rate of said
tax for the nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual
liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection and
reasonable attorney fees.
§ 156-39. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 995]
Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to the registration
requirement, or makes any false or untrue statement on his registration or tax return or who refuses to
permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his custody when the right to
make such inspection by the tax collector is requested and whoever fails or refuses to file a return
required by this article shall, upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution for each offense and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for
each offense. Where the taxpayer is a firm or association, the fine or penalty may be imposed upon
any of the partners or members thereof and, in the case of corporations, upon any of the officers
thereof. Each day on which any person violates this article shall be considered as a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such as hereinbefore provided.
Article IV. Business Tax
[Adopted 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 646; amended in its entirety 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 994]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Municipal Claims, Art. I, Attorney's Fees for Cost of Collection.
§ 156-40. Title.
This shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Tax Ordinance."
§ 156-41. Definitions and word usage.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 326/483
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
BUSINESS
Carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or otherwise, within the Township of Wilkins
any trade or business, including but not limited to financial business, as hereinafter defined,
profession, vocation, service, the rental of property and/or realty, construction, communication or
commercial activity, making sales to persons or rendering services from or attributable to a Wilkins
office or place of business. "Business" shall not include the following: the business of any political
subdivision, any employment for a wage or salary or any business upon which the power to levy a
tax is withheld by law.
BUSINESS LICENSE YEAR
The twelve-month period beginning on the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of
December and each calendar year thereafter.
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX YEAR
The tax year 1980 and each calendar year thereafter.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS
The services and transactions of banks and bankers, trust, credit and investment companies,
where not prohibited by law, holding companies, dealers and brokers in money, credits,
commercial paper, bonds, notes, securities and stocks, monetary metals, factors and commission
merchants.
GROSS RECEIPTS
Cash, credits or property of any kind or nature received in or allocable or attributable to the
Township of Wilkins from any business or by reason of any sale made, including the resale of
goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part of payment for other
goods, wares or merchandise, or services rendered or commercial or business transactions,
and within the Township of Wilkins without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
property sold, materials used, labor service or other cost, interest or discount paid or any
other expense.
"Gross receipts" shall exclude:
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer
as a trade-in or as part of payment for other goods, wares and merchandise in the usual
and ordinary course of his business.
In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and other property sold,
exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed and moneys or credits received in repayment
of advances, credits and loans, but not to exceed the principal amount of such advances,
credits and loans, and shall also exclude deposits.
In the case of a broker, any commissions paid by him to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared in conjunction with such other
broker.
Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line where the dealer
transfers title or possession at the same price for which he acquired the goods, wares or
merchandise, as long as said dealers are not the parent or subsidiary organization of the
vendor or have no other affiliation or cooperative arrangement with the vendor.
Receipts or that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign commerce or to an
office or place of business regularly maintained by the taxpayer outside the limits of the
Township of Wilkins and not for the purpose of evading payment of this tax and those
receipts which the municipality is prohibited from taxing by law. Such receipts shall be
segregated as set forth in § 156-45F of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 327/483
C. GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS ("GROSS RECEIPTS")
Includes both cash and credit transactions.
LICENSE YEAR
The twelve-month period from January 1 through December 31.
MERCANTILE TAX YEAR
The tax year of 1980 and each calendar year thereafter.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins.
PERSON
Any natural person, individual, partnership, association or corporation, nonprofit or otherwise.
Whenever used in any provision prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof and, as applied to corporations and unincorporated
associations, shall mean the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT
Any place indoors or outdoors where the general public or a limited or selected number thereof
may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, contest or
recreation, including, among other places, theaters, opera houses, motion-picture houses,
amusement parks, stadiums, arenas, baseball or football parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or
carnival tents or grounds, fairgrounds, bowling alleys, billiard or pool rooms, nine- or ten-pin alleys,
riding academies, golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery,
rifle or shotgun ranges and other like places.
RESTAURANT (or OTHER PLACE WHERE FOOD, DRINK OR REFRESHMENTS ARE SOLD)
Shall not include such facilities of nonprofit corporations and/or beneficial associations which are
deemed or considered to be services under either statutory or case law or any other such facility
which is exempt by law.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR
Any person who is a dealer or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor. The term does not include any exhibitions, amusements, performances or
contests conducted by nonprofit corporations or associations.
TAX COLLECTOR
The Township of Wilkins or such other person appointed by the Township for the collection of the
taxes imposed under this article.
TAX YEAR
The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS
Any business that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive business days.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR
Any person who sells to dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons, whether or not such vending or dealing is the primary business activity of such person.
The terms "person," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale vendor," "retail dealer" and "retail vendor" shall
not include agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any person vending or disposing of articles of his own growth, production or
manufacture.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 328/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 156-42. License required; fees; posting.
For the mercantile and business privilege license year 1980, and annually thereafter, every person
desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to engage in, business, including the business
of wholesale or retail vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and any person conducting a
restaurant or other place where food, drink or refreshments are sold or place of amusement, whether
or not the same is incidental to some other business or occupation, shall, on or before the 15th day of
January of each license year, procure a business license upon the payment of a fee of $25 for his
place of business or if engaged in both wholesale and retail activities, a fee of $50 for his place of
business or, if more than one, for each of his places of business in the Township from the Tax Collector
as required by law. Such license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business. A licensee
maintaining more than one place of business within the Township shall post a single license at his
principal place of business in Wilkins for payment of all locations. Such license shall be valid only for
the person to whom issued and shall not be transferable or assignable to any other person. Any
person who is in default of payment of any tax, interest or penalty imposed hereunder shall forfeit such
license until said tax, interest or penalty is paid in full.
§ 156-43. Payment due at time of filing return; registration
required.
The person applying for the license shall, at the time of filing, pay the license amount as due
thereon to the Tax Collector. Within 30 days of commencing business in Wilkins Township, every
person shall forthwith register with the Tax Collector and set forth his name, address, business
address, tax identification number, and the nature of the business activity in which he is engaged.
Every person making a business registration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit. Such
registration shall be made by the completion of an application furnished by the Tax Collector and
the payment of a registration fee to be established by the Township. If an individual or business
entity conducts business under a fictitious name, such individual or entity shall apply for
registration in both the true and fictitious names of the individual and entity and shall list the
fictitious name first on the application. Each separate individual or business entity shall apply for a
separate registration.
Each person in the Township who leases property, products or services used by a business, as
defined in this article, shall file a form with the Township on or before January 15 of each tax year
that sets forth the names and present addresses of each of the lessees in the Township during
both the preceding tax year and the current tax year. Any person who owns or leases any facility
of property used for the purpose of conducting an itinerant business shall supply the business tax
receiver with the name and address of every itinerant merchant or promoter leasing or using such
property or facility, together with such other information as the business tax receiver may request
to establish the nature of the goods or services to be displayed or sold, and the duration of the
show. Such information must be provided to the business tax receiver in writing, 45 days prior to
the opening of a show.
§ 156-44. Imposition of tax; applicability; rate.
Every person engaging in any business in the Township of Wilkins, beginning with the year 1980
and annually thereafter, shall pay an annual tax at the rate of two mills on each dollar of volume of
the gross annual receipts thereof not subject to the mercantile tax rate.
For the tax year 1980 and annually thereafter, the Township of Wilkins hereby imposes an annual
mercantile tax in the manner and at the rates hereinafter set forth. Every person engaged in any of
the following occupations or businesses in the municipality shall pay an annual mercantile tax for
each tax year at the rate set forth:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 329/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise: one mill on each dollar of
the volume of the annual gross business transacted by him.
Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, all persons engaged in
conducting restaurants or other places where food, drink or refreshments are sold, whether or
not the same is incidental to some other business or occupation, and all persons conducting
places of amusement, whether or not the same are incidental to some other business or
occupation: 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross business transacted
by him.
Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise: one mill on each
dollar of the annual gross wholesale business transacted by him; and 1 1/2 mills on each
dollar of the volume of the annual gross retail business transacted by him.
The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume of annual business covering
the resale of goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for
other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the tradein
allowance.
Every individual subject to the payment of the business privilege tax hereby imposed and who is
also subject to and has paid the local services tax levied by Article III of this chapter, approved
September 4, 1968, as amended and supplemented, may deduct said local services tax payment
from the amount of tax due and owing under the provisions of this article.
The rates herein set forth are in addition to any mercantile tax or license or business privilege tax
which may be imposed by the Woodland Hills School District, and no credit will be given against
the tax herein levied for taxes levied by or paid to the Woodland Hills School District.
§ 156-45. Computation of gross annual receipts or gross volume
of business; filing returns.
Every return shall include the same contents as prescribed on the form available from the Tax
Collector. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
Every person who has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of any
tax year shall compute his annual gross receipts or gross volume of business upon the actual
receipts of gross amount of business received by him during the preceding calendar year. On or
before the 15th day of April, every person shall file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the preceding calendar
year and the amount of the tax due.
For a business that started operations in the year preceding the current tax year, the business
shall pay its tax in the current year based on the gross receipts or gross volume of business upon
the actual calendar year receipts or gross amount of business received by him during the
preceding calendar year pro-rated to 12 months. The tax shall be paid in full on or before April 15
of the current tax year.
For businesses that started in the current tax year, the tax shall be based on the gross volume of
business transacted on the first full month of operation multiplied by the number of full months that
the business shall be in operation for the tax year. The business must file and pay the tax by the
last day of the month following the first full month of operation. At the end of the year every
business that started that year shall submit an amended return to reconcile the estimated tax
payment to the tax based upon the calendar-year figure of the gross receipts or volume. If the
amount of the tax paid is less than the amended amount due, the business shall remit payment to
the Township of Wilkins with the adjusted return on or before April 15 of the year following the first
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 330/483
E.
F.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
tax year started by the business. If the estimated amount paid is more than the calendar year
figure, the business owner shall file an amended return with the Township of Wilkins for an
adjustment to credit another tax year or request a refund.
Every person when engaged in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall
compute his annual gross receipts or gross volume of business upon the actual gross receipts or
gross volume of business received by him during such tax year. Every person shall, within seven
days from the day he completes such business, file a return with the Tax Collector setting forth his
name, his business and business address and such information as may be necessary in arriving
at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such period and the amount of
tax due.
Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of
the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or any other provisions of law, including
exemptions within this article, the Tax Collector shall establish rules and regulations and methods
of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such receipts which is properly attributable
and allocable to the doing of business in the Township of Wilkins shall be taxed hereunder. The
Tax Collector may make such allocation with due regard to the nature of the business concerned
on the basis of millage division of the receipt according to the number of jurisdictions in which it
may be taxed, the ratio of the value of the property or assets of the taxpayer owned and situated
in the Township of Wilkins to the total property or assets of the taxpayer wherever calculated to
effect a fair and proper allocation. Every person who ceases to carry on a business during any tax
year shall be permitted to apportion his tax for such tax year and shall pay for such tax year an
amount to be computed by multiplying his gross receipts from the preceding full calendar year by
a fraction whose numerator shall be the number of months such person was in business during
the tax year and whose denominator shall be 12.
§ 156-46. Payment required at time of filing return.
The person making the return shall, at the time of making the return, pay the amount of tax shown as
due thereon to the Tax Collector.
§ 156-47. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines, interest and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount
received by him from each person paying the tax and the date of each receipt.
The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns and payments alleged or found
to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to appeal to a court or courts of
competent jurisdiction as in other cases provided.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to compel the production of books, papers and records and
the attendance of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he believes to
have knowledge of such receipts and to otherwise administrate and enforce this article as
provided in the document entitled "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance Rules and Regulations
Pertaining to Enforcement and Administration," which document is attached hereto, made a part
hereof as it may be amended and is marked Exhibit A.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 331/483
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any taxpayer
or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made,
to ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and
required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
The Tax Collector is further authorized to delegate any of his authority herein established or
contained to other employees of the Township of Wilkins or to accountants, auditors or collectors
retained by the Township of Wilkins for the purpose of assisting in the administration of this article
and the enforcement and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder and of the auditing of the
accounts of the taxpayers and persons hereunder.
§ 156-48. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other officer, official, agent or employee of the
municipality as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, and divulgence of any information so gained is hereby declared to be a violation of
this article, which may be punished by dismissal from office or employment.
§ 156-49. Suit for recovery: interest and penalties.
The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article and may
enter such suit in the name of the Township of Wilkins.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on
the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for
each month, or fraction thereof, during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 156-50. Violations and penalties.
Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to the registration
requirement, or makes any false or untrue statement on his registration or tax return or who refuses to
permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his custody when the right to
make such inspection by the Tax Collector is requested and whoever fails or refuses to file a return
required by this article shall, upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution for each offense and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceed 30
days for each offense. Where the taxpayer is a firm or association, the fine or penalty may be imposed
upon any of the partners or members thereof and, in the case of corporations, upon any of the officers
thereof. Each day on which any person violates this article shall be considered as a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such as hereinbefore provided.
§ 156-51. Construal of provisions; severability.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Township of Wilkins to levy
and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any business or any portion of any
business not within the taxing power of the Township of Wilkins under the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 332/483
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the provisions of this article shall
be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United
States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair
the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein
provided.
If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this article, or the
application of any provision to any circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other
provisions of this article, or the application of such provision to other circumstances, shall remain
in full force and effect. The intention of the Board of Commissioners is that the provision of this
article shall be severable and that this article would have been adopted if any such illegal or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
§ 156-51.1. Payment under protest; refunds.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the amount of
mercantile tax or business privilege tax claimed by the municipality in any case where the
taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the municipality's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the municipality has been overpaid,
the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section
shall be applicable to cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
Claims for refunds of taxes erroneously withheld or paid may be filed with the Tax Collector. A
claim for refund must be filed within three years of the due date of the return or one year of
payment of the tax, whichever is later, which allegedly was filed in error. A claim must be prepared
in a manner to be designated by the Tax Collector and must be accompanied by a true copy of the
claimant's federal income tax return. The burden of proof of earning is on the taxpayer and must
be submitted to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
§ 156-51.2. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2009, and shall remain in effect thereafter from year to
year on a calendar basis.
§ 156-51.3. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with any provisions of this article shall be and the same
is hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this article.
Article V. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Mercantile License Tax, was amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 994. See
now Art. IV, Business Tax.
§ 156-52. through § 156-63. (Reserved)
Article VI. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 771]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 333/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 156-64. Title; legislative authority.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" and is adopted
pursuant to authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.) and Act
77 of the 1986 (72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.).
§ 156-65. Definitions.
The following words when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ACQUIRED COMPANY
As defined and described in § 156-73 of this Article.
ACT 77
Act 77 of the 1986 (72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.).
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or
conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION
A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or banking institution which is organized
under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
county or dependency.
DECLARATION OF ACQUISITION
As defined and described in § 156-73C of this Article.
DEPARTMENT
The Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOCUMENT
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences
any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust
or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to
the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total
consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the
consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely
grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under § 156-73C of this Article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at
least 75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as but not limited to hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or
animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
Fur farming;
Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 334/483
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY
Any individual, such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse
of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood
or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON
Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, fine or imprisonment, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall
include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including, without limitation,
buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper
or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests which by
custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A condominium unit.
A tenant/stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association
under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY
A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or
leasing real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
and which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of real
estate; or
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible
asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded
on an established market.
RECORDER OF DEEDS
The Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
STATEMENT OF VALUE
As defined and described in §§ 156-71B and 156-80 of this Article.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not
fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including, without limitation, an estate in
fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate which endures for a fixed period of years but which, either by
reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or
otherwise, consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life
estate or perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTION
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 335/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth, the
amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a commensurate part thereof
where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against other real estate, provided that where such document shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale;
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage
by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or
possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate of an acquired company,
the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of
the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed
values to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax Equalization
Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where the assessment includes other real
estate;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of which is not
determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement for the
construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate between
the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related corporation or
association and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 156-66. Tax imposed.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or in
whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall
be subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof or for or in respect of the
vellum parchment or paper upon which such document is written or printed, a tax at the rate of 1% of
the value of the real estate represented by such document (such rate being subject to the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of
acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
§ 156-67. Interest; civil penalties.
If for any reason any tax imposed by this Article is not paid when due, interest at the maximum
rate permitted by law on the amount of such tax shall be added and collected.
If for any reason any tax imposed by this Article is not paid when due, a penalty at the maximum
rate permitted by law for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall
be added and collected.
If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this Article is due to fraud or if any person liable
for the tax shall participate in or do any of the acts described as unlawful acts in § 156-81, there
shall be added to the tax, as an additional penalty, an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 336/483
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
In the case of failure to record an accurate declaration of acquisition required under this Article on
the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause, there
shall be added to the tax, as an additional penalty, 5% of the amount of such tax if the failure is for
not more than one month, with an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof
during which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 156-68. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this Article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 156-69. Excluded transactions.
Subject to the requirements of Subsection B below, the tax imposed by § 156-68 shall not be
imposed upon:
A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning body of
the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is
made within one year from the date of condemnation.
A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of
the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by
the municipality, Township, school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale
or tax-claim bureau sale.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a transfer
previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of property passed by
testate or intestate succession and held by cotenants; however, if any of the parties take
shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously husband and
wife who have since been divorced, provided that the property or interest therein subject to
such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting
of the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between
brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or intestate
succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the
transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the
grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 337/483
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary
trust.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or straw party
or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this Article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a
grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the grantee
from or for the benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this clause.
A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation or statutory
division of a nonprofit corporation, except where it is determined that the primary intent for
such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this Article.
A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the name of
corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in
the association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has been
held by the grantee for more than two years.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property
conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing
directly from it, but only if:
The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and
The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate transferred.
A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a
foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona
fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding title for a
religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor
for commercial purposes.
A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has
as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open-space opportunities.
A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm corporation by
a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock
thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 338/483
(20)
(21)
(22)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real estate
company or family farm corporation.
A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and assignments
thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, a true, full and complete value of the
transfer shall be shown on a statement of value furnished to the Township of Wilkins. The
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value presented pursuant to Act 77 in accordance
with the regulations and requirements of the Department shall be sufficient for this purpose,
provided that such statement of value shall separately set forth the value of the real estate in the
Township when such real estate is located in more than one municipality. For leases of coal, oil,
natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason
such document is not subject to tax under this Article.
§ 156-70. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 156-71, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or
demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this Article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 156-71. Acquired company.
A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership interest in the
company, however effected, if the change:
Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90%
or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
With respect to real estate acquired after December 10, 1984, a family farm corporation is an
acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family
farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or
transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this Article.
Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a declaration of
acquisition to the Recorder of Deeds for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such
declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in the
Township. A copy of the declaration of acquisition submitted pursuant to Act 77 in accordance with
the regulations and requirements of the Department shall be sufficient for this purpose, provided
that such declaration shall separately set forth the value of such real estate holdings in the
Township when such real estate is located in more than one municipality.
§ 156-72. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a
lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental
charge is established.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 339/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
§ 156-73. Credits against tax.
Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker, which property
was transferred to him/her within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax at the time of the transfer to him/her shall be
given to him/her toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the builder
within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder
shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit for the amount of
tax paid at the time of the demise shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a land
contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the
grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the difference
shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over
credit shall be allowed.
§ 156-74. Credit for deed transfer tax.
Every transaction or document which shall be subject to the tax imposed by the Deed Transfer Tax
Ordinance enacted by the Township on December 4, 1967 (and not amended),[1] shall receive a credit
against the tax due pursuant to this Article for the amount of tax paid pursuant to the Deed Transfer
Tax Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 156-75. Administration; rules and regulations.
The Township Solicitor shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this Article and is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations relating thereto. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this
Article.
§ 156-76. Redetermination and assessment of tax; review.
The Township Solicitor is hereby authorized and empowered to make a redetermination of the tax,
penalty and interest which shall be owed with respect to a document or transaction and to make an
assessment of tax, penalty and interest on the basis of such redetermination. Any person aggrieved
thereby may appeal such redetermination. Any person aggrieved thereby may appeal such
redetermination and assessment by submitting to the Township Solicitor within 30 calendar days
following receipt of notice of such action a written protest. Every such protest shall set forth specifically
the reasons which the appellant believes entitle him/her to relief, and it shall be supported by
affirmation (under oath or penalty of perjury) that the protest is not made for the purpose of delay and
that the facts set forth therein are true. Upon receipt of the protest, the Township Solicitor shall
schedule a prompt hearing thereon and shall so notify the appellant. It shall be the duty of the
Township Solicitor to issue a written decision concerning the protest and notify the appellant thereof
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 340/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
within 90 days following receipt of the protest. The Township Solicitor shall maintain a complete record
of the protest proceedings. Any determination and assessment not appealed from in the foregoing
manner shall be final and nonreviewable.
§ 156-77. Evidence of tax payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this Article shall be evidenced by the affixing of a documentary
stamp or stamps or receipt to every document by the person making, executing, delivering, accepting
or presenting for recording such document. Such stamps or receipts shall be affixed in such manner
that their removal will require the continued application of steam or water, and the person using or
affixing such stamps or receipts shall write or stamp or cause to be written or stamped thereon the
initials of his name and the date upon which such stamps are affixed or used so that such stamps may
not again be used, provided that the Deed Transfer Tax Collector may prescribe such other methods of
cancellation as he/she may deem expedient.
§ 156-78. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording shall set forth therein
and as a part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a
statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this Article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other
document presented for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
document and statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this Article. A copy of the statement of value
presented pursuant to Act 77 in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the department
shall be sufficient for this purpose, provided that such statement shall separately set forth the value of
the real estate in the Township when such real estate is located in more than one municipality.
§ 156-79. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Knowingly and intentionally fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Article;
Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax imposed by this Article
without cancelling such stamp as required by this Article or as prescribed by applicable law or
ordinance;
Knowingly and intentionally fail or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and regulations
prescribed, adopted and promulgated pursuant to this Article;
Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any documentary stamp;
Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by this Article any documentary
stamp which has been cut, torn or removed from any other document upon which tax is
imposed by this Article or any documentary stamp of insufficient value or any forged or
counterfeited stamp or any impression of any forged or counterfeited stamp, die, plate or
other article;
Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary stamp or restore any such
documentary stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after it has already been
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 341/483
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
used or knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or restored stamp to
any person for use or knowingly use the same;
Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored documentary stamp which has been
removed from any document upon which tax is imposed by this Article, provided that the
possession of such stamps shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate the provisions
of this subsection;
Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession any forged or
counterfeited documentary stamp; or
Make a false statement of value or declaration of acquisition when he/she does not believe
the statement or declaration to be true.
Any person who violates any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense,
plus costs; and further shall be required to pay the amount of the tax, together with interest and
penalties as elsewhere provided for in this Article, which should have been paid on the document
or transaction, and upon further default in the payment of said fine, costs, tax, interest and
penalties for 10 days thereafter such person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for 30 days. The
penalties provided under this section shall be in addition to any other penalties provided for
elsewhere in this Article.
§ 156-80. Collection by suit.
All taxes imposed by this Article, together with interest and penalties prescribed herein, shall be
recoverable as other debts of like character are recovered. The Township Solicitor is hereby authorized
and empowered to bring suit in the name and behalf of the Township for the recovery of such taxes,
interest and penalties. When any suit or legal proceeding is so instituted, the person liable therefor
shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection, including court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Township.
§ 156-81. Unpaid tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this Article shall become a lien upon the real estate which is described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the document which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and
levied by this Article, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under this Article is due and payable
and to continue until discharged by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.,
its supplements and amendments.
§ 156-82. Repealer.
The provisions of the Deed Transfer Tax Ordinance adopted by the Township on December 4, 1967
(and not amended),[1] are hereby expressly saved from repeal and shall remain in full force and effect,
except as the same shall be determined to be utterly contradictory or repugnant to the provisions of
this Article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Wilkins to impose the realty transfer tax pursuant to this Article upon the subjects of taxation
authorized by Act 77 and, in addition, to continue to impose the deed transfer tax upon additional
classes or types of transactions pursuant to the Deed Transfer Tax Ordinance (unamended) in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965,[2] duplication of taxation being avoided
by provision of a credit against the former tax for payments made pursuant to the Deed Transfer Tax
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 342/483
[1]
[2]
Ordinance (as amended). Any ordinance or part or provision thereof not expressly saved from repeal
hereby which shall conflict with the provisions of this Article is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 156-83. Word usage.
Whenever, in this Article a particular gender is used, such provision shall be interpreted and construed
to include the masculine, feminine and neuter. Similarly, the use of a singular noun shall be taken to
include the plural.
Article VII. Senior Citizen Property Tax Relief
[Adopted 12-12-1994 as Ord. No. 861]
§ 156-84. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT 77
The Act of December 22, 1993, P.L. 529, No. 77, codified as the Allegheny Regional Asset District
Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW
See the definition of "Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT
The fair market value of property as determined by the Board of Property Assessment, Appeals
and Review of Allegheny County.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
The governing body of the Township of Wilkins.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT
The Department of Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER
A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence in the Township of Wilkins who is a single
person aged 65 or older during a calendar year in which Township real property taxes are due and
assessed or married persons if either spouse is 65 or older during a calendar year in which
Township real property taxes are due and assessed.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
All income received by an eligible taxpayer while residing in his or her principal residence during a
calendar year.
INCOME
All income from whatever source derived, including but not limited to salaries, wages, bonuses,
commissions, income from self-employment, alimony, support money, cash public assistance and
relief, the gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including railroad retirement benefits, all
benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except Medicare benefits), all benefits
received under state unemployment insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all interest
received from the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political subdivision
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 343/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's compensation and the gross amount of loss of
time insurance benefits, life insurance benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of
death benefit payments) and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift between
members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300, but shall not include surplus food or
other relief in kind supplied by a governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation
dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT
Any person who for at least 10 continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling
place as a principal residence and domicile, or any person who for at least five years has owned
and occupied the same, dwelling as a principal residence and domicile if that person received
assistance in the acquisition of the property as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins.
PERSON
A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE
The dwelling place of a person, including the principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in
connection therewith which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience, or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three residential units of
which one residential unit must be a principal residence of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT
The Act of March 11, 197l, P.L. 104, No. 3, as amended, codified as 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.
§ 156-85. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers.
All eligible taxpayers in the Township of Wilkins who are longtime owner/occupants shall be entitled to
have the assessment on his or her principal residence maintained at or limited to the amount
determined by the Department of Property Assessment for the calendar year 1993 if the eligible
taxpayer meets the household income limits for qualification for any amount of property tax rebate
under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.
§ 156-86. Participation in limitation of tax assessment program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Township of Wilkins may apply to participate in the
assessment limitation program authorized under this Article. In order to be eligible to participate in the
program, the person must meet the following conditions:
The person must be a single person aged 65 or older or be married persons with either spouse
being 65 years of age or older.
The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and domicile of the resident.
The person's household income must qualify him/her or her to receive any amount of property tax
rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.
§ 156-87. Rules and regulations.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 344/483
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
The Department of Property Assessment and the Township's shall Manager/Assistant Secretary shall
have the authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to the administration of the limitation of
tax assessment program established under this Article. Such rules and regulations shall include but not
be limited to reasonable proof of household income, proof of residence, proof of qualification for or
receipt of a property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act[1] and any other
reasonable requirements and conditions as may be necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation
program.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.
Article VIII. Tax Notices, Discounts, Penalties and Interest
[Adopted 9-11-1995 as Ord. No. 876]
§ 156-88. Notice of real estate taxes due.
Commencing with the year 1996 and each year thereafter, the Township Treasurer, acting as Tax
Collector, shall, on or before March 1 of each year, send a notice of Township real estate taxes to
every taxable whose name appears on the tax duplicate provided to the Tax Collector.
The notice shall contain the information required by Section 6 of the Local Tax Collection Law (Act
of May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050, No. 394, as amended).[1]
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.6.
Interim real estate tax assessment on new construction and improvements.
[Added 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 1009]
Establishment of interim real estate tax assessment. Commencing with the tax year 2011 and
each year thereafter, there shall be established an interim tax assessment of new
construction and improvements in the Township of Wilkins.
Notice to Manager. The Wilkins Township Building Code Official shall advise the Manager or
his/her designee of the issuance of all building permits for new construction and/or
improvements.
Information to be shared with Woodland Hills School District. The Manager shall share this
information with the Business Manager for the Woodland Hills School District.
Notice to the Allegheny County Board of Property Assessment Appeals and Review. Either
the Township Manager or the Woodland Hills Business Manager or their respective designees
are directed to notify the Allegheny County Board of Property Assessment Appeals and
Review (Assessor's Office) or such other authority responsible for the assessment of property
within the Township of Wilkins of the issuance of a building permit for new construction and/or
the improvement of an existing structure within the Township of Wilkins.
Exempt property excepted. The direction contained herein shall not apply to real estate which
has been declared exempt from real estate taxes in the Township of Wilkins.
Reassessment. Upon reassessment, any interimly reassessed property shall be added to or
revised on the Wilkins Township real estate tax duplicate for that calendar year.
Proportionate reassessment. The reassessed property shall be taxable for Wilkins Township
real estate tax purposes for the proportionate part of the calendar year remaining after the
property was constructed and/or improved.
New construction to be measured at the time of occupancy. The entire improvement or new
construction shall be generally measured at and from the time of occupancy.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 345/483
(9)
(10)
(11)
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Occupancy from the first day of the month. Occupancy occurring during the month shall be
treated as occurring on the first day of the following month.
Tax Collector to be notified of additions and revisions. A certified list of additions and revisions
will be furnished by Wilkins Township to the Wilkins Township Real Estate Tax Collector.
Tax Collector to notify property owner. Within 10 days, the Wilkins Township Real Estate Tax
Collector shall notify the property owner of the real estate taxes due and owing to Wilkins
Township.
§ 156-89. Discount for prompt payment.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of
such tax when making payment of the whole amount thereof on or before April 30 of the subject tax
year.
§ 156-90. Penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers who shall on or before June 30 of the subject tax year, fail to make payment of any such
taxes charged against them shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the
taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by the Tax Collector.
§ 156-91. Interest on delinquent taxes.
Interest at the rate of 10% shall be collected on all claims for delinquent real estate taxes from the date
of filing the lien therefor in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, as provided by Section 9
of the Municipal Claims Act (Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153, as amended).[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
Article IX. Attorney Fees for Collection of Delinquent Claims
[Adopted 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 968[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IX, Attorney Fees for Collection of Delinquent
Claims, adopted 8-29-1996 by Ord. No. 885.
§ 156-92. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Tax, Tax Claim, Tax Lien, Municipal Claim and Municipal Lien
Attorney Fees and Servicing Charges, Expenses and Fees Ordinance."
§ 156-93. Expenses approved.
Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title search in an amount not to
exceed $250 shall constitute a reasonable expense for each title search necessary for the
initiation of each proceeding and compliance with Pa. R.C.P. § 3129. The sum not to exceed $50
shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bringdown or update of the title search in
connection with entry of judgment, issuance of execution, listing for sale, or other action.
Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement action, such as for postage,
non-Sheriff's service of process, investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 346/483
(1)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
(5)
A.
necessary expenses shall constitute reimbursable expenses as part of each claim recovered.
§ 156-94. Attorney fees approved.
Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby adopted and approved as
reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act 20 for all matters described, which fees shall
be awarded to the municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated pursuant to
the Act for the collection of unpaid claims. The property owner's obligation to pay the full amount
of the flat fee for each phase of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect of each
phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of the proceeding shall carry over and
be due on a cumulative basis, together with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
Filing of municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the
preparation and filing of a municipal claim as defined under the Act.
Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in assumpsit as provided in the
Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the initiation of each
proceeding and shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of scire facias or
complaint in civil action, Sheriff's direction for service, notice pursuant to Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1
and the preparation and filing of the praecipe to settle and discontinue the proceeding. The
above does not include:
Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are federal tax liens, federal
judgments, federal mortgages or other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall
constitute reasonable attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly notify and serve
the United States with all required additional notice and the presentation of related
motions to court.
Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a special order of court is
necessary to serve original process or any other pleading, notice, court order or other
document, the following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees as follows:
Investigation of defendant(s) whereabouts and preparation of affidavit of diligent
search: $100.
Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative service, and delivery of the
order of court, along with appropriate directions to the Sheriff for service: $200.
Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees in connection
with entry of judgment which shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter
judgment, notices of judgment, affidavit of nonmilitary status and the praecipe to satisfy
judgment.
Writ of execution, Sheriff's sale of property or execution upon assumpsit judgment. The sum
of $700 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for preparation of all documents necessary
for each execution upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall include the
preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of execution, all Sheriff's documents, preparation
and service of notices of Sheriff's sale, staying the writ of execution and attendance at one
Sheriff's sale.
Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for each
continuance of Sheriff's sale at the request of the defendant.
Sale pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for the sale of property pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281, including
preparation and service of necessary documents, court appearances, attendance at sale and
preparation of proposed schedule of distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 347/483
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Sale pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of $500 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for a sale of property pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282,
including the preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances and the
preparation of proposed Sheriff's schedule of distribution.
Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees
for the preparation of each written installment payment agreement.
Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the preparation, filing
and presentation of motions, other than for alternative service, which shall include, but are not
limited to, motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption and motions to continue
the Sheriff's sale.
Hourly rate matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby adopted and approved as
reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act 20, which fees shall be awarded to the
municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in all
other matters not specifically referenced in § 156-94A above, undertaken in connection with the
collection of claims: senior attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185 per hour; junior
attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160 per hour; paralegals: $100 per hour; and
law clerks: $65 per hour, each as recorded and charged in units of 1/10 of an hour for all time
devoted to enforcement and collection of the municipality's claims. Counsel, whether duly
employed or duly appointed by the municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not deviate from this
fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but
are not limited to, any matters where any defense, objection, motion, petition or appearance is
entered in any phase of any proceeding by or on behalf of any defendant or other interested party.
§ 156-95. Procedure.
Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S. § 7106, shall be provided in
accordance therewith and shall be incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices
sent by the municipality, its agent, counsel or assigns.
Fees to the accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all efforts in collection after the
30th day after the notice, or after the 10th day of any required second notice under the Act, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees accumulated
as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly appointed counsel for the municipality
authorized to pursue collection of claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the municipality's
agents or assigns and, if not collected in due course with the debt as by voluntary payment, shall
be included in any claims filed on behalf of the municipality or by its agents or assigns in the
course of enforcement, including any claims originally filed with the Prothonotary, any claims filed
with the Sheriff or in any other claims filed or statements provided where attorney fees are due.
The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and become part of the claim
or claims in each proceeding as provided by the Act and as provided herein.
§ 156-96. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
The following schedule of charges, expenses and fees (hereinafter collectively referred to as
"servicing fees") is hereby approved and adopted by the municipality pursuant to §§ 1, 2 and 3 of
the Act of May 16, 1923, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106, which amounts are the
direct result of each person's or property's failure to pay claims promptly. The servicing fees
established, assessed and collected hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, § 156-94
attorney fees and § 156-93, expenses associated with legal proceedings initiated by or on behalf
of the municipality to collect its claims.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 348/483
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
Servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment without the initiation of enforcement
proceedings. It is the intent of § 156-96 to pass the cost of servicing on to the delinquent person or
property as part of each claim. The recovery of servicing fees established herein shall not be
contingent upon the initiation of enforcement proceedings; however, such servicing fees are due
even when enforcement proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to pass the cost
and expense associated with delinquent collection on to the delinquent person or property and to
make the municipality whole on all claims collected.
Schedule. The following schedule of fees shall constitute reasonable and appropriate servicing
fees for each indicated service. The servicing fees shall be added to and become part of the
municipality's claims, together with the face, penalties, interest, costs and attorney fees, and shall
be payable in full before the discharge or satisfaction of any claim. The schedule of fees is
separate and distinct from any amounts imposed by the Sheriff, Prothonotary, court of any other
public office in connection with the collection of the municipality's claims.
Service Fee
Assignments $5 per claim
Filing tax liens $5 per item
Satisfactions $5 per claim
Tax claim revivals (i.e., S&A) $10 per claim
Act 1/Act 20 compliance $35 per case
Filing municipal claim and filing municipal revivals $15 per claim
Municipal claim/short title examination $35 per claim
Sheriff sale claim certificates $50 per case
Claim certifications $10 per year
Servicing, including staffing, computers, office space,
telephones, equipment and materials: for all delinquent and
liened taxes, tax liens, municipal claims (filed or unfiled) and
municipal liens
10% of gross collections
Postage and court costs Actual cost
§ 156-96.1. Dollar amount of liens and revivals.
[Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1016]
No lien shall be filed or revived on property where the delinquent real estate tax is equal to or less than
$100.
§ 156-97. Effective date and retroactivity.
This article shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth below[1] and, with respect to
attorney fees pursuant to §§ 156-94 and 156-95, shall apply to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens,
municipal claims, municipal liens, writs of scire facias, judgments or executions filed on or after
December 19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 968 was enacted 1-10-2005.
In no event shall the municipality's right to charge and collect reasonable attorney fees pursuant to
§ 156-94 of this article be impaired by the fact that any claim may also include an attorney
commission of 5% for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any attorney fees assessed and
collected under this or any prior ordinances pursuant to Act 1 shall be in addition to any fivepercent
commission previously included in any claim or judgment thereon.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 349/483
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Attorney fees and expense incurred in pending enforcement proceedings prior to the effective date
of this article, pursuant to a prior ordinance adopted under Act 1, but not collected, shall remain
due and owing in accordance therewith and shall be incorporated in any future statement, claim,
pleading, judgment or execution. Attorney fees and expenses in any pending or new action
incurred after the effective date of this article shall be incurred, charged and collected in
accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in this article.
The charges, expenses and fees set forth in § 156-96 of this article relate to all unpaid claims in
favor of the municipality, its agents and assigns and shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
§ 156-98. Assignment.
The municipality assigns the provisions of this article to any assignee of its claims unless the
assignment limits the assignee's ability to collect such amounts. The municipality and its duly
authorized agents and their counsel shall retain all rights to charge reasonable attorney fees, charges,
expenses and fees, in accordance with the provisions of this article in actions commenced under the
Act and for servicing any claims retained by the municipality.
Article X. Abatement for Improvements to Deteriorated
Residential Property and New Construction
[Adopted 4-30-2007 by Ord. No. 979]
§ 156-99. Act 202 Abatement: new residential construction.
Definitions. For the purposes of the interpretation and administration of § 156-99 of this article, the
following definitions shall apply to the terms used in § 156-99 of this article.
IMPROVEMENT
The erection or construction of one or more single-family residential buildings in compliance
with laws, ordinances or regulations governing such actions.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with
principal offices at 110 Peffer Road, Turtle Creek, Pennsylvania 15145.
UNIMPROVED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Any unimproved real estate owned by an individual, association, corporation or governmental
entity located in the geographical boundaries of the Local Taxing Authority, which is or may be
zoned, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code. Unimproved
residential property includes property upon which a condemned, vacant and blighted structure
has been razed to provide for the construction of a new single-family residential dwelling.
Purpose. In consideration of the limited amount of unimproved residential property located within
its boundaries; its desire to rejuvenate and enhance economic growth, and its desire to eliminate
slum and blight within the Township, the Board of Commissioners has determined that it is in the
best interest of the community that the boundaries within which tax exemption herein provided
shall be available and should be coterminous with the geographical boundaries of the Township of
Wilkins.
Exemptions.
The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 350/483
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
To the exemption schedule as established within this article.
To the assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of a single-family
residential dwelling.
In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional
assessment attributable to the new construction and for which a separate assessment has
been made by the Allegheny County Board of Property Assessment, and for which an
exemption has been separately requested.
No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary and
proper permits prior to improving the property.
In any case after the effective date of this article when a property is damaged, destroyed or
demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and the assessed valuation of the property
affected has been reduced as a result of said damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that portion
of new assessment attributable to the actual cost of improvement or construction that is in
excess of the original assessments that existed prior to the damage, destruction or demolition
of the property.
§ 156-100. Act 42 Abatement: deteriorated residential property.
Definitions. For the purposes of the interpretation and administration of § 156-100 of this article,
the following definitions shall apply to the terms used in § 156-100 of this article.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY
A residential dwelling unit located in the geographical boundaries of Wilkins Township, which
the Board of Commissioners determines to be physically blighted on the basis of one or more
of the following standards:
The residential dwelling unit has been the subject of an order by a government agency
requiring the property to be vacated, condemned, or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances, or regulations.
The residential dwelling unit, by reason of age, obsolescence, inadequate or outmoded
design or physical deterioration has become an economic and/or social liability.
The residential dwelling unit is substandard or unsanitary for healthful and safe living
purposes.
The residential dwelling unit is overcrowded, poorly spaced or is lacking light, space and
air as to be conducive to wholesome living.
The residential dwelling unit is faultily arranged, covers the land to an excessive extent,
or shows a deleterious use of land, or exhibits any combination of the above which is
detrimental to health, safety or welfare.
The residential dwelling unit is more than 20 years of age.
DWELLING UNIT
A single-family residential building intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by
family as defined in § 173-7 of the Wilkins Township Codified Book of Ordinances, containing
a kitchen and cooking equipment, for the exclusive use of the occupants. Dwelling unit shall
not include any unit owned or occupied by persons receiving a subsidy or portion of their rent
or mortgage payment under a federally subsidized program including but not limited to the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 351/483
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(a)
(1)
A.
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, the U.S. Housing Act of
1937, as amended and the Housing Act of 1959, as amended.
IMPROVEMENT
Repair, construction, or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of
rehabilitating a structure so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of housing
safety, health, or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations
governing housing standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
improvement.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with
principal offices at 110 Peffer Road, Turtle Creek, Pennsylvania 15145.
Purpose. In cooperation with the Woodland Hills School District; in consideration of its desire to
rejuvenate and enhance economic growth in the Township; its desire to foster improvements to
single-family residential buildings; and to provide impetus to other investment and improvement,
the Township has determined that it is in the best interests of the community that the tax
exemption herein provided should be available throughout the Township.
Exemptions.
The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
To the exemption schedule as established within this article.
To the assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of an approved
improvement, as defined in § 156-100A.
In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional
assessment attributable to the new construction and for which a separate assessment has
been made by the Allegheny County Board of Property Assessments and for which an
exemption has been separately requested.
No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary and
proper permits prior to improving the property.
In any case after the effective date of this article when a property is damaged, destroyed or
demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and the assessed valuation of the property
affected has been reduced as a result of said damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that portion
of new assessment attributable to the actual cost of the improvement that is in excess of the
original assessments that existed prior to the damage, destruction or demolition of the
property.
§ 156-101. Act 202 and Act 42 provisions.
Schedule of temporary exemption.
The Township hereby temporarily exempts from real property taxation the assessment
attributable to improvements to residential property located within the geographical
boundaries of the Township of Wilkins in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
There shall be no abatement of tax on the assessed valuation attributable to land. Temporary
tax exemption for such improvements to residential properties will be provided in accordance
with the following schedule:
Year one: 100% of the assessed value of the improvements.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 352/483
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
Year two: 100% of the assessed value of the improvements.
After the second year immediately following the year upon which the improvement becomes
assessable, the exemption shall terminate. To be eligible for temporary tax exemption under
this article, construction of the improvement must commence no later than December 31,
2009.
If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to this article, the improvement shall,
during the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is modified, terminated, or
changed during the two-year period in any way which would have affected the exemption if
the property had been so used when the exemption was granted, then, at the election of the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins, the exemption shall terminate as of the
date the use was modified or terminated if the Township of Wilkins so determines that
continuation of the exemption would be inconsistent with the purposes of this article.
Any unimproved property with a tax delinquency is not eligible for the relief set forth in this
article. There is no exemption granted; and any existing exemption shall be permanently
revoked, if there exists any tax delinquency with respect to the unimproved property or any
other property owned in the Township by the property owner at the time of application for the
tax exemption or at any time during the aforesaid exemption period.
Application for temporary exemption. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article
shall notify the Manager of the Township in writing on a form prescribed by the Township
submitted at the time such person secures an occupancy permit for the construction of the
improvement. Applications for temporary exemption not submitted to the Township within 30 days
after the issuance of an occupancy permit (Act 202) or building permit (Act 42) will not be eligible
for tax exemption hereunder. The application for exemption must set forth the following
information:
The identity of the unimproved residential property that is to be improved by reference to the
adjoining street, road, or highway and the block and lot or tax parcel number of the property
as designated by the Board of Property Assessment of the County of Allegheny;
The identity of the current owner of record, or person or entity having an equitable interest in
the unimproved residential property, and any person or entity having a financial interest in
either the unimproved residential property or the planned improvement;
The date the building permit was issued for the planned improvement; and the date that the
occupancy permit was issued for the improvement;
A summary of the plan of improvement of the unimproved residential property;
An estimate of the cost of the planned improvements; and
Such other and additional information as the Township may require to determine eligibility for
exemption.
Processing of application for temporary exemption. If the application meets the requirements of
this article and upon approval of the application by the Board of Commissioners of the Township, a
copy of the application shall be forwarded to the Board of Property Assessment of Allegheny
County and the applicant shall be notified of such action. Upon completion of the construction of
the improvement, the applicant must promptly notify the Board of Property Assessment of
Allegheny County so that an inspection of the improvement may be made. When the Board of
Property Assessments has completed its inspection, such agency shall assess separately the
improvement and the land, shall calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 353/483
D.
E.
F.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
exemption in accordance with the limits of this article and shall notify the applicant and the
Township of the same.
Exemption upon property. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article for both Act 202
and Act 42 abatements shall be upon the property exempted and shall not be terminated upon the
sale, conveyance, bequest or other alienation of such property.
Nonpermissible exemptions. Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be
applied to any commercial and/or industrial property.
Expiration and repeal. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article shall
continue in full force and effect through and including December 31, 2009. Prior to such date, this
article may be repealed by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins.
Unless earlier terminated by the Township, the terms of this article shall automatically expire and
be deemed repealed effective January 1, 2010. The expiration or earlier repeal of this article shall
not affect any completed application for exemption received by the Township before the effective
date of expiration or repeal, as to which terms of this article shall continue to apply.
Article XI. Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
(LERTA) Program
[Adopted 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1056]
§ 156-102. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the following meanings:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY
Any commercial or other business property owned by an individual, association, or corporation,
and located in a deteriorating area, as hereinafter provided.
IMPROVEMENT
Repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of
rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of
safety, health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or
regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
improvement.
§ 156-103. Eligible areas.
The Board of Commissioners determines that the areas shown on the map attached as Exhibit A
shall be the areas which contain and consist of deteriorated properties which are eligible for tax
exemption under this article. Additional eligible areas may be included from time to time by
ordinance of the Board of Commissioners.
The eligible area is defined as inclusive of the following lot/block numbers:[1]
Editor's Note: The table listing the properties in the eligible area is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
Eligible properties within the defined eligibility area must be current on real estate taxes in order to
qualify for abatement.
§ 156-104. Exemption.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 354/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The amount to be exempted from real estate taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional
assessment attributable to the actual cost of new construction or improvements to deteriorated
property in accordance with the exemption schedule established by this article.
The exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to that improvement for which an exemption
has been requested in the manner set forth in this article and for which a separate assessment
has been made by the Allegheny County Assessment Office.
§ 156-105. Exemption schedule.
The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Length
(year)
Portion
(percent)
First 100%
Second 100%
Third 75%
Fourth 50%
Fifth 25%
If an eligible property is granted a tax exemption pursuant to this article, the improvement shall
not, during the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the property and shall not
terminate upon the exchange or sale of the property.
§ 156-106. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
Any person desiring tax exemption under this article shall notify the Manager of the Township as
well as the Business Manager of the Woodland Hills School District in writing on a form provided
to the applicant at the time he secures a building permit for new construction or an improvement.
A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded to the Allegheny County Assessment Office.
The Allegheny County Assessor shall, upon notice by the applicant and after completion of the
new construction or improvement, assess separately the new construction or improvement and
calculate the amount of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established by this article and shall notify the taxpayer, the Township and the school district of the
reassessment and the amount of the assessment eligible for the exemption. Appeals from the
reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer or the local
taxing authority as provided by law.
The cost of the new construction or improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to the
exemption request, and subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to the
adoption of any such amendment.
§ 156-107. Termination date.
An application for exemption may be made at any time within five years from the effective date of this
article. All qualified applications under this article are eligible for the entire five-year exemption
schedule.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 355/483
§ 156-108. Extension.
The Township may, by ordinance adopted from time to time, extend the time for filing an application for
extension. However, in no event shall any one extension period exceed five years.
§ 156-109. Revocation of LERTA exemption.
The exemption from real estate taxes provided for herein shall be forfeited by the applicant and/or any
subsequent owner of the real estate for the failure to pay any nonexempt real estate taxes by the last
day of the time period to pay such taxes in the penalty period. Upon receipt of the notice of
nonpayment of nonexempt real estate taxes, the Township Treasurer shall discontinue the LERTA
exemption.
Chapter 159. Truth in Advertising
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 1-27-1997 by Ord. No.
895. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 121.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 159-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the Wilkins "Truth in Advertising Ordinance."
§ 159-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADVERTISEMENT
Any offer, intended for general distribution to the public or to a specific group of persons, to
provide information or to place goods or services into the stream of commerce, by or on behalf of
a person or entity who deals in goods or services or otherwise by his occupation holds himself or
herself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices or goods involved in the
transaction or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his or her employment of an
agent or broker or other intermediary who, by his or her occupation, holds himself or herself out as
having such skill.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an incorporated or unincorporated
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by a person, partnership,
corporation, association or any other entity. This term shall include a person, partnership,
corporation, association, institution or other entity employing one or more persons for a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation.
§ 159-3. Truth in Advertising.
Every commercial establishment, that places advertisements in newspapers, circulars, television, radio
and in forms of media whatsoever developed or in any other way or form communicates its location to
the general public, other than specifying the general street address or mailing address, shall not
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 356/483
[1]
A.
B.
identify the location of the commercial establishment as being located in a municipality other than the
Township of Wilkins unless the advertisement or communication conspicuously identifies the location
of the commercial establishment as within the Township of Wilkins.
§ 159-4. Penalties for offenses; injunctive relief.
The penalty for violating this truth in advertising ordinance shall be $500 per occurrence, plus the court
costs of prosecuting the violation. Each such publication of an advertisement in violation shall be
deemed a separate violation. For advertisements in violation that are broadcast electronically, each
such broadcast shall be deemed a separate violation. The Township Solicitor, upon the express
direction of the Board of Commissioners or a designee thereof, shall be authorized to petition the Court
of Common Pleas for injunctive relief for any violation of this chapter.
§ 159-5. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. From time to
time, the Code Enforcement Officer shall review and monitor such advertising to determine that the
commercial establishments are complying with the provisions herein. When the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a commercial establishment has not complied with this chapter, he/she shall
institute proceedings before a District Justice for the violation of this chapter.
Chapter 161. Utilities, Public
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 11-8-1982 as Ord. No.
697. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 161-1. Permit required.
No public utility corporation shall place, replace or remove any aerial surface or subsurface public
utility facility which requires a subsurface opening in any street surface or right-of-way in the township
streets, places or ways without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Wilkins.
§ 161-2. Permit application; fees.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the public utility shall complete and execute a permit application
which shall reasonably describe the facility involved, the location of the same and the reason for the
placement, replacement or removal of the facility. Permit fees shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
§ 161-3. Relocation of underground facilities.
No facility which is located underground shall be relocated on or over the surface of the ground
except upon a showing that such relocation is required by public health, safety or welfare.
No permit for this purpose shall be issued by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer except after
approval of the Board of Commissioners after a public hearing.
§ 161-4. Denial of permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 357/483
A.
B.
C.
[1]
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit in all other cases except when, after
reasonable investigation by said officer, it appears that:
The proposed facility will endanger the health or safety of motorists or pedestrians by reason of a
location creating exposure to gas fumes, electric shock, impalement or explosion.
The proposed location will interfere with the unobstructed view of motor vehicle operators at street
intersections or curves.
The proposed facility is located within seven feet of the cartway of any township street.
§ 161-5. Requests for hearing.
Any person or corporation having standing so to do may request a hearing on the grant or refusal to
grant a permit, in which case the Board of Commissioners shall conduct a hearing under the Local
Agency Law.
§ 161-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to
the township for each and every separate offense a sum of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of the fine and costs of prosecution, shall be committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 165. Vector Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 4-11-1983 as Ord. No.
703. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 135.
§ 165-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vector Control Ordinance."
§ 165-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants and which is located on or partially on any premises.
BREEDING AREA
Any condition which provides the accessory environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTIONS OF WATER
Those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open
cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 358/483
A.
B.
boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, receptacles
of any kind or other containers or devices which may hold water.
DILAPIDATED
Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DISPOSAL
Includes the storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse.
EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
fogging, larviciding, trapping or by any other recognized and legal vector-control elimination
methods approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
GARBAGE
All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption
of foods.
HARBORAGE
Any place where vectors can live, nest or seek shelter.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Wilkins.
OCCUPANT
Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or actually having
possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not be
considered an "occupant."
OWNER
Any person who alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or
agent of the owner or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the
same extent as if he/she were the owner.
REFUSE
All solid wastes except body wastes, and shall include garbage, ashes and rubbish.
RUBBISH
Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or nonputrescible solid wastes.
VECTOR
A rodent, arthropod or insect capable of transmitting a disease or infection. "Vectors" shall include
but not be limited to rats, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies and ticks.
VECTOR PROOFING
A form of construction to prevent the ingress or egress of vectors to or from a given space or
building or gaining access to food, water or harborage. This term shall include but not be limited to
ratproofing, flyproofing and mosquitoproofing.
§ 165-3. Unlawful acts.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 359/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit any refuse, offal, pomace, dead
animals, decaying matter or organic substance of any kind in or upon any private lot, building,
structure, accessory structure, premises or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway, ravine,
ditch, gutter or into any of the waters of the commonwealth so that the same shall or may afford
food, harborage or breeding areas for rats, flies or other vectors.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit or permit to accumulate in or
upon any premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bottles, cans, glass, scrap iron, wire, metal articles, pipe, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken plaster or rubbish of any kind unless the same may be kept in approved covered
receptacles or placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground
and evenly piled or stacked or disposed of as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Resources.
It shall be unlawful to maintain a junkyard or a place for the dumping or wrecking or disassembling
of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind or for the storing or leaving of dilapidated,
wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind or of any of the
parts thereof or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or
builders or by other persons, which said places may afford harborage or breeding areas for rats or
other vectors.
It shall be unlawful to store refuse in containers other than those which shall be made of durable,
watertight, rust-resistant material having a tight-fitting lid which must be kept on the container
when in use. These containers must be kept clean by thorough rinsing as often as necessary so
as not to provide food or breeding areas for flies.
It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, bury, destroy or otherwise dispose of refuse except at an
approved refuse disposal site.
It shall be unlawful to collect, haul, transport or convey garbage in open, unenclosed, nonleakproof
vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain or use a sewage system, privy, urinal, cesspool or other
receptacle for human excrement so that vectors may have access to the excrementitious matter
contained therein.
It shall be unlawful to permit weeds or similar vegetation more than one foot high to remain
standing in any vacant lot, yard or other place except as may be approved by the municipality.
It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of standing or flowing
water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is treated or
maintained so as to effectually prevent such breeding.
§ 165-4. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he/she occupies and
controls.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects and/or rodents on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 360/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the
shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
§ 165-5. Vectorproofing.
Any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premises or any other place may be
required to be vectorproofed when found to be providing harborage or breeding areas for rats,
flies, mosquitoes or any other vectors.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any
other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the vectorproofing from any building,
structure or accessory structure for any purpose.
§ 165-6. Private vector-control programs.
A program plan and specifications for private vector-control programs may be required to be submitted
to the municipality as deemed necessary by the vector-control program director. Said program plan
shall be submitted by the owner or agent of the property on or in which said vector-control program is
or will be conducted. The program plan shall state the type of vectors to be controlled, the name of the
company contracted to carry out the program and any and all work to be conducted in an effort to
control said vectors. If after review of the program plan by the vector-control program director it is
found to be inadequate or incomplete, additional information may be required as well as additional
control methods.
§ 165-7. Authority to abate vector problems.
From and after passage of this chapter, the municipality and/or a representative of the vectorcontrol
program is empowered to make inspections of the interior and exterior of all dwellings,
buildings, structures and accessory structures, premises, collections of water, or any other places
to determine full compliance with this chapter and to determine evidence of vector infestation and
the need for vectorproofing or additions or repairs to existing vectorproofing.
Whenever it shall be determined that any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure,
premises, collection of water or any other place is in violation of this chapter, a notice shall be
issued setting forth the alleged violations and advising the owner, occupant, operator or agent that
such violations must be corrected. The time for the correction of said violations must be given as
well as the necessary methods to be employed in the correction.
Whenever said violations shall fail to be corrected within the time set forth and an extension of this
time is not deemed to be necessary, the municipality may proceed to abate the said violations in
the manner provided by the law.
§ 165-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision(s) of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus the cost of
prosecution. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the payment of such
fine and costs, said person shall undergo imprisonment in the Allegheny County jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 361/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(2)
A.
Chapter 167. Vehicles, Abandoned or Nuisance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 4-28-2008 by Ord. No.
987. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 124.
Storage yards — See Ch. 141.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 173.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
As defined by § 102 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, a vehicle which has remained on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 24 hours.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Any motor vehicle which falls under Subsection (1) or (2) hereof and set forth as follows:
Any motorized vehicle which is without current and valid:
License plate or plates; and
Registration sticker; and
Inspection sticker, including emissions inspection, where applicable.
Any motorized vehicle which possesses one or more of the following conditions
constituting a nuisance:
Sharp edges on motor vehicle parts constituting a dangerous condition, including but
not limited to the following:
Broken windshield, mirrors, headlamps, taillamps or other glass.
Broken body parts.
Open or severely damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall.
Protruding motor vehicle parts constituting a dangerous condition, including but not
limited to the following:
Body parts, including glass, broken or otherwise, which protrude from the
normal and customary place on a vehicle.
Doors, trunk or hood which do not latch closed.
Conditions which do or could permit harborage of vermin/animals, including but not
limited to the following:
One or more flat or open tires or tubes.
Missing doors, windshield, windows, hood or trunk.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 362/483
[3]
[4]
[5]
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(2)
Upholstery which is torn or open.
Doors, trunk or hood which do not latch closed.
Open or severely damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall.
Conditions which result in the unsafe suspension of a motor vehicle, including but
not limited to:
Missing tires.
Vehicle frame, broken or otherwise suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
Suspended or unstable supports.
Fluids from the motor vehicle, including but not limited to the following:
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause a fire or explosion.
Exposed battery containing acid.
Disassembled motor vehicle parts, including but not limited to the following: chassis
or other motor vehicle parts stored in a disorderly fashion in or about the vehicle.
Such other conditions which constitute nuisances and threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township of Wilkins.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A police officer, code enforcement officer or other person or entity designated by the
Township of Wilkins to enforce its ordinances.
MOTOR VEHICLE
A car, truck, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or any other type of mechanical device, propelled
by a motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or highways,
and including trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby; and any parts of a motor vehicle.
NUISANCE
Any condition or use of motor vehicle or property, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a danger or potential danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Wilkins.
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Any motorized vehicle which possesses one or more of the following conditions, constituting a
nuisance:
Sharp edges on motor vehicle parts constituting a dangerous condition, including but not
limited to the following:
Broken windshield, mirrors, headlamps, taillamps or other glass.
Broken body parts.
Open or severely damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall.
Protruding motor vehicle parts constituting a dangerous condition, including but not
limited to the following:
Body parts, including glass, broken or otherwise, which protrude from the normal
and customary place on a vehicle.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 363/483
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
A.
Doors, trunk or hood which do not latch closed.
Conditions which do or could permit harborage of vermin/animals, including but not
limited to the following:
One or more flat or open tires or tubes.
Missing doors, windshield, windows, hood or trunk.
Upholstery which is torn or open.
Doors, trunk, hood or windows which do not latch closed.
Open or severely damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall.
Conditions which result in the unsafe suspension of a motor vehicle, including but not
limited to the following:
Missing tires or flat tires.
Vehicle frame, broken or otherwise, suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
Suspended on unstable stoppers.
Fluids from the motor vehicle, including but not limited to the following:
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause a fire or explosion.
Exposed battery containing acid.
Disassembled motor vehicle parts, including but not limited to the following: chassis or
other motor vehicle parts stored in a disorderly fashion in or about the vehicle.
Such other conditions which constitute nuisances and threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township of Wilkins.
PERSON
The owner of the abandoned motor vehicle; or the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, resident
or custodian of the property on which abandoned motor vehicles are located, whether
individual or partnership, association or corporation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY
Any real property located within the Township of Wilkins, which a person owns, and which is
not public property as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any
other publicly owned property or facility.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 167-2. Violations; exceptions.
Violations. A person shall be in violation of this chapter for committing the following prohibited
behavior:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 364/483
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
No person shall keep or leave, or permit to be kept or left, any abandoned motor vehicle
parts, as defined by this chapter, within the Township of Wilkins for more than 72 hours.
No person shall keep or leave, or permit to be kept or left, any abandoned motor vehicle, as
defined by this chapter, within 10 feet of public streets or alleys in the Township of Wilkins for
more than 72 hours.
Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A vehicle in an enclosed building, excluding tarps or similar coverings and carport-type
structures which are open to view and are unsecured.
A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise lawfully licensed to operate a motor
vehicle junkyard or other such lawfully licensed business requiring the keeping of
abandoned vehicles, or parts thereof, as defined herein.
A classic or antique vehicle which is in the process of being restored, provided that the
use of oxy-acetylene or electric arc welding (torch cutting) or the use of spray painting
are performed inside an approved enclosed area or as approved by the Fire Marshal.
A vehicle in an appropriate storage place, lawful depository or impoundment facility.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of abandoned motor vehicles contrary
to the provisions of the Township of Wilkins Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 173), Property
Maintenance Ordinance (Chapter 124) or Vehicles and Traffic Ordinance (Chapter 168).
§ 167-3. Enforcement and abatement; penalties.
The Township of Wilkins shall enforce or abate the nuisances, defined by this chapter, as follows:
Inspections. Enforcement officers of the Township of Wilkins are hereby authorized and
empowered to inspect private property on which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If a Wilkins Township enforcement officer finds a
violation or violations of this chapter, he shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or
certified mail upon the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle, or if unknown, the owner of the
premises, lessee, agent of the owner, household or family member, and/or custodian of the
property on which the abandoned motor vehicle is located, whether individual or partnership,
association or corporation. If the whereabouts or identity of the above-defined persons is unknown
or if they fail to respond to the written notice, service shall be by posting the notice conspicuously
upon the premises where the motor vehicles are located.
Said notice shall specify the violation complained of and shall require the person to remove or
rectify the violation within 10 days of the mailing or posting of said notice.
The authorized enforcement officer, whether the Wilkins Township Police or the code
enforcement officer, shall have the right and power to enter upon the premises where the
abandoned motor vehicles are located to accomplish the service of notice and any other
remedy under this chapter.
Impounding of abandoned motor vehicles. If the person notified does not comply with the notice to
abate, the Township of Wilkins enforcement officer is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed any abandoned motor vehicle which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter,
within the boundaries of the Township of Wilkins, at the initial expense of the Township. Such
abandoned motor vehicle shall be impounded at the closest junk automotive dealership or yard
until lawfully claimed or disposed of according to law. The Township of Wilkins shall then assess
the person notified with the cost of such towing and impoundment, plus 10% of all costs.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 365/483
(1)
(2)
C.
[1]
A.
B.
Enforcement of nuisance motor vehicles and abandoned motor vehicles. An action shall be
brought against any person in violation of this chapter by filing a citation with the Magisterial
District Justice for the Township of Wilkins for a summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Any person who shall be convicted of violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
removal of the vehicle, restitution for the costs of removal of the vehicle(s) and/or a term of
imprisonment of up to 90 days, per violation. Each day that a violation continues after conviction
shall constitute a separate offense.
Civil action for unpaid fines, penalties and costs and other relief. The Township of Wilkins may
file a civil enforcement proceeding with the same Magisterial District Justice to recover the
unpaid fines, penalties, costs, restitution and expenses accruing for each day the violation
continues when they are not voluntarily paid. Penalties shall not exceed $1,000 per violation.
The civil enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by complaint or by such other means as
may be provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures. In any civil action, the
Township of Wilkins shall be exempt from the payment of costs of any civil case brought to
enforce this chapter and in accordance with 53 P.S. § 66601 (c.1)(1).
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter, or
any remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they may be
employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Township of Wilkins.
Chapter 168. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 5-14-1979 as Ord. No.
643. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 117.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 138.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 168-1. Word usage.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have meanings ascribed to them in the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code as now in force[1] or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 168-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic or parking
regulations.
[Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 800]
The Township of Wilkins shall adopt all traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature:
By enactment of an ordinance.
By action of the Chief of Police of Wilkins Township. The Chief of Police is by this section
authorized and directed to impose such traffic regulations as may be specified from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners of Wilkins Township by resolution. Such Resolution may direct the
Chief of Police to regulate traffic or parking through exercise of any of the powers specified at 75
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 366/483
C.
[1]
A.
[2]
[3]
B.
[1]
[1]
A.
Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a). Regulations of traffic or parking so imposed shall be deemed to have been
authorized and imposed by this chapter and by action of a public official authorized to act on
specified matters in accordance with the provisions of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(b)(2).
In such other manner as may be authorized by law.
§ 168-3. Powers of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Wilkins or the officer in command in his absence shall have the
following powers:
Regulating and temporarily prohibiting traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance, or special events; Vehicle Code § 6109(a)(1)[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(15).
Adopting and enforcing such temporary or experimental regulations as may be necessary to cover
emergencies or special conditions, including but not limited to fire, flood, storm or road
construction damage; Vehicle Code § 6109(a)(20).[2] Such temporary and emergency regulations
shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of Wilkins in the same manner as
permanent regulations.[3]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(20).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-4. Designation of crosswalks, traffic lanes and parking
spaces.
The Board of Commissioners of Wilkins Township shall further have the power and authority to
establish, change and abolish and to designate by appropriate markings or signs, crosswalks, traffic
lanes and parking spaces; Vehicle Code § 6109-(b).[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(b).
§ 168-5. Records of traffic violations.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this Township or
of the State Vehicle Code of which any person has been charged, together with the final disposition of
all such alleged offenses.
§ 168-6. Designation of stop intersections.
The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where
particular traffic hazards exist upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall
stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such
place where a stop is required; Vehicle Code § 6109(b).[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(b).
§ 168-7. Parking on narrow streets.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any highway where such stopping, standing or
parking would create a hazardous traffic condition or would unduly interfere with the free
movement of traffic.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 367/483
[1]
B.
[1]
[1]
[1]
The site where such standing, stopping or parking is prohibited shall be marked by the erection of
official traffic signs; Vehicle Code § 3353-(d).[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(d). In addition, original Section 8, entitled "Stopping,
standing or parking prohibited," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-8. Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such circumstances as to
leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic,
and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 168-9. Establishment of speed limits.
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all street's and
highways within the Township, except as this chapter, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and
determines upon the basis of traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable
upon specified streets and highways or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are
in place giving notice thereof. No person shall exceed the maximum speed limit as posted on any
highway within the Township; Vehicle Code § 3363 and § 6109(a)(10) and (14).[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3363 AND 6109(a)(10) and (14).
§ 168-10. Damage to Township property.
Any person or firm or corporation causing damage to be done to any traffic standard, sign or other
construction of the Township shall become liable to pay the damages caused thereby.
§ 168-11. Vehicles obstructing traffic.
The Police Department shall have the right to remove, if necessary, any vehicle obstructing traffic,
whether parked or standing. The charges for such removal shall be held by the person owning or in
charge of the vehicle causing such obstruction or which is illegally parked; Vehicle Code § 3351.[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3351.
§ 168-12. Weight limitations.
The Township may determine and designate which streets or highways in the Township require a
limitation of the weight of motor vehicles which use said streets or highways in order that said streets
or highways shall not be damaged. Upon ascertaining which streets or highways require said limitation
of weight passing over the same, signs shall be erected at either end and along streets and highways
setting forth the maximum weight of motor vehicles which can use said streets and highways; Vehicle
Code § 4902.[1]
Editor's Note: See Pa.C.S.A. § 4902.
§ 168-13. Enforcement.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 368/483
[1]
[1]
The provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code as to the procedure in prosecuting violations shall be
followed in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 168-14. U-turns prohibited upon certain streets.
No operator of any vehicle shall make a U-turn upon the Greensburg Pike, William Penn Highway,
Brown Avenue, Churchill Road, Larimer Avenue, Rodi Road or Penn Center Boulevard.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-15. One-way streets established.
[Amended 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 788[1]]
The following are established as one-way streets:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Cherry Way East From Greensburg Pike to Wallace Avenue
Hart Drive Turnabout Counter- clockwise Entire length
Leneake Street West From Larimer Avenue to Linhart Street
Linhart Street East Entire length
Rebecca Avenue East From Thompson Street to McMasters Avenue
Ridge Street South From Wallace Avenue to Cline Street
Upper Mortimer Avenue North Entire length
Upper Mortimer North Entire length
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-16. Speed limits established on certain streets.
The following speed limits are hereby established:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Alpine Boulevard
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Braddsley Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Briaridge Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Brown Avenue 35 Entire length
Calmont Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Churchill Road 25 From the Churchill Borough line to
Larimer Avenue
Cline Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Clugston Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 369/483
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Curry Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Curry Court
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Delaney Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Dunbar Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Farnsworth Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Frazier Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Gardenia Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
George Lane
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
George Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Gilchrest Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Gilmore Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Grandview Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Greensburg Pike 35 From the Churchill Borough line to the
Borough of Turtle Creek line
Harrison Road
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Harwick Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Hawthorne Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Highland Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
James Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Jefferson Heights Road
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Kingston Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Larimer Avenue 25 From Rodi Road south to the Turtle
Creek Borough line
Laurel Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Leax Lane
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 370/483
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Leneake Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Linhart Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Lucia Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
McMasters Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Mortimer Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Negley Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Old William Penn Highway 35 Entire length
Patterson Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Penhurst Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Penn Center Boulevard
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Powell Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Quarry Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Queenston Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Radcliff Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Rebecca Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Ridge Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Ridgewood Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Rita Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Rodi Road South 35 Entire length
Roland Road
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Stevendale Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Sunset Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Thompson Run Road 35 Entire length
Thompson Street
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Thorncrest Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 371/483
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Tynewood Drive
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Wallace Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
Wilbur Avenue
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
20 Entire length
§ 168-17. Stop intersections established.
[Amended 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 666; 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 24-94; 4-30-2007 by Ord. No. 980; 9-10-
2007 by Ord. No. 981]
The following intersections located in the Township are hereby declared to be stop intersections and
official stop signs shall be erected or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected. All vehicles traveling
upon the first named street, upon approaching the second named street shall come to a full stop, at a
clearly marked stop line, or if none, before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or,
if none, then, at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering into the intersection.
If traveling upon Stop At Direction
Alpine Boulevard Greensburg Pike
Alpine Boulevard Miller Street Both
Alpine Boulevard Stevendale Drive
Ayers Alley Negley Avenue
Baker Street Lower Rodi Road
Balint Lane Brown Avenue
Beech Street Washington Street Extension
Beech Street Extension Saw Mill Run Road
Boone Alley Clugston Avenue (upper)
Boone Alley Clugston Avenue (lower)
Braddsley Drive Penhurst Drive (upper)
Braddsley Drive Penhurst Drive (lower)
Briaridge Drive Larchwood South
Briaridge Drive Leax Lane
Briaridge Drive Tynewood (lower) Both
Calmont Drive Thorncrest Drive
Charnwood Drive Frazier Drive
Cherry Way Wallace Avenue
Churchill Court Churchill Road
Churchill Lane Coal Street
Churchill Lane Negley Avenue
Churchill Road Larimer Avenue
Churchill Road Penhurst Drive Both
Cline Street Greensburg Pike
Cline Street Powell Street South
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 372/483
If traveling upon Stop At Direction
Cline Street Wallace Avenue Both
Clugston Avenue Highland Avenue
Coal Street Meadow Street
Curry Avenue Negley Avenue
Curry Court Negley Avenue
Delaney Drive Dunbar Drive (lower) South
Delaney Drive Dunbar Drive (upper)
Delaney Drive Kingston Drive
Delaney Drive Queenston Drive Both
Dorothy Street Greensburg Pike
Dorothy Street John Street Both
Dorothy Street Peter Street Both
Dowling Avenue Elizabeth Street
Dunbar Drive Delaney Drive (lower)
Dunbar Drive Delaney Drive (upper) Both
Dunbar Drive Jefferson Heights Road
Dunbar Drive Kingston Drive Both
Eastmont Park Road Frazier Drive
Elizabeth Street Greensburg Pike
Elizabeth Street Lucia Road
Elizabeth Street Nanette Drive Both
Elizabeth Street Rita Drive (lower) Both
Elizabeth Street Rita Drive (upper) Both
Elizabeth Street Stevendale Drive Both
Farnsworth Avenue Churchill Road
Farnsworth Avenue Harrison Road
Farnsworth Avenue Patterson Street Both
Fire Department #4 Frazier Drive
Frazier Drive Gilmore Drive Both
Frazier Drive Kingston Drive
Free Lane Brown Avenue
Gardenia Drive Churchill Road
George Lane Churchill Road
George Street Harrison Road
Gilchrist Drive Old Northern Pike
Gilchrist Drive Ridgewood Drive Both
Gilmore Drive Frazier Drive
Gilmore Drive Kingston Drive
Grayhurst Drive Harrison Road
Harrison Road Churchill Road
Harrison Road Farnsworth Avenue Both
Harrison Road Larimer Avenue
Harrison Road Patterson Street East
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 373/483
If traveling upon Stop At Direction
Hart Drive Delaney Drive
Harwick Drive Penhurst Drive (lower)
Harwick Drive Penhurst Drive (upper)
Hawthorne Drive Laurel Drive Both
Hawthorne Drive Sunset Drive (upper)
Hawthorne Drive William Penn Highway
Heritage Drive Penhurst Drive
Hibiscus Drive Gardenia Drive
Highland Avenue Clugston Avenue Both
Highland Avenue Mortimer Avenue Both
Highland Avenue Negley Avenue
Ivy Street Brown Avenue
Ivy Street Tongalucas Street
James Street George Street
Jefferson Heights Road Dunbar Drive Both
Jefferson Heights Road Orion Drive Both
John Street Dorothy Street
Kingston Drive Dunbar Drive
Kingston Drive Gilmore/Delaney Drives Both
Kingston Drive Frazier Drive Both
Kingston Drive Queenston Drive Both
Larchwood Drive Briaridge Drive South
Laurel Drive Hawthorne Drive
Laurel Drive Orion Drive Both
Laurel Village Drive Penn Center Boulevard
Leax Lane Briaridge Drive
Lilly Lane Elizabeth Street
Lilly Lane Rita Drive
Linhart Street Larimer Avenue
Lougeay Road Lower Rodi Road
Lougeay Road Old William Penn Highway
Lucia Road Roland Road
Lucinda Drive Brown Avenue
McMasters Avenue Larimer Avenue
McMasters Avenue Rebecca Avenue Both
McMasters Avenue Semmens Street Both
Miller Street Alpine Boulevard Both
Miller Street Elizabeth Street
Mortimer Avenue Highland Avenue
Mortimer Avenue Saw Mill Run Road Both
Mortimer Avenue Spur Road Both
Moss Street Brown Avenue
Nanette Street Elizabeth Street
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 374/483
If traveling upon Stop At Direction
Nanette Street Rita Drive
Negley Avenue Churchill Road Both
Negley Avenue Highland Avenue North
Negley Avenue Rebecca Avenue Both
Negley Avenue Semmens Street Both
No Name Alley Beaver Street
Old Northern Pike Gilchrist Drive
Old Northern Pike Old William Penn Highway
Orion Drive Laurel Drive
Orion Drive Sunset Drive
Patterson Street Harrison Road
Peffer Road Gardenia Drive
Peffer Road Sawmill Run Road
Penhurst Drive Braddsley Drive (lower) Both
Penhurst Drive Braddsley Drive (upper) Both
Penhurst Drive Churchill Road
Penhurst Drive Harrison Road
Penhurst Drive Harwick Drive (lower) Both
Penhurst Drive Harwick Drive (upper) Both
Penhurst Drive Heritage Drive Both
Penhurst Drive Radcliffe Drive Both
Penn Center Boulevard Building #2 North
Penn Center Boulevard Building #7 Both
Penn Center Boulevard Laurel Village Entrance Both
Penn Center Boulevard Lower Rodi Road
Peter Street Dorothy Street
Pine Tree Drive Vineseian Place
Powell Street Cline Street
Powell Street Greensburg Pike
Queenston Drive Delaney Drive
Queenston Drive Kingston Drive
Radcliff Drive Harwick Drive
Radcliff Drive Penhurst Drive
Railroad Street Larimer Avenue
Rebecca Avenue McMasters Avenue
Ridge Street Cline Street Both
Ridge Street Greensburg Pike
Ridgecrest Drive Lougeay Road
Ridgewood Drive Gilchrist Drive Both
Rita Drive Elizabeth Street (lower)
Rita Drive Elizabeth Street (upper)
Rita Drive Stevendale Drive Both
Roland Road Brown Avenue
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 375/483
If traveling upon Stop At Direction
Roland Road Stevendale Drive
Russell Lane Brown Avenue
Saw Mill Run Road Mortimer Avenue
Semmens Street McMasters Avenue East
Spur Road Beaver Street
Stevendale Drive Alpine Boulevard Both
Stevendale Drive Elizabeth Street Both
Stevendale Drive Rita Drive
Stevendale Drive Roland Road Both
Straley Lane Brown Avenue
Sunset Drive Hawthorne Drive (lower) Both
Sunset Drive Hawthorne Drive (upper)
Sunset Drive Old William Penn Highway
Sunset Drive Orion Drive Both
Sylvia Lane Old William Penn Highway
Thomas Lane George Lane
Thompson Street Rebecca Avenue Both
Thompson Street Semmens Street
Thompson Run Road Lower Rodi Road
Thorncrest Drive Calmont Drive Both
Thorncrest Drive Hawthorne Drive
Tynewood Drive Briaridge (lower)
Tynewood Drive Briaridge (upper)
Upper Mortimer Avenue Clugston Avenue
Vineseian Place Churchill Road
Wallace Avenue Cline Street
Wallace Avenue Powell Street
Wallace Avenue Ridge Street Both
Washington Avenue Brown Avenue
Washington Avenue Extension Hazel Street
Wilbur Avenue Ivy Street
Article II. Parking
§ 168-18. Parking prohibitions at all times.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Alpine Boulevard South Entire length
Ayers Avenue Both Entire length
Baker Street
[Amended 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
South Signs as erected
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 376/483
Name of Street Side Location
Barbour Street Both Entire length
Beaver Avenue East Entire length
Beech Street Both Entire length
Boone Alley Both Entire length
Brown Avenue
[Added 7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 704]
East From Washington Street to a point 1,200
feet north
Charnwood Drive West Entire length
Cherry Alley Both Entire length
Churchill Lane North Entire length
Churchill Road South From Larimer Avenue to Negley Avenue
Clugston Avenue
[Amended 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 666]
East From a point 790 feet south of Highland
Avenue to the Turtle Creek boundary line
Clugston Avenue
[Amended 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 666]
West From Highland Avenue to a point 728 feet
north of the Turtle Creek boundary line
Coal Street Both Entire length
Crestview Drive Both Entire length
Curry Avenue South Entire length
Curry Court East Entire length
Delaney Drive West/ north Entire length
Dorothy Street Apartments
[Amended 1-14-1985 by Ord. No. 730]
North/ east From Peter Street to the driveway of the
Highland Manor
Dorothy Street
[Amended 1-14-1985 by Ord. No. 730]
South/ west From Greensburg Pike to Peter Street
Dowling Avenue West Entire length
Dunbar Drive South/ west Entire length
Electric Avenue Both Entire length
Elizabeth Street South/ west Entire length
Elwood Drive East Entire length
Farnsworth Avenue West Entire length
Frazier Drive North Entire length
Gardenia Drive West Entire length
George Lane Both Entire length
George Street East Entire length
Gilchrest Drive West From Old Northern Pike to Ridgewood Drive
Gilmore Drive West Entire length
Grand View Avenue South Entire length
Greensburg Pike
[Added 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 744;
amended 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 966]
Both Cline Street to Powell Street, except for a
point 100 feet north and 100 feet south of
Ridge Street
Greensburg Pike
[Amended 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 966]
Both Powell Street to Churchill line, 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays
Hagars Alley Both Entire length
Harrison Road North Entire length
Hart Drive South Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 377/483
Name of Street Side Location
Hawthorne Avenue South/ west From Sunset Drive to Sunset Drive
Hazel Street Both Entire length
Hibiscus Drive South Entire length
Highland Avenue
[Added 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 666]
Both From the Turtle Creek boundary line to a
point 151 feet north
Highland Avenue West Entire length
Ivy Street South Entire length
James Street North Entire length
Jefferson Heights Road Both From the Northern Pike to the southern
Eastmont School property line
Jefferson Heights Road South Entire length
John Street Both Entire length
Kingston Drive Both From the William Penn Highway to Gilmore
Drive and Delany Drive
Kingston Drive West Entire length
Larimer Avenue Both Entire length
Laurel Drive West Entire length
Leneake Street South/ west Entire length
Lilly Lane West Entire length
Linhart Street North/ east Entire length
Lougeay Road Both Entire length
Lucia Drive West Entire length
Lucinda Drive West Entire length
McMasters Avenue
[Added 9-14-1981 by Ord. No. 625]
Both From the east side of Semmens Street to a
point 35 feet north
McMasters Avenue
[Added 9-14-1981 by Ord. No. 625]
Both From the west side of Semmens Street to a
point 46 feet north
McMasters Avenue East From Larimer Avenue to a point 104 feet
south
Meadow Street South Entire length
Miller Street South/ west Entire length
Montgomery Street South Entire length
Mortimer Avenue East Entire length
Moss Street South Entire length
Nanette Drive Both Entire length
Negley Avenue East Entire length
Old Northern Pike Both Entire length
Orchard Street Both Entire length
Patterson Street South Entire length
Peffer Road Both Entire length
Penhurst Drive East/ south Entire length
Penn Center Boulevard Both Entire length
Powell Street Both From Greensburg Pike to Wallace Avenue
Powell Street East/ north Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 378/483
[1]
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
Name of Street Side Location
Quarry Street West Entire length
Queenston Drive South/ west Entire length
Railroad Street North/ east Entire length
Rebecca Avenue Both From Thompson Street to McMasters
Avenue
Rebecca Avenue
[Added 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 710]
Both From Thompson Street to Negley Avenue
Rebecca Avenue North From Negley Avenue to Thompson Street
(Sundays only)
Rebecca Avenue North From Thompson Street to McMasters
Avenue
Ridge Street South/ east Entire length
Ridgewood Drive Both Entire length
Rita Drive West/ north Entire length
Rodi Road Both Entire length
Roland Road Both From Brown Avenue to Lucia Drive
Roland Road East Entire length
Saw Mill Run Road Both Entire length
Semmens Street North Entire length
Stevendale Drive West Entire length
Sunset Drive North/ east Entire length
Thompson Run Road Both Entire length
Thompson Street West Entire length
Tongalucas Street Both Entire length
Tongalucas Street East Entire length
Upper Mortimer Avenue West Entire length
Wallace Avenue East Entire length
Washington Street South/ east Entire length
Wilbur Avenue East Entire length
William Penn Highway Both Entire length
Zerjav Alley Both Entire length
Editor's Note: Original Section 19, entitled "Backing up restricted," which immediately preceded this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-19. Fire lanes.
The erection of official signs prohibiting standing and parking as provided by the Vehicle Code,
§ 3353(a) and (b)[1] and Chapter 88, Fire Prevention, as amended, are hereby authorized in areas
designated as fire lanes, as follows:
At the following locations in Penn Center:
The lanes abutting the Sears, Roebuck and Company retail store building on the north,
south, west and east.
The lanes abutting the Sears, Roebuck and Company automotive store building on the
north, east, south and west.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 379/483
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
[2]
(6)
[3]
(7)
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
The lanes abutting Penn Center Building No. 2 on the north, east, south and west.
Between signs erected at the main entrances located on the north, east, south and west
sides of Penn Center Building Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5.
At designated areas adjacent to traffic lanes in parking areas marked by yellow paint.
In front of the entrances to Briaridge Apartment Buildings addressed as follows: 100 Briaridge
Drive, 102 Briaridge Drive, 104 Briaridge Drive, 106 Briaridge Drive and 108 Briaridge Drive;
also Briaridge Apartment parking lot at the entrance to Free Lane.
[Amended 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 726]
As posted in front of the entrance to Seville Square Apartment Buildings addressed as
follows:
Building No. 1: 4293 Greensburg Pike.
Building No. 2: 4295 Greensburg Pike.
Building No. 3: 4297 Greensburg Pike.
As posted at the Showcase Cinema, 3455 William Penn Highway, in the following locations:
At curbs on the north, south, west and east sides of the building.
At the driveway on the west side of the building.
At the driveway in the east parking lot running in a northerly direction from the William
Penn Highway.
[Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 695]
At the west side of the Mauna Loa Restaurant, 3333 William Penn Highway.
As posted at the Laurel Village Apartments and Penn Tower Apartments.[2]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
As posted at the west side of an unnamed right-of-way along the boundary of the lands
owned by Joseph Suffer and PCIV Inc.[3]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(a) and (b).
The official signs shall be paid for and maintained by the owners of the property on which the fire
lanes are located.
No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in the locations above set forth.
The Police Department of the Township of Wilkins is authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $15 and costs of prosecution.
§ 168-20. Miscellaneous parking restrictions.
Parking of any motor vehicle without current and valid license plates or current and valid inspection
stickers on any streets of the Township is prohibited; parking of any motor vehicle on any street for the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 380/483
[1]
[1]
[2]
purpose of substantial repairs or overhaul is prohibited; parking any motor vehicle and leaving the
same unmoved for any seven-day period is prohibited. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine (unless otherwise
specified) of not less than $15 and costs of prosecution. No vehicle shall be removed under the
authority of this section if at the time of the intended removal thereof the owner or person for time
being in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove such
vehicle immediately.
§ 168-20.1. Parking within marked spaces.
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
Wherever a space is designated off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle
parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of
this section for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 168-20.2. Berm parking only on parts of certain streets.
[Added 8-29-1994 by Res. No. 23-94]
Parking on the berm only, with all parts of the parked vehicle off the paved portion of the following
streets, shall be permitted:
Name of Street Side Location
Baker Street South Signs as erected
Article III. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 168-21. Authority to remove vehicles.
Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle found upon a highway subject to
the provisions of § 3352(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3352(a), (b), (c) and (d).
§ 168-22. Vehicles of excessive size.
No vehicles, trucks, tractors or trailers in excess of twenty-three and one-half (231/2) feet in outside
length and/or nine feet in outside height and 82 inches in outside width shall be parked at any time
upon the public streets of the Township except during such periods reasonably required to pick up or
deliver persons or property within the Township. It is hereby declared to be the policy and intent of the
Township of Wilkins that parking provided on the Township streets not be taken up by storage or
parking of extra-size vehicles or equipment as above described unless the same is actually in
commercial use at the time it is stored or parked.
§ 168-23. No-passing zones.
No vehicle shall overtake or pass on the left side of the roadway in that portion of any highway where
overtaking or passing is prohibited by appropriate signs or markings which shall indicate the beginning
and end of such zones; Vehicle Code § 3307.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3307.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 381/483
A.
B.
[2]
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
§ 168-24. School zones.
School zones are hereby established on Churchill Road extending from a point where the
boundary line of the Borough of Churchill crosses said Churchill Road eastwardly to the
intersection of Harrison Road and on Jefferson Heights Road in front of the Eastmont School
property.
A speed limit of 15 miles per hour during school hours shall be imposed in this zone.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs and to
enforce said speed limit as provided in § 3365(d) of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3365(d). Also, original Section 28, entitled "Prohibition of turns,"
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 7-5-1983 by Ord. No. 707.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-25. Operation of commercial vehicles in parks.
Commercial motor vehicles shall be absolutely prohibited from operation and use on all roads serving
as access roads to any Township park, parklet or playground and within any Township park, parklet or
playgrounds, provided that such prohibition shall not apply to commercial motor vehicles using the
same for purposes of operation, maintenance or repair of said parks, parklets or playgrounds.
§ 168-26. Vehicle weight restrictions.
The words "truck or trailer," "highway," "police officer" and "person" shall be defined as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
Trucks and trailers shall not be used or operated on any highway maintained by the Township of
Wilkins having a gross weight, including chassis, body and load, in excess of eight tons (16,000
gross pounds).
Trucks or trailers having a gross weight, including chassis, body and load in excess of six tons
(12,000 gross pounds) shall not be used or operated on any highway maintained by the Township
of Wilkins when such highway traverses a bridge or when any portion of such highway is
protected, supported, or abutted by a wall, cribbing or other structure designed to protect or
support any portion of the highway.
Any police officer having reason to believe that the gross weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles is in excess of the limits provided herein is authorized to arrest the progress of such
vehicle to prevent damage or deterioration of the highway and, upon finding excess weight, to
require the person operating the same to unload excess weight.
Restricted highways.
Commercial motor vehicles, regardless of weight, shall not be used or operated except for
local service on the following highways; Vehicle Code § 4902.[1]
Name of Street
Alpine Boulevard
Cline Street
Dorothy Street
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 382/483
[1]
(2)
(1)
(2)
[2]
F.
G.
H.
Name of Street
Dunbar Drive
Elizabeth Street
Gardenia Drive
Grandview Avenue
Hawthorne Drive
Jefferson Heights Road
Kingston Drive
Lougeay Road (over 16,000 pounds gross weight)
Lucia Road
Lucinda Drive
Powell Street
Quarry Street
Roland Road
Stevendale Drive
Sunset Drive
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902.
"Local service" is hereby defined as being the operation and use of commercial motor
vehicles upon trips which originate in or terminate in the Township of Wilkins.
The Board of Commissioners may at its discretion, upon good cause being shown therefor, upon
application, in writing, accompanied by a fee as provided by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, issue special permits, in writing, authorizing the applicant to operate or move
upon any highway maintained by the Township of Wilkins a commercial vehicle exceeding the
maximum weight specified in this section or a commercial vehicle on a highway upon which it is
otherwise prohibited; Vehicle Code § 4961.[2]
Any such permit shall be subject to such rules and regulations and any other condition or
restrictions, including the obligation on the part of the permittee to restore or replace any
section of highway or bridge or wall, cribbing or other structure designed to protect or support
any highway damaged as a result of such movement, whether or not the same was
attributable to negligence on the part of the permittee, as shall be deemed necessary by the
Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners may in its discretion require from the
permittee a bond guaranteeing the replacement or restoration of such highway damage, with
sufficient surety in such amount as the Board of Commissioners shall in its discretion find
necessary.
Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers, shall be open to inspection
by any peace officer and shall be revocable at any time at the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4961.
There shall be erected and maintained by the Township of Wilkins official signs designating the
applicable provisions of this chapter, whether there are weight restrictions or commercial vehicles
are prohibited, at each end of the highway affected thereby and at intersections thereof.
Any person refusing to unload excess weight when so ordered by a peace officer in uniform or
violating any of the other provisions of this section shall, upon conviction be sentenced to a fine of
no more than $300 and no less than $25 and costs of prosecution.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 383/483
[1]
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
§ 168-27. Yield signs.
Subject to the provisions of § 3323 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,[1] yield signs are erected at the
following intersections. The yield shall apply to the second named street.
Intersections
Rodi Road and Penn Center Boulevard
William Penn Highway and Penn Center Boulevard
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323.
§ 168-28. Placing of snow upon streets.
No person, firm or corporation shall throw, place or deposit upon the improved portion of any Township
street or road or cause the same to be done any snow, ice or slush, whether or not such snow, ice or
slush originally was plowed from the public street or road.
§ 168-29. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-30. Handicapped parking.
[Added 3-27-1995]
At the request of any handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, after review and approval
by the Chief of Police, there may be erected on the highway as close as possible to their place of
residence a sign or signs indicating that that place is reserved for the handicapped person or
severely disabled veteran, that no parking is allowed there by others, and that any unauthorized
person parking there shall be subject to a fine.
Posted signs; vehicles to be towed.
Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or severely disabled
veteran registration plate or displaying a handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking
placard when such vehicles are being operated by or for the transportation of a handicapped
person or a severely disabled veteran, no person shall park a vehicle on public or private
property reserved for a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran which property has
been so posted with a sign stating the penalty amount indicated in Subsection D, indicating
that vehicles in violation of the subsection may be towed.
Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated handicapped parking area may be
removed from that area by towing and may be reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon payment
of the towing costs.
Signs as provided in Subsection B(1) hereof shall be replaced when they become obsolete or
missing with costs of replacement borne by the persons responsible for signing the particular
location.
Unauthorized use. An operator of a vehicle bearing a handicapped or severely disabled veteran
plate or displaying a handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard shall not make use
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 384/483
D.
of the parking privileges accorded to handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans under
Subsection B(1) unless the operator is handicapped or a severely disabled veteran or unless the
vehicle is being operated for the transportation of a handicapped person or severely disabled
veteran.
Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200.
Article IV. Parades, Processions and Assemblages
[Added 10-30-1995 by Res. No. 20-95]
§ 168-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the words "assemblage" and "procession" shall have the following
meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE
A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any street.
PROCESSION
A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving along a street in a way that
interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A "procession" shall not include a funeral caravan
or military convoy.
§ 168-32. Assemblages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any assemblage unless the person
organizing or conducting the assemblage first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of the day on
which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is
proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date.
The permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when
the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been
granted or at any time or place other than that authorized by the permit.
§ 168-33. Processions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any procession unless the person organizing
or conducting the procession first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance of the day when the
procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit
shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession,
the hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble and form before the
procession is under way, the time when the procession may commence to move along its route and
the time by which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route of the procession
and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 385/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
§ 168-34. Engineering and traffic study.
No permit for assemblies or processions shall be issued without an engineering and traffic study, which
study shall include the following elements and criteria:
Elements.
Accident analysis.
Capacity analysis.
Past experience of processions, assemblages or special activities.
Traffic volume: average daily traffic, kinds and classes.
Type of highway.
Criteria. The closure or partial closure of a street for the purpose of a procession, assemblage or
special activity may be permitted if the following criteria are satisfied. On Township streets:
An adequate alternate route can be established for detouring traffic around the closed route.
An alternate route will not be required if one or more of the following exist:
The street to be closed is used primarily by local drivers who are familiar with the
alternate route.
The street is only partially closed and traffic can be safely maintained by police control on
the remainder of the highway.
The street closing is for less than 20 minutes and excessive traffic backup will not occur
during the closing.
Adequate detour signing or police control are provided by the Police Department for the
rerouting of traffic along the alternate route if required.
Delays in excess of 15 minutes will not be experienced along intersecting highways. These
delays may be alleviated by:
Periodically opening the intersection to cross traffic so that no vehicles on the intersecting
highway will be delayed in excess of 15 minutes.
Providing an alternate route for the cross street.
Adjacent properties will not be adversely affected by the street closure or partial closure.
A review of previous similar closures indicates no substantial problems or citizen complaints.
§ 168-35. State-designated highways.
Permits which include assemblages or processions on state-designated highways shall not be issued
unless compliance with Department of Transportation Regulation 201.71 has been assured.
§ 168-36. Conditions for approval.
In considering the application for a permit, the Chief of Police may attach reasonable conditions to the
grant of the permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 386/483
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
§ 168-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $25 and costs.
Article V. Speed Humps
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1054]
§ 168-38. Speed humps on Kingston and Dunbar Drive.
In accordance with Resolution No. 19-2015 which established the Traffic Calming Policy, speed
humps are hereby designated to be placed on Kingston Drive and Dunbar Drive, specifically at the
following locations:
Kingston Drive: 244 Kingston Drive.
Dunbar Drive: 428 Dunbar Drive.
The speed hump shall be designed to be a raised area on the road that is 22 feet in length with a
six-foot ramp on either end of a ten-foot flat top.
The speed humps shall be placed in the locations referenced at A(1) and A(2) for the minimum
period of 180 days for observation. Following the observation period, the speed humps may be
declared permanent.
Chapter 173. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins 7-9-1973 by Ord. No.
542. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Neighborhood blight reclamation and revitalization – See Ch. 27.
Planning Commission – See Ch. 35.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Construction Codes – See Ch. 78.
Geophysical seismic testing – See Ch. 82, Art. III.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Floodplain management – See Ch. 90.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 48.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 152.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 173-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Wilkins Township Zoning Ordinance."
§ 173-2. Defined terms.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 387/483
A.
B.
C.
Words used in a special sense in this chapter are defined in Article II.
§ 173-3. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives which are the basis for the provisions of this chapter are set
forth in the Comprehensive Plan as adopted and amended by the governing body.
§ 173-4. Zoning Map.
A map entitled "Wilkins Township Zoning Map" is hereby adopted as a part of this chapter. The Zoning
Map shall be kept on file for examination in the office of the Township Manager in the Municipal
Building.
§ 173-5. Compliance required.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted or
enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required by this chapter.
Article II. Definitions and Word Usage
§ 173-6. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are herein defined. Words used in the present tense
include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural and vice versa; the words "used for"
include the meaning "designed for."
§ 173-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABUT or ABUTTING
To join at a border or boundary; to share a common boundary with.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1053]
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE
A building or use which:
Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use.
Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use.
Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use served.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL
The all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of
sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental
noise at a given location without extreme atmospheric conditions, such as wind greater than three
meters per second or precipitation, and then adjusting the noise level to eliminate any noise
associated with existing developments or facilities.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 388/483
A.
B.
ANTENNA
Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices used
for the transmission or reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional
antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna.
An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless communications facilities as defined below.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
AREA OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
An indoor area, whether privately or publicly owned, to which the public has access by right or by
invitation, expressed or implied, whether by payment of money or not, including but not limited to
private-members clubs, conference halls, activity centers, public halls, courthouses, municipal
buildings, fire halls, libraries and school auditoriums, other than religious convocations.
[Added 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1031]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
State-of-the-art mitigation measures applied to oil and natural gas drilling and production to help
ensure that energy development is conducted in an environmentally responsible manner.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof.
MAIN
The building housing the principal use of the land.
UNIT GROUP
Two or more buildings, other than dwellings, grouped upon a single tract, such as universities,
hospitals, institutions or industrial plants.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the grade of the perimeter of the
proposed structure to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE
A line extending the entire width of the lot. The "building line" shall be located along the plane
created by the wall of the building facing the front yard.
BUSINESS, MEDICAL OFFICES
One or more administrative offices of individual doctors, dentists, chiropractors or other medical
practitioners and their supporting staffs where human patients receive diagnosis, treatment and
counseling and who are not kept overnight, including a methadone clinic.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986; amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1055]
BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
Any office of recognized professions, other than medical, such as lawyers, architects, engineers,
real estate brokers, insurance agents and others who, through training, are qualified to perform
services of a professional nature and other offices used primarily for accounting, corresponding,
research, editing or other administrative functions, but not including banks or other financial
institutions.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEM
A system utilized while drilling so that various types of pits are not used and instead steel bins or
closed containers are used to collect all drilling waste.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
CO-LOCATION
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 389/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas, on an existing tower-based WCF, or on
any structure that already supports at least one non-tower WCF.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID
A liquid having a closed cup flash point at or above 100º F. (38º C.). Combustible liquids shall
be subdivided as follows:
[Added 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1023]
Class II: liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above 100º F. (38º C.) and below
140º F. (60º C.).
Class IIIA: liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above 140º F. (60º C.) and below
200º F. (93º C.).
Class IIIB: liquids having closed cup flash points at or above 200º (93º C.).
This category of liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids.[2]
COMPLETION OF DRILLING, REDRILLING AND REWORKING
The date within 60 days of the completion of drilling, redrilling or reworking of the well site.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
DAY-CARE CENTER
A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, located within a building that is not used as a dwelling
unit, for the care, on a regular basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day, of children under the
age of 16 or handicapped or elderly persons.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
DISPOSAL WELL
A nonproducing gas well used for the storage of wastewater.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS)
A network of spatially separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
DOUBLE HOUSE
A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two families, with separate entrances for each,
but under one roof and with a wall or party wall between, but no interior connection between the
two.
DRILLING
Any digging or boring of a new well to explore, develop, or produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbons
or to inject gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
DRILLING SITE
An area that includes the perimeter of the surface area of drilling operations.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
DWELLING
Any building which is designed for or occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence or
sleeping place of one or more persons either permanently in Zoning Districts R-1 through R-4 or
transiently or permanently in Zoning Districts C-1, RC-1 and M. Notwithstanding the above, the
definition of a dwelling shall not preclude the principal occupant/owner or the principal
tenant/occupant of a home in Zoning Districts R-1 through R-4 from having any friend or relatives
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 390/483
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
as invited guests. Each dwelling shall have a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet, subject
to the Property Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 124.
[Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 997; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
EMERGENCY
A condition that:
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public; or
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss
of the services provided.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
EXPLORATION
Temporary geologic or geophysical activities, drilling in context with the zoning definition in this
chapter, including seismic surveys, related to the search for natural gas or other subsurface
hydrocarbons.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
FAMILY
[Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 927]
One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit, provided that a group of four or more persons who are not within the second degree of
kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a "family."
Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding subsection, a "family" shall be deemed to
include four or more persons not within the second degree of kinship occupying a dwelling
unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped
persons as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a
dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any family unit, as defined in
Subsection A of this definition.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME
A facility, licensed or approved by the commonwealth as required by the laws of the
Commonwealth, located within a dwelling in which the operator resides, for the care on a regular
basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day, of not more than six children under 16 years of age,
including care provided to children who are relatives of the provider, where such use shall be
secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and shall meet all applicable requirements
for home occupation.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
FCC
Federal Communications Commission.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
FLAMMABLE LIQUID
[Added 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1023]
A liquid having a closed cup flash point below 100º F. (38º C.). Flammable liquids are further
categorized into a group known as Class I liquids. The Class I category is subdivided as
follows:
Class IA: liquids having a flash point below 73º F. (23º C.) and having a boiling point
below 100º F. (38º C.).
Class IB: liquids having a flash point below 73º F. (23º C.) and having a boiling point at or
above 100º F. (38º C.).
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 391/483
(3)
B.
Class IC: liquids having a flash point at or above 73º F. (23º C.) and below 100º F. (38º
C.).
This category of liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids.
FLOWBACK WATER
The murky, salty water from fracking natural gas wells. It consists of frack fluid which returns to the
surface as well as produced water.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
FRACTURE OR FRACKING
The process of injecting water, customized fracking fluid, steam, or gas into a gas well under
pressure to improve gas recovery.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
FRESH WATER
Water obtained from a potable water source of the commonwealth, such as a hydrant, stream,
lake, water well, spring or other source that has not been treated or utilized in commercial or
industrial operations.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
FRONT FACADE AREA
The public right-of-way area located directly in front of a physical structure.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
GAS
Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the
earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature of 60° F. and
pressure of 14.7 psia, any manufactured gas, any byproduct gas or any mixture of gasses.
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000]
GAS WELL
Any well drilled for the intent of extracting gas or other hydrocarbons from beneath the surface of
the earth.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
GROSS FLOOR AREA
The sum of all gross horizontal areas of several floors of a building or buildings, measured from
the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of common walls separating buildings.
This includes stairwells, restrooms, lobby areas, floor space for mechanical equipment and all
other common areas and basements.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
GROUNDWATER
Water in that portion of the generally recognized hydrologic cycle which occupies the pore spaces
and fractures of saturated subsurface materials. Groundwater often supplies wells and springs
and is often withdrawn for domestic, agricultural, municipal, industrial and other beneficial uses.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
GROUP CARE FACILITY
An establishment that provides room and board to persons who are residents by virtue of
receiving supervised specialized services limited to health, social and/or rehabilitative services
provided by a governmental agency, their licensed or certified agents or a nonprofit social service
corporation charted in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or authorized to operate in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Added 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 738]
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 392/483
The vertical distance measured from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point
on a tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
HOME OCCUPATION
An accessory use of a service character conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents
thereof, which use is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not
in any way change the character of the dwelling.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING
The processing and fabrication of certain materials and products where no process involved will
produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard or noxious emission which will disturb or
endanger neighboring properties. "Light manufacturing" includes the production of the following
goods: home appliances, electrical instruments, office machines, precision instruments, electronic
devices, timepieces, jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments, novelties, wood products, printed
material, lithographic plates, type composition, machine tools, dies and gauges, ceramics,
apparel, lightweight nonferrous metal castings, film processing, light sheet metal products, plastic
goods, pharmaceutical goods and food products, but not animal slaughtering, curing nor rendering
of fats.
LOCAL STREET OR ROAD
A public street or road, adopted by ordinance, serving abutting homogeneous land uses and
providing for no truck usage except for local deliveries.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF A
That portion bounded by the required front, side and rear yards.
LOT
A parcel of land fronting on a street or highway, which is or may be occupied by a main building, or
a unit group of buildings, and accessory buildings, with the open spaces required by this chapter.
LOT AREA
The total area within the lot lines of a lot, provided that the area shall be measured to the street
right-of-way line only and shall not include any part of an alley or areaway used in common with
the owner or occupier of other lots.
LOT LINE, FRONT
That boundary of a lot which is along the right-of-way line of an existing or dedicated public street
or, where no public street exists, is along a public way.
LOT LINE, REAR
That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most parallel to the front lot line.
[Added 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1011]
LOT LINE, SIDE
Those boundaries of the lot that extend from the front lot line to the rear of the lot.
LOT WIDTH
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the building line.
MAJOR RENOVATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
An activity that involves more than 2,000 square feet of impervious area, to include both newly
created impervious area and any reconfiguration of existing impervious area, and results in a total
earth disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1053]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 393/483
A.
B.
C.
METHADONE CLINIC
A facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health to use the drug methadone,
suboxone, and subutex in the treatment, maintenance and detoxification of persons.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986; amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1055]
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
MOBILE HOME PATIO
An outdoor living space surfaced with asphalt or other durable material and designed to
supplement the mobile home living area.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
MONOPOLE
A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure, designed and erected on the ground or on
top of a structure, to support communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A building or portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units.
NEW DEVELOPMENT
An activity that involves more than 2,000 square feet of impervious area, to include both newly
created impervious area and any reconfiguration of existing impervious area, and results in a total
earth disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1053]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS
A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient
traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the
premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
[Added 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 953; amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses;
The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling;
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a
substantial nature;
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 394/483
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking,
signs or lights;
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood;
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or
type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood;
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more
than 25% of the habitable floor area;
The business may not involve any illegal activity.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of the zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or
extent of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or
prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reasons of annexation.
Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014]
NONCONFORMING USE
A use, whether of land or of a structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions
of this chapter or an amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such chapter or amendment or prior to the application of such
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.[3]
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER WCF)
All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but not limited to, antennas and related
equipment mounted to a wireless support structure. Non-tower WCFs shall not include support
structures for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground level.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT FACILITY or FACILITY
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION
A facility designed and constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an oil and
gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery of oil and gas
to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing plant or underground
field, including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves,
tanks and other equipment.
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT
A facility designed and constructed to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane,
and other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow the natural gas to be of
such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial
markets, but not including facilities or equipment that are/is designed and constructed
primarily to remove water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from natural gas.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 395/483
C.
D.
GATHERING SYSTEM FACILITY
A facility associated with a gathering system or water collection line, such as a drip station,
vent station, pigging facility, chemical injection station or transfer pump station.
PRODUCTION FACILITY
A facility related to the production of gas which utilizes motors and/or engines.
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT
The well site preparation, well site construction, drilling, fracturing, and/or site restoration
associated with an oil and gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage; gas reservoir;
impoundment and transportation used for such activities; and the installation and use of all
associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and structures, whether
permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and
repair of oil and gas pipelines, not regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
United States Department of Transportation, Office of Pipeline Safety, and associated equipment;
and all other equipment and activities associated with the exploration for, production of and
transportation of oil and gas, including natural gas compressor stations and natural gas
processing plants, and structures, defined as other support facilities or structures performing
similar functions that operate as midstream facilities.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
OIL AND GAS DRILLING SUBSURFACE FACILITIES
Activities performed under the surface of the ground that are part of the operation of oil and gas
drilling, as defined herein, whether or not located on properties within the unit for a particular well
site, but that are not included in the well site, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling and
hydraulic fracturing zones, underground gathering and transmission pipelines established in
accordance with Public Utility Commission (PUC) guidelines, water distribution lines and similar
underground facilities incidental to oil and gas drilling.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
OIL or PETROLEUM
Hydrocarbons in liquid form at standard temperature of 60° F. and pressure of 14.7 psia.
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000]
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT
An identified outdoor area where entertainment is provided by a commercial entity, such as ice
skating rinks and swim clubs or pools.
[Added 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1031]
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY
Any occupancy which is not transient occupancy.
[Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 997]
PLACE OF ENTERTAINMENT
An indoor area, whether privately or publicly owned, to which the public has access by right or by
invitation, expressed or implied, whether by payment of money or not, including but not limited to
theaters, concert halls, ballrooms, dance halls, discotheques, nightclubs, indoor leisure centers,
adventure/activity centers, sports clubs, cinemas, amusement parks, casinos and zoos, indoor
miniature golf, indoor roller-skating rinks and other related uses.
[Added 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1031]
PROTECTED STRUCTURE
Any occupied structure measured horizontally within 1,500 feet of a drilling site or within 3,000 feet
of the outside wall of the nearest permanent structure of an oil and gas development facility or
disposal well. The term shall not include any structure whose owner has signed a waiver relieving
the operator from implementation of the measures established herein or other applicable
provisions of the Code of the Township of Wilkins. In the waiver, the owner must acknowledge that
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 396/483
the operator is explicitly relieved from complying with the regulations applicable to a protected
structure. The waiver must be notarized.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER
A structure, owned or operated by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity, telephone or other transmission
lines.
[Added 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936]
RECREATIONAL AREA
The use of land, not commercially, by persons, nonprofit corporations or associations for outdoor
swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, basketball courts, shuffleboard courts, slides, swings,
horseshoe courts and none other.[4]
REDRILL
Deepening or sidetrack/horizontal drilling of the existing well bore extending more than 150 feet
from said well bore.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
RELATED EQUIPMENT
Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based
WCF or non-tower WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes
generators and base stations.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
REWORK
Reentry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack/horizontal
operations (which does not extend more than 150 feet horizontally from the existing well bore) or
replacement of well liners or casings.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
SCHOOL BUILDING CONVERSION
A school building or former school building which is no longer used for educational purposes.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
SIDE YARD
A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and rear yard for the minimum depth
specified in this chapter.
[Added 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1011]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A separate building designed for or occupied by one family.
[Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 644]
SPECIALTY RETAIL
An establishment devoted exclusively to the sale of distinctive, high quality merchandise, including
one or more of the following: art and photography galleries or studios; antiques; books; boutique
items; candles; candies; cards and stationary; cut and dried flowers; gifts; handicraft; handmade
and gourmet food and baked goods; interior decorator items; leather goods; men's, ladies' and
children's apparel; pipes and tobacco; and shops of a similar nature.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY
Camouflaging methods applied to wireless communications towers, antennas and other facilities
which render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure
or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such
methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building8/
17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 397/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed to resemble
trees, shrubs, and light poles.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
STREET
A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not it is affixed to the land. This includes, but is not limited to, communications equipment
buildings and communications towers.
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936]
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE
A modification to an existing wireless communications facility substantially changes the physical
dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets any of the following criteria:
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
For communications towers outside the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the
facility by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for
communications towers in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of the facility by more than
10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
For communications towers outside the public rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the
WCF by more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structures at the level of the
appurtenance, whichever is greater; for those communications towers in the public rights-ofway,
it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the
technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets;
It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the communications tower;
or
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of construction or
modification of the communications tower unless the noncompliance is due to an increase in
height, increase in width, or addition of cabinets.
SWIMMING CLUB
The use of land by persons, nonprofit corporations or associations primarily for sports or
swimming activities.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWER-BASED WCF)
Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including, but not
limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles. DAS hub facilities are
considered to be tower-based WCFs.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Wilkins, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
TRAILER
Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being used as conveyance on the public
streets and highways and duly licensed as such and constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling for one or more persons. A trailer shall not be
construed as a mobile home for purposes of this chapter.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 398/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY
Any person or persons who occupies a dwelling unit as a sleeping unit, which is not his or her
residence or domicile, for not more than 30 days.
[Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 997]
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING (DUPLEX)
A separate building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families, one above the other.[5]
WATER IMPOUNDMENT, FRESH
A lined depression, excavation pit or facility situated in or upon the ground, whether natural or
artificial, used to store fresh water.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
WATER IMPOUNDMENT, WASTE
A lined depression, excavation pit or facility situated in or upon the ground, whether natural or
artificial, used to store wastewater fluid, including but not limited to brine, fracturing fluid, produced
water, recycled water, impaired water, flowback water or any other fluid that does not satisfy the
definition of "fresh water."
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
WBCA
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadbandi Collocation Act (53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.).
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
WELL
A bore hole drilled or being drilled for the purpose of or to be used for producing, extracting or
injecting any gas, petroleum or other liquid related to oil or gas production or storage, including
brine disposal, but excluding bore holes drilled to produce potable water to be used as such. The
term "well" does not include a bore hole drilled or being drilled for the purpose of or to be used for
systems of monitoring producing or extracting gas from solid waste disposal facilities, as long as
the wells are subject to the Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97),[6] known as the "Solid Waste
Management Act," and do not penetrate a workable coal seam. The term also does not include a
bore hole drilled or being drilled for the purpose of or to be used for degasifying coal seams if the
following conditions are satisfied:
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000]
The bore hole is used to vent methane to the outside atmosphere from an operating coal
mine; and
The bore hole is regulated as part of the mining permit pursuant to the Act of June 22, 1937
(P.O. 1987, No. 394),[7] known as the "Clean Streams Law," and the act of May 31, 1945 (P.L.
1198, No. 418),[8] known as the "Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act;" and
The bore hole is drilled by the operator of the operating coal mine for the purpose of
increased safety; or
The bore hole is used to vent methane to the outside atmosphere pursuant to a state- or
federal-funded abandoned mine reclamation project.
WELL OPERATOR or OPERATOR
Any person, partnership, company, corporation and its subcontractors and agents who have an
interest in real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing or transporting oil or
gas; the person designated as the well operator or operator on the permit application or well
registration. If the owner is a separate entity than the operator, then the owner shall also be listed.
Where a permit or registration was not issued, the term shall mean any person who locates, drills,
operates, alters or plugs any well or reconditions any well with the purpose of production
therefrom. In cases where a well is used in connection with the underground storage of gas, the
term also means a storage operator.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 399/483
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000; amended 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
WELL SITE
Shall consist of the area occupied by any of the facilities, structures and equipment associated
with or incidental to the construction, drilling, fracturing, production, or operation of an oil or gas
well. If multiple areas are used, then the total combined areas shall be considered the well site.
[Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
WIRELESS
Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not limited to, infrared line-of-sight, cellular,
PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF)
The antennas, nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or
accommodating wireless communications services.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building permit, zoning approval
and/or permission to use the public right-of-way (ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE
A freestanding structure, such as a tower-based wireless communications facility, or any other
support structure that is primarily constructed to support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility.
[Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
YARD
An open space adjacent to a lot line, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as
otherwise provided herein.
FRONT YARD
A yard extending from side lot line to side lot line and extending back in depth the required
minimum distance from the front lot line to a line parallel to the front lot line.
REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and extending forward in depth the required
minimum distance from the rear lot line to a line parallel thereto on the lot.[9]
ZONING OFFICER
The person or persons appointed by the Board of Commissioners to enforce this chapter.
[Added 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Editor's Note: See also § 173-22G, 173-28 and 173-77.
Editor’s Note: The definitions of “communications antenna,” “communications equipment building,”
communications tower,” and “communications tower height,” all added 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936,
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063.
Editor's Note: The definition of "planned residential development," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917.
Editor's Note: The definitions of "sign," "sign, advertising," and "sign, business," which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 834.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “unused school building,” which immediately followed, was
repealed 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.2 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 400/483
[9]
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which defined "yard, side," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014. See now the definition of ”side yard."
Article III. District Regulations
§ 173-8. Zoning districts.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917; 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000]
The municipality is divided into the following districts as shown by the district boundaries on the Zoning
Map:[1]
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Residential District
R-C-1 Residential-Commercial District
C Commercial District
M Manufacturing District
F-1 Floodplain District
LAR-TND Larimer Avenue Traditional Neighborhood Development District
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
§ 173-9. District boundaries.
District boundaries shown on the lines of roads, streams and transportation rights-of-way shall be
deemed to follow the center lines. The vacation of roads shall not affect the location of such district
boundaries. When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a district boundary by
such center lines, by the scale of dimensions stated on the Zoning Map or by the fact that it clearly
coincides with a property line, he/she shall refuse action, and the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal,
shall interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the scale of the Zoning Map and
the purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this chapter.
§ 173-10. Permitted uses.
[Amended 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 638; 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 644; 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 738; 9-11-
1989 by Ord. No. 787; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
The permitted uses for each district are as follows. Uses not specifically listed shall not be permitted.
R-1 Residential District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Single-family dwellings.
Parks.
Accessory uses.
No-impact home-based business as defined in § 173-7.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
R-2 Residential District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 401/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
E.
Single-family dwellings.
Parks.
Accessory uses.
No-impact home-based business as defined in § 173-7.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
R-3 Residential District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Single-family dwellings.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Parks.
Accessory uses.
No-impact home-based business as defined in § 173-7.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
R-4 Residential District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Single-family dwellings.
Double houses.
Duplex.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Parks.
Accessory uses.
No-impact home-based business as defined in § 173-7.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
C Commercial District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Banks.
Bowling alleys.
Funeral homes.
Hotels and motels.
Public buildings.
Offices.
Restaurants.
Service shops.
Theaters (indoor).
Enclosed stores for the sale of goods.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 402/483
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Gasoline stations. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal part of the conduct of
the business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or gasoline
service station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business where a
patron can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the lot) shall
be so located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the line of any
elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic, medical
center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not said lot
line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
Repair garages. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal part of the conduct of
the business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or gasoline
service station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business where a
patron can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the lot) shall
be so located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the line of any
elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic, medical
center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not said lot
line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
Auto sales and service. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal part of the
conduct of the business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or
gasoline service station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business
where a patron can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the
lot) shall be so located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the
line of any elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic,
medical center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not
said lot line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
Public garage. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal part of the conduct of the
business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or gasoline service
station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business where a patron
can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the lot) shall be so
located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the line of any
elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic, medical
center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not said lot
line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
Drive-in business. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal part of the conduct of
the business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or gasoline
service station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business where a
patron can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the lot) shall
be so located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the line of any
elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic, medical
center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not said lot
line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
Accessory uses. [NOTE: Any use or structure involving, as a principal parts of the conduct of
the business, the use or servicing of motor vehicles such as an automobile or gasoline
service station, automobile sales area, major garage or drive-in business (a business where a
patrol can receive goods or services without entering the principal structure of the lot) shall be
so located that no vehicular entrance or exit shall be closer than 250 feet to the line of any
elementary or secondary or vocational school, playground, hospital, medical clinic, medical
center, church, residential lot or the same use as the proposed use, whether or not said lot
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 403/483
(17)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
H.
A.
line is located on the same frontage as the proposed uses described elsewhere in this
section.]
The storage of Class I flammable liquids and Class II combustible liquids in aboveground
tanks outside of buildings, as more fully defined and governed by the Wilkins Township
Codified Book of Ordinances, Part II, Chapter 88, as amended by Ord. No. 1018 on
September 12, 2011, and the 2009 International Fire Code.
[Added 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1023]
M Manufacturing District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Building equipment or materials yards.
Maintenance equipment of a public agency or utility.
Offices.
Research laboratories.
Warehousing.
Light manufacturing.
Accessory uses.
The storage of Class I flammable liquids and Class II combustible liquids in aboveground
tanks outside of buildings, as more fully defined and governed by the Wilkins Township
Codified Book of Ordinances, Part II, Chapter 88, as amended by Ord. No. 1018 on
September 12, 2011, and the 2009 International Fire Code.
[Added 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1023]
F-1 Floodplain District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Parking areas.
Parks.
R-C-1 Residential-Commercial District. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
All those permitted uses as identified in the R-1 Residential District.
All those permitted uses as identified in the R-2 Residential District.
All those permitted uses as identified in the R-3 Residential District.
Business, medical/professional offices.
Specialty retail.
§ 173-11. Conditional uses.
[Amended 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 638; 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 738; 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917; 12-
27-1999 by Ord. No. 927]
The governing body may authorize conditional uses as follows if all conditions and provisions of Article
VI are met:
R-1 Residential District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 404/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
(1)
D.
Churches.
Golf clubs.
Golf courses.
Public buildings.
Recreation areas.
School building conversions.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
A mobile home not located within a mobile home park shall be subject to the conditions set
forth in § 173-49O(6)(b) through (d).
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
R-2 Residential District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
Churches.
Golf clubs.
Golf courses.
Public buildings.
Recreation areas.
School building conversions.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
A mobile home not located within a mobile home park shall be subject to the conditions set
forth in § 173-49O(6)(b) through (d).
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
R-3 Residential District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
Churches.
Golf clubs.
Golf courses.
Public buildings.
Recreation areas.
School building conversions.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
A mobile home not located within a mobile home park shall be subject to the conditions set
forth in § 173-49O(6)(b) through (d).
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
R-4 Residential District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
Churches.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 405/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
H.
Golf clubs.
Golf courses.
Public buildings.
Recreation areas.
Public schools.
Swim clubs.
Tennis courts.
School building conversions.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
A mobile home not located within a mobile home park shall be subject to the conditions set
forth in § 173-49O(6)(b) through (d).
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
Mobile home park.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
C Commercial District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
Multifamily dwellings.
Swim clubs.
Tennis courts.
Private schools.
Group care facilities.
F-1 Floodplain District. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
Single-family dwellings.
Equipment storage.
M Manufacturing District. Conditional uses shall be as follows: any use not prohibited by ordinance
and not specifically permitted in any district by the Zoning Ordinance, and specifically including
gas and oil well drilling, oil and gas development, and oil and gas drilling subsurface facilities.
[Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000; 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
R-C-1 Residential-Commercial District.
[Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986]
All those conditional uses as set forth in the R-1 Residential District.
All those conditional uses as set forth in the R-2 Residential District.
All those conditional uses as set forth in the R-3 Residential District.
Day-care center.
Family day-care home.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 406/483
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
I.
A.
B.
Townhome.
LAR-TND Larimer Avenue Traditional Neighborhood Development District. Conditional uses shall
be as follows:
[Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1006]
All those permitted uses as identified in the R-2 Residential District.
All those permitted uses as identified in the R-1 Residential District.
Ambulance station.
Professional offices/personal and professional services. Such uses may include:
General business offices;
Insurance offices;
Real estate offices;
Beauty and barber shops;
Offices for medical doctors, chiropractors and dentists;
Offices of accountants.
Contractor yards.
Self-storage facilities.
Dry cleaners and laundries.
Laundromats.
Light manufacturing and assembly.
§ 173-12. Height regulations.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Except as provided in § 173-20, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above average ground
level. Heights up to 45 feet may be permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board
using the following criteria:
In determining whether to grant or refuse such special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the fire-fighting equipment available within the Township of Wilkins at the time of the
request for special exception and the ability of such equipment to be used in fighting fires in the
proposed building and in the rescue of persons occupying the same.
The "structure" is any of the following and does not constitute a hazard to an established airport:
television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers,
stage towers and scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator
bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, and flagpoles.
§ 173-13. Lot and yard requirements.
[Amended 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 638]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 407/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The minimum lot area, minimum width of a lot, minimum depth of the front yard and minimum width of
each side yard for each district shall be as shown in Subsection A.
The Table of Lot, Area and Bulk Requirements shall be as follows:
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1006]
Table of Lot, Area and Bulk Requirements
District
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Lot Area
Per Family
(square
feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
R-1 15,000 15,000 80 40 25 15
R-2 10,000 10,000 65 30 20 10
R-3 7,500 7,500 50 30 20 8
R-4 7,500 2,500 50 30 20 5
C 5,000 2,000 50 50 30 0
M 20,000 -- 50 50 30
F-1 20,000 10,000 50 50 30 10
LAR-TND See § 173-49M
NOTE:
See § 173-13F.
Lots which abut on more than one street shall provide the required front yards along every street.
Except as provided in §§ 173-16, 173-17 and 173-20 of this chapter, all structures, whether
attached to the principal structure or not and whether open or enclosed, including porches,
carports, balconies or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum
front, side or rear yard.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1011]
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter and then held in separate ownership
different from the ownership of adjoining lots may be used for the erection of a structure
conforming to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, even though its area and
width are less than the minimum requirements of this chapter.
Where an on-lot septic tank is to be used, the minimum lot size shall not be less than required by
percolation tests and in no case shall it be less than 15,000 square feet.
Nonresidential structures or uses shall not be located or conducted closer to any lot line of any
other lot in any R District than the distance specified in the following schedule:
Minimum Side or Rear Yard Abutting Any
Lot in Any R District
(feet) Use
20 Off-street parking spaces and access drives for
nonresidential uses
40 Churches, schools and public or semipublic
structures
70 Recreation facilities, entertainment facilities,
motels, all business uses and industrial uses
1
1
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 408/483
[1]
G.
H.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
F.
Any manufacturing or commercial use abutting any R District shall be further required to place a
masonry wall or hedge between six and 10 feet tall along the full length of the boundary except
that it may be omitted within 25 feet of a street line.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 207, entitled "Floodplain District," which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 638.
Anything in this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, there shall be no minimum front, rear or side
yard requirement applicable to additional structures erected on lots owned or leased by volunteer
fire companies and ambulance or emergency medical services companies, provided the lot is in
use for fire or ambulance or emergency medical service at the time of adoption of this
amendment.
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 937]
Article IV. General Regulations
§ 173-14. Nonconforming uses and buildings.
Continuing existing uses. Except as otherwise provided, the lawful use of land or buildings existing
as of the date of adoption of this chapter may be continued even though such land or building
does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land or
building is located. Normal maintenance of nonconforming land or buildings may occur, including
any necessary repairs and alterations which do not enlarge or extend the nonconformity.
[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014]
Expansion. A nonconforming building may be enlarged to an extent not exceeding 50% of the
ground floor area of the original building, provided that:
The yard and height requirements of the district are adhered to.
If the nonconforming use is commercial, manufacturing or industrial in nature, the building line
and parking and loading requirements applicable to commercial or manufacturing and
industrial districts are adhered to.
Restoration. Any nonconforming building or use which has been destroyed by fire, explosion,
flood, windstorm or other casualty shall be considered partially destroyed if the cost of restoration
equals 100% or is less than 100% of the tax assessed value as recorded in the County Office of
the Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review, and such building or use may be rebuilt,
restored or repaired, provided that such restoration is started within one year and completed within
two years. If the damage is greater than as aforesaid, the building or use shall be considered
completely destroyed and shall not be rebuilt, restored or repaired.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Conversion to a permitted use. Any nonconforming building or use which has been changed to a
conforming use shall not be changed back again to a nonconforming use.
Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be considered to be abandoned if such nonconforming
use or activity on the part of the owner or tenant shall cease for a period of one year, and any
future use of said building or premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Buildings existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter which conform as to use but which
are nearer to the front, rear or side lot line than permitted under this chapter shall be deemed to
create nonconforming lines.
[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014]
Buildings which are located in any residential zoning district may be constructed or extended
along a nonconforming front, rear or side line on the same lot upon which nonconforming
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 409/483
[1]
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
front, rear or side lines exist.
Buildings may be constructed on an unimproved lot situated between two adjacent lots on
which nonconforming building lines exist, provided that the proposed nonconforming building
lines are in line with either of the existing adjacent building lines.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding the extension of existing buildings along
nonconforming side lines, was repealed 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014.
§ 173-15. Computation of lot area.
Any portion of a lot once used as a yard or as lot area per family in compliance with the area
requirements of the district regulations of this chapter shall not be counted again as required yard or lot
area per family for another building.
§ 173-16. Unenclosed porches.
An unenclosed porch no more than one story or 15 feet in height and 12 feet in depth may be erected
in the front or rear yard, provided that no portion of said porch shall be closer to a side lot line that the
required width of the side yard.
§ 173-17. Projections into required yards.
A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster projecting no more than 12 inches from the wall of the
building may project into a required yard.
§ 173-18. Service roads.
In the C Commercial District, service roads may be constructed within the front and rear yards of the
building lot.
§ 173-19. Fences.
[Amended 8-10-1975 by Ord. No. 587; 10-13-2003 by Ord. No. 957]
Vegetation hedge or fence.
A vegetation hedge or fence no more than 48 inches in height may be erected in the front and
side yard of any structure, except on corner lots.
A vegetation hedge or fence no more than 72 inches in height may be erected in the rear yard
of any structure.
For purposes of this subsection, the line of demarcation between rear and side yards shall be
the rear wall of the structure.
A vegetation hedge or fence not more than 120 inches in height maybe erected in any yard
used for public schools, public parks, public recreation or public institution areas.
On corner lots, no vegetation hedge or fence exceeding 36 inches in height shall be erected
within 50 feet of the intersecting street lines, except split rail and chain link fences not more
than 48 inches in height may be enacted.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 410/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Barbed wire may be used only as follows:
Barbed wire may be strung directly above an existing permitted fence at a height not less than
five feet above ground level and shall not be strung more than two feet in height above an
existing permitted fence.
No barbed wire shall be strung within any Township right-of-way.
All parts of barbed wire must be visible to the naked eye at all times.
§ 173-20. Accessory buildings and uses in residential district.
[Added 4-11-1983 by Ord. No. 702; amended 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 965; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
1011]
In all residential districts, accessory buildings and uses installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be installed only in side or rear yards as defined in Article II and shall not exceed a
height of 10 feet when the use is a building, except garages for motor vehicles, which shall not
exceed a height of 12 feet.
In all residential districts, accessory buildings and uses installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be placed on the lot in conformance with the rear and side line footage requirements
as set forth in § 173-13A, except when the accessory building or use covers a ground area of 120
square feet or less, in which case an accessory use or building may be installed within five feet of
the side and rear lot line.
§ 173-21. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to land or buildings owned or leased by the Township of Wilkins or any
municipal authority or public service organization created by said Township.
§ 173-22. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be authorized as special exceptions with such conditions as are deemed
appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Living quarters in an accessory structure as an accessory use to a single-family house to
accommodate domestic employees of the residents of the principal building.
The accommodation of not more than two nontransient roomers as an accessory use to a singlefamily
house, provided that no sign is displayed.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 302.7c, relating to directional signs as a special exception and
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917. For current
provisions relating to the topic, see Art.V, Signs.
Temporary structures and trailers used in conjunction with construction work may be permitted
only during the period that the construction work is in progress. Permits for temporary structures
shall be issued for a six-month period.
Uses similar to those permitted in the Commercial and Manufacturing districts may be authorized
in the respective districts utilizing the following criteria:
The proposed use conforms to the district provisions and all general regulations of this
chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 411/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
[2]
F.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
G.
The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be
dangerous, injurious or noxious to any property or persons and shall comply with the
performance standards of § 173-50.
The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce a harmonious
relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent buildings and properties.
The proposed use shall produce a total visual impression and environment which is
consistent with the environment of the neighborhood.
The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to minimize traffic congestion
in the neighborhood.
The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this chapter and shall be consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan.
Parcels of land held in single and separate ownership which are composed of contiguous lots
originally subdivided prior to 1969 into lots having areas or width less than those permitted in the
district, where resubdivision subject to this chapter will result in undue hardship, in the case of
substantial improvements, having been made to the property under and subject to any thenexisting
regulations, which improvements render resubdivision impractical or unusually
burdensome.
Fences not conforming to the standards of this chapter if they do not unreasonably interfere with
light, air or view of any other property, whether or not abutting, and are not likely to endanger
public safety by reason of design or construction.[2]
Editor's Note: Original Subsection H, which dealt with flashing and rotating signs and immediately
followed this subsection, as amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 644, was deleted 12-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 917. For current provisions relating to this topic, see Art. V, Signs.
Adult uses.
[Added 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 825]
In the M Manufacturing District, the following special uses are permitted as special
exceptions: adult bookstores, adult mini-motion-picture theaters, adult motion-picturetheaters,
adult entertainment and adult motels and other uses similar in nature.
Specific conditions for special exceptions for adult bookstores, adult mini-motion-picture
theaters, adult motion-picture-theaters, adult entertainment, adult motels and other uses
similar in nature in the M Districts:
Adult bookstores, mini- and motion-picture theaters, entertainment and motels regulated.
In the development and execution of this section, it is recognized that there are some
uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable
characteristics, particularly when several are concentrated under certain circumstances
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these
uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting
or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized
in the following subsections of this section. These regulations are for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area and preventing the
establishment of these uses in close proximity to other permitted uses in the M District.
Definitions.[3] For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT BOOKSTORE
An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade,
including but not limited to videocassettes, movies, books, magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 412/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[3]
[1]
[2]
(c)
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to
the sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Entertainment consisting of the use of live dancing, posing, acting or other theatrical
presentation involving personnel whose actions are distinguished or characterized
by emphasis on the use of the human body in a manner intended to or resulting in
arousal of sexual excitation or sexual titillation or a prurient interest or intended to or
resulting in producing lustful emotions.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE-THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity for accommodating less than 50 persons used
for presenting material distinguishing or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL
A hotel presenting adult motion-pictures by means of closed circuit television or any
other method of transmission, the material being presented having as a dominant
theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE-THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity for accommodating 50 or more persons used
for presenting material having as a dominant theme or presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined
herein, for observation by patrons therein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Human genitals or pubic regions.
Buttock.
The female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Human male genitals in a discernably turgid state, even if completely or
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast.
Editor's Note: See also § 173-7, Definitions.
Limitations. Regulated uses include but are not limited to the following:
Adult bookstore.
Adult motion-picture theater.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 413/483
[3]
[4]
[5]
[1]
[2]
[4]
[3]
(d)
H.
[5]
I.
(1)
A.
Adult mini-motion-picture theater.
Adult entertainment.
Adult motel.
Regulated uses shall be permitted subject to following restrictions:
No such regulated uses shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult
use.
No such regulated use shall be located within 500 feet of the property line of any
existing residentially zoned property, an existing church or other place of worship or
any existing school or property used as a private or public park or playground.
The distance provided for in this section shall be calculated by following the shortest
route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main
entrance of a proposed regulated use to the main entrance of any existing regulated
use or the property line of any existing residentially zoned property, any existing
church or other place of worship or any existing school, private or public park or
playground.[4]
Editor's Note: Original Section 303, entitled "Signs," which immediately followed this
section, as amended, was deleted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 834.
In the M Manufacturing District, communications tower, including tower-mounted communications
antennas and any related communications equipment building, subject to the provisions of §§ 173-
100 and 173-101.
[Added 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936]
Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility transmission tower, building or
other structure, subject to the provisions of §§ 173-100 and 173-101.
[Added 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936][5]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding no-impact home-based businesses, added 2-10-
2003 by Ord. No. 953, was repealed 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1014.
§ 173-23. Off-street parking and loading.
[Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 644; 4-9-1996 by Ord. No. 884]
Off-street parking.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the specifications of this
section in any district whenever any new use is established or an existing use is enlarged.
[Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1031]
Use Parking Spaces Required
Bowling alleys
5 for each alley, plus any additional parking
requirements for an establishment containing a
bar/lounge in addition to a bowling alley, as indicated
under "restaurants"
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 414/483
Use Parking Spaces Required
Business professional offices
1 for every 300 square feet of gross floor area in
banks and professional offices with on-site customer
service; or the greater of 1 space per employee or 1
space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for
offices without on-site customer services; or 1 space
for each 100 square feet of gross floor area
accessible to the public for personal service
establishments, plus 1 space for each employee on
the peak shift
Churches 1 for every 6 seats in the principal meeting room
Clubs
1 for every 50 square feet of aggregate floor area in a
meeting room/auditorium for clubhouses and civic,
fraternal and labor meeting halls, plus 1 for every
employee on the largest shift
Dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
Family day-care facilities 1 for each employee, plus a dropoff/pickup location
for every 3 individuals served
Family day-care homes and group
homes
2 for each home, plus 1 dropoff/pickup location for
every 3 individuals served
Funeral homes
1 for every 50 square feet of gross floor area per
parlor in the funeral home, plus 1 for every remaining
300 square feet of gross floor area
Gas stations 1 for every 200 square feet of floor area with not less
than 8 spaces in any and all events
Hospitals and group homes 1 for every 3 beds, plus 1 for every employee on the
largest shift
Hotels/motels
1 for every rental unit, plus 1 for every 2 employees,
plus 1 for every 4 seats in a main gathering area or
restaurant
Medical offices
1 for every doctor, plus 1 for every employee and 2
for each chair, examination or treatment room or
patient-service area
Outdoor commercial entertainment
1 for each 4 customers, computed on a basis of
maximum capacity at any 1 time, plus 1 for every 2
employees on a peak shift
Restaurants (all classifications)
1 for every 50 square feet of public floor space, plus 1
for every 3 outdoor seats, plus 1 for every employee
working on the largest shift
Areas of public assembly 1 for every 4 seats
Schools:
Adult education 1 for every 3 students, plus 1 for each member of the
staff
K through 8 education
Bused or public
transportation
1 for every 7 students, plus 1 for each member of the
staff
Nonbused or private
transportation
1 for every 3 students, plus 1 for each member of the
staff
9 through 12 education
Bused or public
transportation
1 for every 5 students, plus 1 for each member of the
staff
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 415/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Nonbused or private
transportation
1 for every 3 students, plus 1 for each member of the
staff
Stores, shops and specialty retail 1 for every 175 square feet of gross leasable floor
space
Theaters or places of entertainment 1 for every 3 seats
Uses not otherwise listed
1 for each 3 persons at maximum permitted
occupancy, or 1 for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area of the building or lot area devoted to such
use, whichever is the greater
Warehouses and bus garages 1 for every 2 employees
No off-street parking space shall have a width of not less than nine feet, and an area less
than 171 square feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, and shall be of usable shape and
condition.
Any off-street parking lot shall be graded for proper drainage and surfaced so as to provide a
durable and dust-less surface.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises in any R District.
When determination of off-street parking results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction shall be counted as one space.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot
does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an
access drive of not less than eight feet in the case of a dwelling, and not less than 24 feet in
width in all other cases, leading to the parking or storage areas and to loading or unloading
spaces required hereunder.
Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the principal use only upon
the grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that safe, convenient
pedestrian access is assured and that a written agreement, approved by the Township's
solicitor, shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit, containing a guaranty that such
parking spaces shall be available so long as the principal use is continued.
For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building or
improvements, as measured between the exterior faces of the walls.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
The total floor area of the building or improvement designed for tenant occupancy,
excluding halls, corridors or other areas used in common by the tenants of the building or
improvement, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint
partitions and exteriors of outside walls.
Off-street loading. One off-street loading berth of not less than 35 feet by 10 feet shall be provided
for every business and industrial use with a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, with one
additional berth required for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area. Access and space to
maneuver shall be sufficient so that no truck need back onto any public street or across any public
sidewalk.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 416/483
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
For establishments with drive-through lanes, the lane shall accommodate four cars stacked within
the lane.
[Added 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1031]
§ 173-24. Removal of topsoil.
No soil, loam, sand or gravel shall be removed from any parcel of land in any district.
Nothing herein shall prevent the construction of a building for which an unexpired permit has been
issued or the landscaping of the lot or lots upon which a building has been erected.
If a building is being constructed or altered, material excavated in connection with such
construction may be sold.
All lands, regardless of their slope, from which structures or natural cover has been removed or
otherwise destroyed shall be appropriately graded and seeded within a reasonable time of such
clearance activity. The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be interpreted to be within two weeks
during the growing season and shall be rigidly applied to construction activities in order to
accomplish the intent of keeping erosion to an absolute minimum.
No cutting, filling or other disturbing of land and natural vegetation is permissible within 50 feet of
the edge of natural drainage courses except as permitted by action of to Zoning Hearing Board. In
such cases, the Board may grant permission, provided that special precautions are taken to
ensure against continuing erosion or other circumstances which may be harmful to the immediate
watercourse or in any way pollute the stream, provided that no permission shall be granted which
is not in conformance with all Township ordinances regulating cutting and filling.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
§ 173-25. Rear dwellings restricted.
No building in the rear of a principal structure and on the same lot not extending through a block from
street to street shall be used in whole or in part as a dwelling unless there is provided for such
structures an unobstructed easement of access at least 20 feet wide to a street, and within the lines of
such easement shall be constructed a gravelled or other paved way sufficient in width and thickness to
accommodate fire apparatus or other emergency equipment. Such building shall conform to all density
district requirements for a principal building, and the rear line of the required rear yard for the principal
building in front shall be considered the street lot line for the building in the rear. This provision does
not apply to multiple-family dwellings in commercial areas.
§ 173-26. Vehicular traffic control.
[Added 2-11-1980 by Ord. No. 650]
All applications for building or occupancy permits for any commercial, manufacturing or industrial
use of any property abutting a public street accepted and maintained as a public street by the
Township of Wilkins or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall contain the following information:
A clear description or the land use and purpose for which the property is to be used or
reused.
The precise location of all driveways and driveway approaches serving all roads and abutting
properties.
The number of parking spaces existing or to be created on the property.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 417/483
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
The identity of any abutting property, whether or not within the Township of Wilkins, from
which vehicular traffic is to be connected to the public street by transversing the property for
which application is made.
Where it appears from the application that the number of daily vehicular trips to or from the
property will exceed 100 or more, the applicant shall provide a detailed report of existing and
forecasted vehicular traffic activity which may result from use of the property and the public street.
The aforesaid report shall be prepared by a person qualified in the field of traffic engineering. In
addition to the requirements of Subsection B hereof, the report shall contain conclusions
concerning the impact of the proposed land use or reuse on the flow of traffic, shall provide vehicle
trip generation rates and vehicle trip deployment patterns, shall identify street capacity and/or
safety deficiencies within the environs of the proposed development and shall recommend
maximum size and gross weight limits for vehicles based on the width, grade, configuration and
condition of the public street.
The Zoning Officer shall review the application, and where the information supplied is incomplete
or, to the officer's knowledge, inaccurate, the Officer shall obtain an independent study by a
person qualified in traffic engineering, at the expense of the applicant.
No permit shall be issued for any building or use where it appears from the traffic reports that the
traffic generated by the use will create a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public or of
Township residents by reason of exceeding the capacity of public streets, lack of proper traffic
control at nearby major thoroughfares, their intersections or interchanges or because the
proposed use involves vehicles in excess of the size or weight which can safely traverse the public
street by reason of street grade, width or configuration.
No part of any property in the commercial, industrial or manufacturing districts, whether a use or
occupancy permit has been heretofore or is hereafter issued, shall be used as a right-of-way to
connect the land under permit to any abutting property for passage of vehicular traffic unless a
permit for such use is applied for and issued by the Township of Wilkins.
§ 173-26.1. Sidewalk requirement.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1053]
Sidewalks shall be required within the public right-of-way for all properties abutting arterial streets in
the C Commercial District upon the transfer of ownership of property, the new development of property,
a subdivision or reverse subdivision of property, or a major renovation of infrastructure located on the
property. All sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the design standards of Chapter 144.
Article V. Signs
[Added 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 834]
§ 173-27. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the following purposes:
To preserve and protect the public safety, comfort and welfare of users of streets and sidewalks in
the municipality by regulating signs of all types.
To enhance community appearance, to reduce visual clutter and blight and to promote the
recreational value of public travel and the economic development of the municipality.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 418/483
C.
D.
E.
To limit the size, number and location of signs which may obstruct the vision of motorists, create
distractions and increase traffic accidents.
To maintain the right of residences and businesses to reasonably identify their location, products
and services.
To acknowledge the appropriate display of signs as necessary to public service and to the conduct
of competitive commerce.
§ 173-28. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED OR OBSOLETE SIGN
A sign which identifies, describes, directs attention to or gives directions for locating any business
or establishment no longer in operation or advertises any product or service no longer being
marketed or any sign structure lacking sign face or sign copy.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
ANIMATED SIGN
Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or
create a special effect or scene.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
ARTERIAL
A street classification which indudes highways that provide intracounty or intermunicipal traffic of
substantial volumes where the average trip lengths are usually five miles or greater. Generally,
these highways should accommodate operating speeds of 35 to 55 miles per hour.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE
A pennant, flag, valance, banner, except when a banner is used as a temporary sign, propeller,
spinner, streamer, searchlight, balloon or similar device or ornamentation which is designed or
used for the purpose of promoting, advertising or attracting attention.
[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 931]
BILLBOARDS or OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
A type of sign, display or device, usually freestanding, having a minimum surface area of 35
square feet, that is affixed to the ground or to a building, the primary purpose of which is to display
advertising posters. Such signs commonly referred to as "billboards" are generally designed so
that the copy or poster on the sign can be changed frequently, and the advertising space is for
lease. The definition applies to signs advertising both on-site and off-site products, goods and
services.
CANOPY or AWNING SIGN
A sign which appears on a roof-like shelter, either permanent, retractable, or removable, which is
made of canvas or other material that is affixed to a building or is self-supporting and provides
protection from sun, rain, snow and other elements.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN
A sign, or portion of a sign, wherein provision is made for the manual change of letters or
characters in or upon the surface area of the sign. Electronic moving message board signs are not
changeable copy signs.
[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 419/483
The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting rightof-
way lines (or a right-of-way line and a driveway), each point being that distance from the
intersection and the two intersecting right-of-way lines (or a right-of-way line and a driveway)
specified in the table following the graphic below.
"B" (distance in feet)
"A" (distance in feet)
Local
Street
Arterial
Street
30 Local street and collector
street
30 130 to 150
130 to 150 Arterial street 30 130 to 150
COLLECTOR
A street classification which is intended to include those highways which connect local access
highways to arterial highways. They may serve intracounty and intramunicipal traffic. They may
serve as traffic corridors connecting residential areas with industrial, shopping and other services.
They may penetrate residential areas. Generally, these highways will accommodate operating
speeds of 35 miles per hour.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN
A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not
include text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat
screen, LED screens, video boards and holographic displays.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER
Any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in
text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed
and can be modified by electronic processes. These signs to not incorporate any mechanical
movement of the sign itself of any use of pulsating or undulating copy message.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
FESTOON LIGHTING
A group of two or more light bulbs of more than 20 watts each hung or strung overhead, not on a
building or structure, which are exposed to persons on a public right-of-way or which are not
shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of light from being visible from the property line. This
shall not include the temporary erection of lights as part of a holiday celebration or small lights of
less than 20 watts each.
FLASHING SIGN
A sign, the illumination of which is intermittently on and off so as to flash or blink or the intensity
varies so as to appear to flash or blink.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
FREESTANDING POLE SIGN or GROUND SIGN
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 420/483
A.
B.
A sign which is completely or principally supported by one or more posts or other supports which
are not attached to the principal building on the property but which are anchored in or upon the
ground, including pole signs (as shown on the left below) and ground signs (as shown on the right
below). Signs attached to inoperative vehicles shall also be deemed "freestanding signs."
"Freestanding signs" shall not include billboards, outdoor advertising structures or canopy or
awning signs.
ILLUMINATED SIGN
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED
A light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness
through a translucent surface.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED
A sign illuminated by an artificial source of light which is cast upon, or intentionally falls upon
the surface or face of the sign.
LOCAL ACCESS
A street classification intended to include streets and roads that provide direct access to abutting
land and connections to higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will be low and travel
distances generally short. These streets and roads should be designed for operating speeds of 25
miles per hour or under.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
MULTIOCCUPANT LAND USE
Any combination of multifamily dwellings and/or nonresidential establishments in one or more
buildings under single ownership or management with common parking facilities. This shall
include but not be limited to a shopping center, multitenant office building, apartment complex or
townhouse development.
MULTI-PRISM SIGN
A sign made with a series of triangular sections that rotate and stop, or index, to show three
images or messages in the same area at different times.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
NONCONFORMING SIGN
Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of
these regulations and any amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations
and restrictions of this article, or a sign previously deemed to be nonconforming for which a
special permit has been issued.
PORTABLE SIGN
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 421/483
A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, a structure or the ground or which is designed
to be moved from place to place. This includes but is not limited to signs attached to wood or
metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable; paper, cardboard or canvas signs
wrapped around supporting poles; sandwich signs; and trailer- or boat-mounted signs.
PROJECTING SIGN
Any sign that is attached to a wall in a perpendicular manner.
PUBLIC SIGN
A sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of, a public
officer in the performance of any public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or public officer, including official
traffic signs, public notices, government flags and other signs warning of hazardous or dangerous
conditions.
ROOF SIGN
A sign erected on or above a roof or parapet of a building.
SIGN
Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof which is used primarily to advertise, identify,
display or direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, project,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images. This includes but is not limited to wall
signs, freestanding ground signs, freestanding pole signs, window signs, canopy or awning signs,
suspended signs, changeable copy signs, illuminated signs, temporary signs and any other type of
sign defined herein and any other attention-getting device, flag or banner.
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED
Two sign faces of identical size and dimensions placed back-to-back and secured or attached to a
single support structure. It shall not include signs comprised of two or more sign faces attached at
an angle.
SIGN SURFACE AREA
The smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters,
symbols and accompanying designs, together with the background on which they are displayed,
but not including any supporting structures (see illustration below). In computing the area of a
double-faced sign, only one side shall be considered. If a sign is comprised of more than two
sides, the area of each side shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
SPECIAL ADVERTISING AND REAL ESTATE SIGN
A temporary, nonilluminated sign made of flexible, nonreflective material, or solid metal, or wood,
secured by grommets, nails, ropes, cords, stakes or other temporary means to buildings,
structures or the ground, that announces a special event or sale, including real estate sales and
leases, or the names of contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing work on the
premises.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 422/483
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
SUSPENDED SIGN
A sign which is suspended over a pedestrian walkway from the marquee, overhang, soffit, or
similar feature of a building.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign which is erected for a limited time period, including garage sale signs, grand opening signs,
celebration signs and political campaign signs.
[Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
VEHICLE SIGN
Signs attached to any operative vehicle that relate to the purpose or use of the vehicle, such as
taxi signs and delivery vehicle signs.
WALL SIGN
A sign which is mounted on, attached to, carved or integrated into or applied to the exterior wall of
a building or structure or to the lower slope of a mansard roof.
WEDGE-SHAPED SIGN
A temporary, nonilluminated "special advertising and real estate sign" which has two sign faces of
identical size and dimension placed at an angle which is greater than 45° and secured or attached
to more than one support structure. A wedge-shaped sign with identical copy on both sides shall
be deemed to be one sign. A wedge-shaped sign with different copy on each side shall be
deemed to be two signs.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
WINDOW SIGN
A sign which is painted on, affixed to or placed against any window or which is placed in a display
case for view from the outdoors through a window.
Editor's Note: See also § 173-7, Definitions.
§ 173-29. Sign permit application.
Applications for a sign permit shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer, and shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with these regulations
and all other appropriate ordinances and regulations of the municipality. No application shall be
filed or considered unless the application fee designated by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners is paid upon presentation of the application.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
Applicants for new or replacement signs shall apply for approval as part of an application for land
development approval or as a separate application if no other approval is necessary.
Sign permits shall be issued for the life of the sign or any shorter period as stated on the approved
permit application by the Zoning Officer. However, any permit may be revoked at any time by the
Zoning Officer upon finding that the sign violates any provision of this article or that the permittee
made false representations in securing the sign permit.
No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property, structure or building
without the prior written consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property,
structure or building or his or her authorized representative. The written consent must accompany
the sign permit application.
Except as provided in § 173-30, below, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
move or convert any sign in the municipality or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 423/483
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
[1]
D.
E.
F.
(a)
(b)
(1)
[1]
(a)
(2)
G.
sign permit for each such sign from the Zoning Officer.
No new sign permit is required for signs which have previously been issued valid permits and
which conform with the requirements of these regulations on the date of their adoption unless the
sign is hereafter altered, relocated or reinstalled.
Every sign permit issued shall become null and void if installation is not commenced within 180
days from the date of such permit.
§ 173-30. Exemptions.
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article, except as they may
interfere with traffic safety or in any other way become a public safety hazard:
Memorial plaques or historic markers or other similar signs which are engraved or a permanent
component of a building, monument, tombstone or other similar structure.
Signs erected by the municipality.
Street number signs indicating the address of a building or structure.
Temporary signs subject to the limitations in Table 1,[1] and provided that:
No temporary sign encroaches into any public right-of-way or obstructs the view of motorists
in any required clear sight triangle.
No temporary sign is erected more than seven days before or remains in place more than
seven days after the advertised event, with the exception of real estate signs, which shall be
removed seven days after sale or rent.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
Pennants for model homes.
"No trespassing" signs, warning signs (such as "Beware of Dog") and notification signs for
emergency personnel, provided that the sign does not exceed two square feet in sign surface area
and there are no more than two such signs on the lot.
Temporary political signs. Temporary political signs announcing political candidates seeking office,
political parties and/or political and public issues contained on a ballot shall be subject to the
following:
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 921; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
Private property.
Area. Temporary political signs shall not exceed an aggregate gross surface area of 20
square feet.
Height. Temporary political signs shall not project higher than four feet, as measured from
base of sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
Public property.
No sign shall be erected on public property which:
Obstructs the site triangle distance at an intersection along a public right-of-way.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 424/483
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
(b)
H.
[1]
Tends by its location, color, shape, message or nature to be confused with or
obstruct the view of traffic signs or traffic signals by motorists or pedestrians; no red,
green or yellow illuminated signs shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic
signal.
Uses admonitions such as stop, go, slow, danger, etc., which might be confused with
traffic signals.
Exceeds an aggregate gross surface area of 20 square feet.
Temporary political signs shall not project higher than four feet, as measured from
base of sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
No temporary political sign shall be erected in any public park or land which is part of
the Township Municipal Building site.
Special conditions as to all temporary political signs on public property.
Timing. Temporary political signs may be erected or maintained for a period not to
exceed 30 days prior to the date of the election to which such signs are applicable
and shall be removed within seven days following such election. The candidate is
responsible for all political signs of the candidate.
Permit.
The erector of such signs or an authorized agent of the political party or
candidate shall apply for and obtain a permit from the Township Zoning Officer
and deposit with the Township at the time of his application a fee in an amount
established by resolution as a guarantee that all such signs shall be removed
promptly within seven days after the date of the election to which such signs
relate. If such signs are not removed at the end of the seven-day period, the
Township will then have them removed and keep the full sum deposited to
reimburse the expense incurred by the Township. The Township Commissioners
shall determine by resolution the amount of deposit which shall be returned
upon the satisfactory removal of such signs within the seven-day period.
All signs erected without a permit shall be removed forthwith by the Township
and, if not claimed by the owner, within 10 days of removal, disposed of. If
claimed by the owner, the permit fee due shall be paid.
Vehicle signs.
§ 173-31. Sign height.
The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground elevation nearest to the sign to the highest
elevation of the sign. Signs shall not exceed the height limits in Table 1,[1] but in no event shall any
portion of any sign exceed the height limit established for structures in the applicable zoning district or
the lowest point of the roofline of an existing principal building within 100 feet of the sign, whichever is
lower.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-32. Sign placement.
Signs shall be subject to the placement requirements in Table 1,[1] but in no event shall any sign be
placed in a position that will obstruct the view of motorists or cause any other danger to motorists or
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 425/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
J.
pedestrians within a public right-of-way or on adjoining lots, nor shall any sign be placed within the
clear-sight triangle required to be maintained at all street intersections and driveway and accessway
entrances onto public streets.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-33. Maintenance.
All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be kept in good repair at all times. All parts
and supports shall be painted or maintained as necessary to prevent rusting, rotting, illegibility or other
determination. All broken or missing parts shall be promptly replaced. All seams between panels or
other components of the sign shall be maintained in a sealed condition. If a sign is damaged,
destroyed or becomes dilapidated to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value (based on
current costs), the municipality may remove the sign at the expense of the owner of the sign or the
owner of the property on which it is located.
§ 173-34. Prohibited signs.
[Amended 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 895]
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this section, the following signs shall be strictly prohibited
in all zoning districts:
Streamers, posters, ribbons, light strings, light bands, spinners, attention-getting devices that
move, except for temporary signs that are subject to the regulations set forth in § 173-30D.
Signs which exhibit changing natural or artificial light or color effects and signs (other than neon
signs) which contain bare, unshielded light or tubes which are visible from a private residence.
Blinking, flashing, animated and electronic display screen signs, except for time, date and
temperature signs.
[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
Portable signs.
Roof signs or any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on top of or above the
parapet of a building, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.
Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles, standpipes, gutter drains or fire escapes, other
than warning signs issued by government officials or public utilities.
Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination may be confused with or construed to be a traffic control sign, signal or device or the
light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle except where such sign is accessory to a parking
area and gives directions or instructions to drivers and pedestrians.
Signs that move, rotate, change position, have moving parts or create the illusion of movement,
whether the movement is created by the wind or mechanically, including multi-prism signs.
[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
Signs in public rights-of-way which are not public signs.
Abandoned or obsolete signs.
[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
Abandoned or obsolete signs or sign structures, including any nonconforming signs or sign
structures, shall be removed within 90 days. The non-use of a sign or a period of six months
shall create a presumption of abandonment.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 426/483
(2)
(3)
[1]
K.
L.
M.
Any obsolete sign panel or sign copy which identifies, describes, directs attention to or gives
directions for locating any business or establishment no longer in operation, or advertises any
product or service no longer being marketed, shall be removed within 90 days after becoming
obsolete. Covering obsolete sign panels or sign copy with any material is specifically
prohibited.
The owner or lessee of the property upon which the sign is located shall be responsible for its
removal and shall be subject to the general penalties clause of this Zoning Chapter for failure
to comply with the provisions stated herein.
Signs which do not meet the standards of or which otherwise violate the Pennsylvania Outdoor
Advertising Control Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.
Signs which the Zoning Officer determines to be unsafe or insecure or that is erected in violation
of the provisions of this article.
Signs which indicate a location in a municipality other than Wilkins Township or which could
reasonably confuse the public into believing that the business is located in a municipality other
than Wilkins Township.
§ 173-35. Signs permitted in individual zoning districts.
[Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 986; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
The signs listed in Table 1 shall be permitted in individual zoning districts, subject to any requirements
listed in the table and in each subsection.
TABLE I
Type of Zoning District
Type of Sign
Residential/
Residential-
Commercial-1 Commercial Manufacturing
Attention-getting device
Permitted No No No
Billboard
Permitted No See § 173-36
Maximum number — See § 173-36
Maximum surface area — See § 173-36
Maximum height — See § 173-36
Maximum length — See § 173-36
Minimum setback See § 173-36
Canopy or awning sign
Permitted No Yes Yes
Maximum letter size
(inches)
— 6 6
Changeable copy sign
Permitted No Yes Gas stations only
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 427/483
Type of Zoning District
Type of Sign
Residential/
Residential-
Commercial-1 Commercial Manufacturing
Electronic message center
sign
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 971]
Permitted No Yes Gas stations only
Festoon lighting
Permitted No No No
Freestanding sign
Permitted Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number 1 per lot or parcel, all districts
Maximum surface area
(square feet)
15 72 72
Maximum height (feet) See § 173-38
Maximum length (feet) 4 10 10
Minimum setback from
property line (feet)
5 5 5
Historic markers E E E
Illuminated sign See
§ 173-39.
External permitted No Yes Yes
Internal permitted No Yes Yes
Memorial plaques E E E
Official government sign E E E
Portable sign
Permitted No No No
Roof sign
Permitted No No No
Special advertising and
real estate sign
Permitted Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number 2 2 per public street front
Maximum surface area
(square feet)
6 Building-mounted, see § 173-41C
Ground-mounted, see "NOTES"
Maximum height 4 feet Building-mounted, see § 173-41E
Ground-mounted, 8 feet
Maximum length -------- Building-mounted, see § 173-41C
Ground-mounted, see "NOTES"
Minimum spacing
between signs
-------- None None
Illumination No No No
Setback -------- Building-mounted, same as building setback
Ground-mounted, see "NOTES"
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 428/483
Type of Zoning District
Type of Sign
Residential/
Residential-
Commercial-1 Commercial Manufacturing
Placement See § 173-30D -------- --------
Time limit See § 173-30D and G Contractor or artisan's sign: 10 days after the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy
Real estate signs: 10 days following sale or
lease of property
Special advertising sign: Not more than 10
days before nor more than 10 days following
the special event or sale, with a maximum of
30 days
Street number sign E E E
Suspended/ projecting
sign
Permitted No Yes Yes
Maximum surface area
(feet)
— 6 6
Minimum clearance
above ground or
sidewalk (feet)
— 9 9
Maximum height of sign
surface (feet)
— 3 3
Maximum Number — 1 per establishment
Minimum spacing
between signs (feet)
— 20 20
Setback — Building setback minus 4 feet
Temporary sign
Permitted Yes Yes Yes
Maximum number 2 per lot 1 per store 2 per lot
Maximum surface area
(square feet)
6 16 16
Maximum height (feet) 4 4 4
Illumination No No No
Placement See § 173-30D.
Time limit See § 173-30D and G.
Vehicle sign E E E
Wall sign
Permitted No Yes Yes
Maximum number — 1 per lot or establishment
Maximum surface area — See § 173-41C
Maximum height — See § 173-41E
Maximum length — See § 173-41
Minimum spacing
between signs
— None None
Setback — Same as building setback
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 429/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
Type of Zoning District
Type of Sign
Residential/
Residential-
Commercial-1 Commercial Manufacturing
Window sign
Permitted No Yes Yes
Maximum surface area — See § 173-42
NOTE: E-Exempt, subject to
§ 173-30.
Banner sign
[Added 6-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 943]
NOTES: Size. Ground mounted special advertising and real estate sign shall have a
maximum allowable sign surface area as follows:
Minimum Distance of Sign From Road Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Maximum Sign Size
(square feet)
20 to 75 32
75 to 250 90
250 or more 140
§ 173-36. Billboards and outdoor advertising.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all new billboards or outdoor advertising structures shall
comply with the following limitations and requirements:
Billboards or other outdoor advertising structures may be allowed within commercial or industrial
districts only, except they shall be prohibited within the following portions of such districts:
Within 660 feet of the right-of-way of an interstate, primary or federal-aid highway or within 20
feet of the right-of-way of any other highway.
On any property occupied by or located immediately adjacent to a public or private school,
playground or recreation center or community center or within 500 feet of the property line of
any public or private school property.
No billboard or advertising structure may be placed within 1,500 feet of any other billboard or
advertising structure located within the municipality or within 200 feet of any residential district
zone line. If a billboard faces a residential district, the minimum distance shall be increased to
300 feet. Official government signs, owned and maintained by a governmental entity, shall not
be counted nor shall measurements be made from them for purposes of determining spacing
requirements. The distance between sign structures shall be measured along the pavement
between points directly opposite the signs along both sides of the roadway.
References to residential lines and school property lines shall include properties in abutting
municipalities.
Advertising signs may not be mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a building or any other
structure.
The following standards shall apply to billboards or outdoor advertising:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 430/483
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[2]
(7)
C.
[3]
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
Size. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable sign surface area as follows:
Minimum Distance of Sign From
Road Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Maximum Sign Size
(square feet)
20 to 250 150
250 to 350 250
350 or more 350
A billboard structure may have sign faces placed back-to-back or in a V-shaped configuration
on a single billboard structure.
The dimensions of the sign face of a billboard shall not exceed 15 feet in total height or 25
feet in total length.
An advertising sign structure shall have a maximum height above the curb of the roadway
from which it is intended to be viewed of 35 feet.
The minimum front, side and rear yard requirements applying to a principal use as set forth
within a zoning district in which the billboard is to be located shall apply to each billboard
structure.
The maximum lot coverage as specified in the zoning district in which the billboard is to be
located shall apply to any lot upon which a billboard structure is located and shall be
cumulative, including any other structures and buildings on the same lot therewith.
No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view from the road or street of
any existing business sign, logo sign, residential or nonresidential structure or limit or reduce
the light and ventilation requirements under the Municipal Building Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction.
Lighting of signs shall be subject to the general standards for illuminated signs in § 173-39 below.
The Municipal Zoning Officer shall issue a license tag for each billboard containing a license
number readable from the ground. The Zoning Officer shall inspect each billboard annually and, if
it complies with requirements of this section and Table 1,[3] shall issue a renewal sticker to be
affixed to the license tag. Renewal sticker colors shall be changed each year to simplify visual
inspection.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
When approval for placement of a billboard is required by any agency of the federal,
commonwealth or county government and approval is granted by the municipality for a billboard, a
temporary building permit may be granted, conditioned upon approval of the other government
agency. If the holder of the temporary building permit fails to submit evidence of the required
approval by such agency within 30 days, the temporary building permit shall be revoked by the
Zoning Officer, who shall provide written notice to the applicant.
Construction methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Municipal Building Code. In addition:
An advertising sign structure shall have a maximum of one vertical support being a maximum
of four feet in diameter or width and without bracing or vertical supports.
An advertising sign face shall be independently supported and have vertical supports of metal
which are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and corrosion.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 431/483
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire sign face to be able to
withstand a minimum 80 miles per hour wind load. The applicant shall provide a certificate by
a registered engineer or architect certifying to the compliance with this subsection.
The entire base of the advertising sign structure shall be permanently landscaped with
suitable shrubbery and/or bushes of a minimum height of three feet, placed in such a manner
as to screen the foundation of the structure.
Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an attractive and healthy manner in
accordance with accepted conservation practices.
Permanent landscaping shall form a base and/or backdrop to the billboard sign when practical
in the opinion of the Zoning Officer.
All curbs and grading shall be in accordance with municipal ordinances.
No bare cuts are permitted on a hillside.
All cuts or fills are to be permanently seeded or planted.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-37. Canopy and awning signs.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] letters or characters of the sign shall appear only on the
apron of the canopy or awning.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-38. Freestanding signs.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all freestanding signs except for temporary signs shall
comply with the following limitations and requirements:
A freestanding sign shall have no more than two sign faces.
The area immediately surrounding the base and support structure of the sign shall be landscaped
with evergreen vegetation.
Freestanding ground signs are preferred and shall be used instead of pole signs to the maximum
extent practicable or feasible.
Freestanding sign height.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 1007]
The maximum permitted height of freestanding sign in Residential Zoning Districts (R-1
through R-4) is five feet.
The maximum permitted height of a freestanding sign in Residential-Commercial (RC1),
Commercial (C-1) and Manufacturing (M-1) shall be determined based upon street
classification, as follows:
Street Classification
Maximum Height of Freestanding Sign
(feet)
Arterial 16
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 432/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
Street Classification
Maximum Height of Freestanding Sign
(feet)
Collector 8
Local 6
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-39. Illuminated and electronic message center signs.
[Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 971]
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all internally or externally illuminated signs and electronic
message center signs shall meet the following requirements:
Limits on degree of internal illumination. Any sign located adjacent to a dwelling unit or lot zoned
for residential use shall be located, shielded and screened to prevent direct light or glare onto a
dwelling unit or residential lot.
External illumination. Whenever external illumination is used for a sign, the source of light shall be
located, shielded, screened and directed in such a manner that the light source is not visible.
Hours of illumination. No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
unless the establishment displaying the sign is open for business during those hours.
Illuminated signs shall be subject to and comply with Chapter 72, Building Construction.
An electronic message center shall have a black background/face with amber tone changeable
copy.
Character height shall not exceed eight inches in height, with no more than three lines of copy per
electronic message center sign.
Each message displayed on an electronic message center must be static or depicted for a
minimum of 24 hours. Scrolling, flashing, fading, dissolving or fluttering of messages or images is
strictly prohibited.
Time, date and temperature signs are exempt from this requirement.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-40. Suspended signs.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all suspended signs shall comply with the following
limitations and requirements:
The sign shall be located in front of the establishment it serves and shall be of a similar size, color
and design as other suspended signs.
There shall be no more than one such sign per establishment fronting on the marquee, overhang
or other building feature from which the sign is suspended.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-41. Wall signs.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 433/483
A.
B.
C.
[2]
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all wall signs shall comply with the following limitations and
requirements:
The sign shall extend no further than 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached.
The sign shall be attached to the wall so that the face of the sign is substantially parallel to the
wall.
The maximum sign area shall be 7.5% of the area of the first two stories of building elevation on
which it is placed, or, in the case of a multitenant retail commercial building or multiowner office
condominium, each tenant or owner may have a sign area not to exceed 7.5% of the area of its
leased exterior storefront.
No message shall appear on that of the sign which extends the sign from the wall, except for the
electrical permit information that may be required under the Municipal Building Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction.
Wall signs shall be no higher than the height of the building and if the sign projects further than
three inches from the wall, no lower than 10 feet above the ground level.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-42. Window signs.
In addition to the regulations in Table 1,[1] all window signs shall comply with the following limitations
and requirements. The total area of all window signs on display at any one time, including temporary
window promotional signs, shall not exceed 33% of the total area of the window in which they are
located. A series of windows which are separated by frames less than six inches in width shall be
considered as a single window for the purposes of this computation.
Editor's Note: See § 173-35.
§ 173-43. Shopping centers and multioccupant land uses.
No sign permit shall be issued for a shopping center or other multioccupant land use or for any
individual establishment or occupant therein unless a uniform sign plan has been submitted and
approved for the entire development.
The Zoning Officer shall approve the uniform sign plan only upon finding that:
The sizes of signs and the materials used in the signs shall be consistent throughout the
property or shall establish a hierarchy of different types of signs, with the size and materials of
the signs in each category being consistent for all signs in that category.
The design of and materials used for the structural elements of the signs shall be consistent
with the design of and materials used for the building or buildings which the signs serve.
The signs shall conform to all other requirements of this article.
The sign plan has been reviewed by a qualified municipal consultant.
§ 173-44. Gas stations.
In addition to other signs permitted under this article, automobile service stations may erect
changeable copy signs advertising the prices of different grades of gasoline or other fuels, provided
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 434/483
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
that:
Such signs are permanently mounted either to the fuel pumps or to the supports of a canopy
covering the fuel pumps.
Such signs shall not be erected higher than 12 feet above the ground.
There shall be no more than four sign faces per pump island.
The combined surface area of all such signs at each pump island shall not exceed 24 square feet.
Such signs shall not be internally illuminated.
§ 173-45. Nonconforming signs.
Any nonconforming sign may be continued only as provided in this section.
Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign may occur, including any necessary repairs and
alterations which do not enlarge, extend or intensify the nonconformity.
No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made of a nonconforming sign, except
when the alteration is required by law or will eliminate the nonconforming condition.
No conforming sign shall be erected on the same premises as an existing nonconforming sign
until the nonconforming sign has been removed or changed to a conforming sign. However, for
multioccupant land uses, the fact that one particular establishment therein has a nonconforming
sign will not prohibit a different establishment therein from erecting a conforming sign on the same
premises.
A nonconforming sign shall be made to conform with the requirements of this article whenever
there is a change in the use or occupancy of the building which the sign serves or whenever the
building or structure which the sign serves is externally expanded or remodeled.
Whenever the use of a nonconforming sign or the use which the sign serves has been abandoned
for a period of six consecutive months, the sign thereafter shall be made to conform with the
provisions of this article. Non-use for a period of six months shall create a presumption of
abandonment.
If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more of its
replacement value at the time of the damage or destruction (based on prevailing costs), then the
sign thereafter shall be made to conform to the provisions of this article. However, if the damage
or destruction is less than 50% of the replacement value, then the sign may thereafter be restored
to its original condition. In either event, restoration or repair of the sign must begin within six
months after the date of damage or destruction and diligently pursued to completion, and the
repaired or reconstructed sign shall be made to conform to the Municipal Building Code and
Municipal Electrical Code in force at the time of the repair or reconstruction.
Any sign that was not previously approved by the municipality and that does not conform to these
regulations (illegal signs) shall be immediately removed at the expense of the owner.
Article VI. Conditional Uses
§ 173-46. General requirements.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 435/483
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Conditional uses as specified in Article III may be allowed or denied by the Board of Commissioners
after recommendations by the Planning Commission and after public notice (as defined in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code[1]) and hearing, in accordance with the following criteria
and provisions.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-47. Application.
Applications for conditional uses will be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by:
An application fee in an amount equal to that set by resolution of the governing body.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
Five copies of a site plan and supporting data which shows the size, location and topography of
the site, the use of adjacent land, the proposed size, bulk, use and location of buildings, the
location and proposed function of all yards, open spaces, parking areas, driveways, storage areas
and accessory structures, the location of all utilities, the provisions for parking, moving or loading
of vehicles, and the timing of construction proposed.
§ 173-48. Review of application.
The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the application to the governing body and to the Planning
Commission for review and approval.
The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the governing body within 45 days
unless the petitioner agrees, in writing, to a time extension, and failure to act within the allotted
time shall be deemed to be a favorable recommendation.
The governing body may attach such conditions as it deems necessary to the approval of any
conditional use. All development, construction and use shall be in accordance with the approved
plan, unless a revised plan is submitted and approved. Any development contrary to the approved
plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 173-49. Criteria for approval.
A conditional use shall be approved if and only if it is found to meet the following criteria:
The proposed use conforms to the district and conditional use provision and all general
regulations of this chapter.
The proposed use meets all special standards which may apply to its class of conditional uses as
set forth in this article.
The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be dangerous,
injurious or noxious to any other property or persons and shall comply with the performance
standards of § 173-50.
The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce a harmonious relationship of
buildings and grounds to adjacent buildings and properties.
The proposed use shall produce a total visual impression and environment which is consistent
with the environment of the neighborhood.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 436/483
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
J.
The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to minimize traffic congestion in
the neighborhood.
The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this chapter and shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
Recreational area. The lot or parcel used for a recreation area shall contain no less than 130,000
square feet. No recreational facility shall be erected, constructed or placed nearer than 50 feet
from an abutting lot line nor nearer than 150 feet from an existing dwelling located on an abutting
or adjoining property or lot.
Swimming club. Any lot or parcel of land used as a swimming club shall contain not less than
175,000 square feet. No clubhouse, swimming pool or other facility shall be erected, constructed
or placed on land used for this purpose nearer than 50 feet from an abutting lot line and 100 feet
from an existing dwelling.
Multiple-family dwellings in the R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts under the following conditions:
[Added 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 644]
The definition of "family" contained in § 173-7 of this chapter shall apply to multiple-family
dwellings.
No part of any lot used as a multiple-family dwelling shall be located closer than 250 feet to
any part of any other lot in the R-3 and R-4 Districts used as a multiple-family dwelling.
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
There shall be two parking spaces for each multiple-family unit, and each space shall be
at least 10 feet by 20 feet.
All parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and surfaced to provide a durable
and dust-free surface.
All lighting in the parking area shall be arranged to reflect light away from other premises
and to prevent glare thereon or therein.
At least 50% of the required parking spaces shall be totally enclosed within the principal
or an accessory structure.
No more than 1/2 of the required front and rear yard area shall be used for parking.
No part of the required side yard area shall be used for parking.
Lot, yard, height and sidewalk requirements shall be as follows:
Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
Required front yard: 50 feet.
Required side yard: 15 feet.
Required rear yard: 30 feet.
Maximum height: 35 feet.
Section 173-13B of this chapter shall apply to corner lots.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 437/483
(h)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
K.
Sidewalks shall be installed according to existing Township standards along the portion of
the multiple-dwelling lot abutting all streets.
The maximum number of multiple-family units permitted on a tract of 20,000 square feet shall
be six.
For each multiple-family unit over six, the minimum lot area shall be increased by 2,500
square feet per unit.
The maximum number of multiple-family units permitted on any single lot or tract shall be 13.
The yard and height requirements (not minimum lot size) above set forth may be altered by
not more than 10% by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception when said Board
finds that such alteration is warranted because of unusual lot configuration or topography.
Group care facility.
[Added 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 738]
Applications for group care facilities shall be accompanied by all certificates, licenses,
approvals or other documents required by any governmental unit or agency having jurisdiction
to issue the same when it is possible to obtain those instruments prior to conditional use
approval.
Supervision and staff shall be provided by adults qualified by training and experienced to
render the services required.
Supervision and staff shall be provided on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis.
The minimum number of supervisors and staff required during a day or any part thereof shall
be determined by the governing body as a condition of approval of the use.
The operator of the group care facility shall provide a resume identifying supervisors and staff
and their professional or occupational training and experience. This information shall be
provided for each person prior to beginning work.
When the group care facility involves child care, the operator shall comply with Act 244 of
1984, as amended or supplemented,[1] and provide the Township Chief of Police with proof of
compliance.
Editor's Note: See now 23 Pa. C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
The residents of a group care facility need not be related to each other; however, the number
of residents shall not exceed 15 persons, plus supervisors and staff.
On-site parking facilities shall be provided at the ratio of one stall for each facility supervisor,
staff or employee and one additional stall for each nonemployee resident operating a motor
vehicle from the facility, plus four additional spaces.
The application for a group care facility shall contain a plan showing the location of the facility
on the ground, parking area, lot area, setback and yard provisions, together with a narrative
statement relating to the requirements of this article.
The operator of a group care facility shall file annually with the Township Secretary a report
detailing the use of the facility and its compliance with the conditions of original approval and
of this chapter.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to exempt a group care facility from complying
with the provisions of the Township Building and Fire Codes or other ordinances applicable to
the construction, occupancy and operation of the facility.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 438/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[a]
[7]
(a)
(1)
L. Gas and oil well drilling, oil and gas development, and oil and gas drilling subsurface facilities in
the M Zoning District, under the following conditions:
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1000; amended 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1060]
Conditional use application. A person or entity desiring approval of a conditional use
application pursuant to this section shall submit a written application. Before submitting the
application, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Township staff to determine
the requirements of and the procedural steps for the application. The intent of this process is
for the applicant to obtain necessary information and guidance from the staff before entering
into any commitments or incurring substantial expenses with regard to the site and plan
preparation. The application shall not be considered to be complete and properly filed unless
and until all items required by this section, including the application fee, have been received.
Such application shall include the following information and plans:
Payment of an application fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Wilkins as adopted by a
consolidated fee resolution. Said fee schedule may also include a requirement to
deposit escrow funds to be drawn from by the Township for reimbursement of
administrative and engineering costs associated with review and inspections to
ensure compliance with this chapter. The Township may adjust the escrow amount
from time to time as may reasonably be required.
Fourteen paper copies and one electronic copy of the completed application form
supplied by the Township along with supporting documentation as identified in this
section.
Written permission from the property owner(s) who has legal or equitable title in and
to the proposed development or facility or demonstrable documentation of the
applicant's authority to occupy the property.
The GIS location and 911 address of the well site.
Copies of any and all permits and applications submitted to the various local, county,
state and federal agencies. Permits and plans shall include but not be limited to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection well applications and permit,
Erosion and Sediment Control General Permit-2 (ESCGP-2), or current permit
requirement, or other erosion and sedimentation permits and all air, water and waste
management permits.
A site plan, prepared by an engineer or surveyor licensed in Pennsylvania, shall be
provided to establish compliance with all applicable regulations. All drilling and
production operations, including derricks, vacuum pumps, compressors, storage
tanks, vehicle parking, structures, machinery, temporary housing, ponds and pits,
and ancillary equipment on the well site shall be identified. All protected structures
within 1,500 feet of the property lines of the well site shall be identified. All roads
related to the development or facility must also be shown. A sufficient number of
copies of the site plan shall be provided for review and comment by all Wilkins
Township emergency service organizations.
Traffic study:
A description of plans for the transportation and delivery of equipment,
machinery, water, chemicals, products, materials and other items to be utilized
in the siting, drilling, stimulating, completion, alteration and operation of the
development or facility. Such description shall include a map showing the
planned vehicular access roads and transportation infrastructure that may be
used and the type, weight, number of trucks and delivery schedule necessary to
support each phase of the development.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 439/483
[b]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[12]
An inventory, analysis and evaluation of existing road conditions on Township
roads along the proposed transportation route identified by the application,
including photography, video and core boring as determined to be necessary by
the Municipal Engineer.
To the extent that the same is not otherwise included or provided on copies of
applications for permits from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other
governmental units and herewith submitted or where no such permit is required, the
applicant shall provide a water withdrawal plan for the development identifying the
source of water, how many gallons will be used and withdrawn each day, the
origination of the water, proposed truck routes and all permits issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other governmental body. If the development
is to be supplied by way of waterlines, the locations of all proposed waterlines are to
be identified. The site for the treatment and disposal of the water shall also be
identified. The use of nonpotable water sources is highly encouraged. The use of
injection wells for disposal of fracking fluid is strongly discouraged. The applicant is
required to use best management practices.
To the extent that the same is not otherwise included or provided on copies of
applications for permits from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other
governmental units and herewith submitted or where no such permit is required, the
applicant shall identify the means and availability of the site for disposal of cuttings,
fracturing fluids, oil, toxic materials, hazardous materials and other waste products.
To the extent that the information has been developed, the applicant shall provide a
plan for the transmission of gas from the development. The plan will identify but not
be limited to gathering lines, compressors and other mid- and downstream facilities
located within the Township and extending 800 feet beyond the Township boundary.
The applicant shall provide a sufficient number of copies to the Township of the
preparedness, prevention and contingency ("PPC") plan as defined in the PADEP
document, "Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of Environmental
Emergency Response Plans," or the most-recent applicable guidance document, to
be distributed to the Township Manager, the Emergency Management Coordinator,
the Fire Chief of the district and Woodland Hills Emergency Services.
Noise management plan:
An acoustics study shall be prepared and submitted with the application. The
study shall be prepared by an acoustics expert(s) acceptable to the Township.
The study shall identify the existing background level of noise and the
anticipated noise impact from the proposed use. The report shall contain
measures of existing ambient measurements, estimates of the noise
measurements to be anticipated from the type of operations and equipment that
are proposed for the use and if there are any significant increases in those noise
levels. The report shall also contain specific proposals that are intended to
reduce noise levels emanating off the site.
The study shall be based upon actual sound-level measurements and estimates
of potential noise impact at the property lines of the site of the proposed use; or
the applicant/developer shall submit a statement prepared by an engineer
warranting that the nature of the use will produce no impact on acoustics, in
regards to the standards of this chapter.
The noise level shall be established based on a test performed during a
continuous seventy-two-hour time span, which shall include at least one twentyfour-
hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The testing shall be done
by a qualified noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 440/483
[13]
[14]
[15]
Township and shall be in accordance with Specifications ANSI S12.18-1994
Method II and ANSI S1.4-1971. The Township reserves the right to hire a thirdparty
consultant to witness testing and review the results at the sole expense of
the applicant. The sound-level meters used shall meet the American National
Standards Institute's standard for a Type I sound-level meter.
Environmental impact analysis. To the extent that the same is not otherwise included
or provided within copies of applications for permits from the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or other governmental units and herewith submitted or where no such
permit is required, the applicant shall provide an environmental impact analysis. The
environmental impact analysis shall describe, identify and analyze all environmental
aspects of the site and of neighboring properties that may be affected by the
proposed operations or the ultimate use proposed to be conducted on the site. The
limits of the impact area to be studied shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners. The environmental impact
study shall include, but not be limited to, all critical impact areas on or off site that
may be impacted by the proposed or ultimate use of the facility, including the impact
on the critical areas, the protective measures and procedures to protect the critical
areas from damage, and the actions to be taken to minimize environmental damage
to the critical areas on the site and surrounding areas during and after completion of
the operation. Critical impact areas include, but are not limited to, stream corridors;
streams; wetlands; slopes in excess of 25%; sites where there is a history of adverse
subsurface conditions or where available soils information or other geotechnical
data, including data from the Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of
Mines, indicates the potential for landslides, subsidence or other subsurface
hazards; Class I agricultural lands; highly acidic or erodible soils; carbonate or highly
fractured bedrock; aquifer recharge and discharge areas; areas of unique or
protected vegetation or wildlife habitat; and areas of historic, cultural and/or
archaeological significance.
Air quality study. To the extent that the same is not otherwise included or provided
within copies of applications for permits from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
other governmental units and herewith submitted or where no such permit is
required, the applicant shall provide an air quality study. The study shall be prepared
by experts acceptable to the Township and submitted with the application and shall
include an analysis of the existing and predicted air quality levels, including smoke,
odors, fumes, dust and pollutants at the site. This report shall contain the sources of
the information, the data and background tests that were conducted and the
conclusions and recommendations of the professionals preparing the report that
would be required to maintain the air quality at a level equal to or better than the
existing background level prior to the proposed use; or the applicant/developer shall
submit a statement prepared by an engineer warranting that the nature of the use
will produce no impact on air quality.
Hydrological study. To the extent that the same is not otherwise included or provided
within copies of applications for permits from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
other governmental units and herewith submitted or where no such permit is
required, the applicant shall provide a hydrological study. The study shall be
prepared by a hydrogeologist acceptable to the Township. The study shall evaluate
the existing surface and subsurface hydrogeology, based upon historical data and
on-site investigation and studies where such historical data, in the judgment of the
Planning Commission, is inadequate. The study shall identify groundwater discharge
and recharge areas that may be affected by the proposed use, map the groundwater
table and analyze and delineate the effects of the proposed use on the hydrology,
including surface and groundwater quantity and quality. Acceptance of the study is
subject to final approval by the Board of Commissioners. If the study shows an
alteration to the groundwater, the permit shall be denied.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 441/483
(b)
(c)
(a)
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(2)
Conditional use approval is nontransferable without consent from the Board of
Commissioners and shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not
commenced within one year from the date of issuance of the conditional use. The
conditional use approval may be extended by the Board of Commissioners upon written
request by the operator, after notice and hearing. The operator shall provide proof that
the requested conditional use permit for such location has not changed.
The applicant shall provide any and all waivers from owners of protected structures.
General standards.
Best management practices shall be encouraged.
The uses regulated by this section are determined to be land developments and subject
to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
Any hazardous or toxic material shall be securely contained, stored and removed in
accordance with applicable state or federal regulations. On-site disposal is prohibited. All
hazardous materials stored must be clearly marked, identifying the contents, chemicals,
and hazards as required by the OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, 29 CFR
1910.1200, and National Fire Protection Association Code 704, Standard System for the
Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response. All regulated tanks
are to be labeled to an NFPA specification.
Fracture fluid storage ponds, open pits and reserve pits are highly discouraged. Closedloop
systems and other related best management practices, including but not limited to
the use of netting over fracture fluid ponds, are strongly recommended to be used during
the drilling or completion of any well.
Fresh-water storage ponds are permitted. The use of nonpotable water is strongly
encouraged.
All operations shall be in accordance with applicable federal laws and regulations, the
Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (58 P.S. § 601.101 et seq.), as amended, and pursuant to
all other applicable rules, regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto.
It is strongly recommended that drip pans, containment devices or other best
management practices be placed, used or installed underneath all tanks, containers,
pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves,
connections and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge or
spill hazardous liquids. The operator shall be responsible for prevention and prompt
removal of spills involving waste materials, oil and toxic or hazardous materials.
Multiple well pad sites on any one oil and gas development shall be prohibited, unless
the operator proves to the satisfaction of the Township that the underlying geology makes
using a single well pad impractical.
Changes in the site plan, including but not limited to any expansion of the ground surface
area used and/or devoted towards drilling operations, requires further conditional use
approval pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
Except for emergency and governmental compliance activity, hours of operation are
limited to Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All deliveries and pickups
incidental to the oil and gas development or facility must occur during the defined hours
of operation.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 442/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
At least 30 days prior to any development activity at the development or facility, the
operator shall provide the following information to each property owner within 3,000 feet
of the planned surface location of the development or facility:
A copy of the site plan submitted as part of the conditional use application;
A general description of the planned operations at the development or facility and
associated equipment to be used;
The contact information for the operator; and
The availability of the operator to hold a meeting locally with such residents to
present the operator's plans for the development or facility and to allow for questions
and answers. The meeting(s) shall be held prior to the commencement of
development activity.
A duly authorized representative of the Township, trained by the operator or agents of the
operator, shall have the authority in relation to the enforcement of this chapter to enter
upon the property of a development or facility for the purpose of inspecting the equipment
and all other aspects of the site necessary to assure compliance with this chapter.
The operator of any development or facility shall notify the Emergency Management
Coordinator, Municipal Zoning Officer and Municipal Engineer no less than 90 days prior
to the startup and abandonment or shutdown of any well site.
All drilling and production operations, including but not limited to derricks, vacuum
pumps, compressors, storage tanks, vehicle parking, structures, machinery, temporary
housing, ponds, pits, and ancillary equipment, shall be located not less than 1,500 feet
from any protected structure and not less than 200 feet from the nearest property line.
Traffic impact.
The proposed routes must be designed to minimize the impact on streets within the
Township. The Township reserves the right to designate alternate routes in the event that
the applicant's proposed routes are deemed inadequate, unsafe or overly disruptive to
normal vehicular traffic by the Municipal Engineer. Vehicles are to operate on state routes
and may only use municipal roads when the use of state routes is not feasible.
Prior to the commencement of any activity at the development or facility, the operator
shall enter into a municipal roadway maintenance and repair agreement with the
Township, in a form acceptable to the Township, regarding maintenance, repair and
bonding of municipal roads that are to be used by vehicles for development activities.
The municipal roadway maintenance and repair agreement will identify the
responsibilities of the applicant to prepare, maintain, and repair municipal roads before,
during and immediately after drilling operations associated with the development or
facility. The applicant shall take all necessary corrective action and measures as directed
by the Township pursuant to the agreement to ensure the roadways are repaired and
maintained during and at the conclusion of all development activities.
The operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the municipal roads
utilized remain free of dirt, mud and debris resulting from development activities and/or
shall ensure such roads are promptly swept and cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur.
The operator shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the safety of persons in
areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent to roadways (for example, persons
waiting for public or school transportation). Where necessary and allowed, during periods
of anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with the development of facility,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 443/483
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(a)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(8)
the operator will provide flagmen to ensure the public safety and include adequate signs
and/or other warning measures for truck traffic and vehicular traffic.
There will be no staging of trucks or equipment on local roads.
A traffic control plan in conformance with PennDOT standards shall be provided.
Visual.
The oil and gas development or facility shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize the removal of trees and shrubs, protect all natural resources, and minimize the
amount of surface disturbance.
The operator shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning and shall chip, grind or
remove all tree stumps from properties it clears for development purposes.
The location and design of structures and site improvements shall be integrated with the
natural color, form and texture of the surrounding area.
Lighting.
Lighting shall be in conformance with Chapter 72, § 72-2, of the Code of the Township of
Wilkins.
Air and water quality.
Air-contaminant emissions shall be in compliance with all municipal, county, state and
federal regulations, including, without limitation, the provisions of the Code of the
Township of Wilkins, as amended, and all applicable regulations for smoke, ash, dust,
fumes, gases, odors and vapors.
The operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure appropriate dust-control
measures are in place to prevent visible plumes of dust from crossing the property line or
adversely impacting neighboring properties.
Sixty days prior to drilling, the operator shall notify residents with water wells within 3,000
feet of the gas well of its intentions to drill. The operator shall provide proof of notice to
the Township.
All condensate tanks, compressor stations, processing plants and other production
facilities shall be equipped with vapor recovery and/or vapor destruction units.
Noise. Except for emergency and governmental compliance activity, noise shall be regulated
by Chapter 110 of the Township Codified Book of Ordinances.
Hazards.
Upon request of the Emergency Management Coordinator, the operator shall, prior to
drilling its first gas well in the Township, make available, with at least 30 days' notice, at
the applicant's sole cost and expense, an appropriate group training program for
emergency responders and municipal code enforcement personnel. Such training shall
be made available at least annually during any year that drilling activities take place at
the oil and gas development or facility. Training should cover each phase of the
development from site work to well completion. The Township shall require a minimum of
four hours of annual training, with additional hours added at the recommendation of the
Fire Marshal annually. If additional wells are drilled at the site, the operator and
Emergency Management Coordinator will determine if additional training is required.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 444/483
(b)
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(9)
(10)
The applicant shall maintain at the property and on file with the municipality a current list
and the Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all chemicals used in the drilling
operations (including but not limited to types of additives, acids, polymers, salts,
surfactants and solvents) and in any fracturing operations. If the PPC requires availability
and/or utilization of special equipment or supplies particular to the hazards or conditions
addressed in the PPC, the Township shall require the operator to reimburse the Township
for the cost of procurement of such special equipment or supplies.
Access.
Beginning with its intersection with a public street, any ingress or egress point for the
development or facility shall be paved for the first 50 feet and improved with limestone or
other material for the next 100 feet in a manner that no water, sediment, or debris will be
carried onto any public street. If any amount of mud, dirt or other debris is carried onto
public or private rights-of-way from the well site, the operator shall immediately clean the
roads and implement a remedial plan as directed by the Township to keep the streets
continuously clean.
The first 50 feet from the existing edge of pavement extending into the site shall
consist of the following material:
Compacted subgrade.
PennDOT Class 4 geotextile fabric.
Eight inches of AASHTO No. 1 crushed aggregate base course.
Two inches of PennDOT 2A aggregate.
Six inches of Superpave® 25 mm binder course.
The remainder of the driveway to the well pad shall be constructed with the following
material:
Eight inches of AASHTO No. 1 crushed aggregate base course.
Two inches of PennDOT 2A aggregate.
Ingress and egress points for all public and private driveways or roadways shall be
located and improved in order to:
Meet 67 Pa. Code Chapter 441, Access to and Occupancy of Highways by
Driveways and Local Roads, PennDOT Design Manual 2.
Ensure adequate capacity for existing and projected traffic volume.
Provide efficient movement of traffic, including appropriate turning radii and transition
grade.
Minimize hazards to highway users and adjacent property and human activity.
All applicable permits or approvals must be obtained, including, without limitation:
Access or driveway permits to state or county roads.
Overweight or oversize loads.
Geophysical exploration.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 445/483
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(12)
Geophysical seismic testing is governed by Chapter 82 of the Township Codified Book of
Ordinances, as amended.
A licensed geologist must provide a report regarding the ability of the land to subside due
to the proposed operations. This report must detail the amount of risk of seismic activity
because of existing subsurface conditions and with the introduction of drilling and
fracking.
Storage of equipment.
No equipment, including drilling, redrilling, reworking or other portable equipment, shall
be stored on the development or facility which is not essential to the everyday operation
of the development or facility. This includes the removal of idle equipment unnecessary
for the operation of wells.
Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the development or facility except
when drilling or well-servicing operations are being conducted on the site.
It shall be illegal to park or store any vehicle or item of machinery on any street, right-ofway
or in any driveway, alley or on the development or facility which constitutes a fire
hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires, except
equipment which is necessary for the maintenance of the development or facility or for
the gathering or transporting of hydrocarbon substances from the site.
Fencing, screening and buffering.
Security fencing consisting of a permanent, eight-foot, galvanized chain-link fence topped
with either razor or barbed wire shall be installed prior to the commencement of any
activity at every well site to secure wellheads, storage tanks, separation facilities, water
or liquid impoundment areas, and other mechanical and production equipment and
structures on the well site.
Security fencing shall be at least eight feet in height, equipped with lockable gates at
every access point, and having openings no less than 12 feet wide. Gates shall be kept
locked except when being used for access to the site. Additional lockable gates used to
access the well site, freshwater ponds or open pits by foot may be allowed, as necessary.
The fence posts shall be set in concrete at sufficient depths to maintain the stability of the
fence.
The Township's first responders shall be given means to access the well site in case of
an emergency. It is recommended that a lock box be installed. The applicant must
provide the Allegheny County 911 Communications Center with necessary information to
access the development or facility in case of an emergency.
Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the development or facility,
providing notice of the potential dangers and the contact information in case of an
emergency. During drilling and hydraulic fracturing, clearly visible warning signage must
be posted on the well site.
In construction of the oil and gas development or facility, the natural surrounding shall be
considered and attempts made to preserve existing trees and other native vegetation.
Existing trees and respective root systems should not be disturbed whenever possible.
All oil and gas developments and facilities shall have a minimum front, side and rear yard
setback of a minimum of 200 feet.
Oil and gas developments and facilities are subject to Chapter 173, Zoning, of the Code
of the Township of Wilkins.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 446/483
[1]
[2]
(h)
(i)
(13)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
(a)
(14)
Any development which abuts a residential use shall provide a ten-foot buffer strip along
the affected boundary line(s). All plants shall be selected from species that are hardy in
the area and shall be sound nursery stock. Developers will have two options for the
buffer strip:
Type I buffer: to consist of a double row of Norway spruces planted at oblique lines
to one another so that a continuous screen is provided. All trees shall be a minimum
of 12 feet in height at the time of planting. Trees which die shall be replaced within
six months.
Type II buffer: A Type II buffer shall consist of a single row of any species of
coniferous tree, shrub or plant that will block a line of sight from the level of existing
grade to at least 12 feet in height at time of planting.
In addition to screening, the developer shall submit a general landscaping plan, including
foundation planting around structures. Any landscaping strip along a Township right-ofway
shall be composed of plantings that will not block clear views for vehicles entering or
leaving the premises.
Structure height. Permanent structures of the oil and gas developments and facilities (both
principal and accessory) shall comply with the height regulations of the applicable zoning
district.
Oil and gas development facilities.
Oil and gas development facilities, which employ the use of compressors, motors or
engines as part of the operations and/or produce air-contaminant emissions or offensive
odors, subsurface facilities, including horizontal drilling facilities, gathering system
facilities and production facilities shall be listed as a principal use upon conditional use
approval only in the M Manufacturing District, subject to this subsection, all applicable
chapters of the Code of the Township of Wilkins and the following:
All noise-generating equipment and processes shall be contained within a
completely enclosed building, and windows and doors shall remain closed during
operations.
Adequate public utilities shall be available to meet the demands of the facility.
The front, rear and side yard requirements shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
The site shall be designed utilizing natural topography and/or constructed earthen
mounds so as to obstruct visibility from adjacent streets and properties.
Adjacent public streets shall be adequate to accommodate traffic volumes and
weight limits associated with traffic to and from the site.
The storage, handling, transportation and disposal of hazardous or potentially
hazardous materials shall be in accordance with all applicable permits and
requirements of the Code of the Township of Wilkins, the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protections and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
No structure shall be located less than 3,000 feet from any protected structure.
Secondary containment shall be provided at sites utilizing liquid separators.
Compressors and other power-driven equipment shall use sparkless electrical
motors, when practicable, as an alternative to internal combustion motors.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 447/483
[10]
[11]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(15)
(1)
M.
If an internal combustion engine is used, it shall not be discharged into the open air
unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box
constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive
vibrations and the ignition of carbon or soot. All such equipment shall be maintained
in good operating condition according to manufacturer's specifications.
A security fence, as specified in Subsection L(12), Fencing, screening and buffering,
of this subsection, shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line and 20
feet from a public right-of-way.
Natural gas processing plants shall be listed as a principal use upon conditional use approval
in the M Manufacturing District and shall be subject to this subsection, all applicable chapters
of the Code of the Township of Wilkins, and the following:
All noise-generating equipment and processes shall be contained within a completely
enclosed building, and windows and doors shall remain closed during operations.
Adequate public utilities shall be available to meet the demands of the facility.
The front, rear and side yard requirements shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
The site shall be designed utilizing natural topography and/or constructed earthen
mounds so as to obstruct visibility from adjacent streets and properties.
The traffic study shall show that adjacent public streets shall be adequate to
accommodate traffic volumes and weight limits associated with traffic to and from the
site.
The storage, handling, transportation and disposal of hazardous or potentially hazardous
materials shall be in accordance with all applicable permits and requirements of Chapter
82 of the Code of the Township of Wilkins, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
The facility's property line shall be located not less than 3,000 feet from any protected
structure.
Secondary containment shall be provided at sites utilizing liquid separators.
Power-driven equipment shall use sparkless electrical motors, when practicable, as an
alternative to internal combustion motors.
If an internal combustion engine is used, it shall not be discharged into the open air
unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box
constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive
vibrations and the ignition of carbon or soot. All such equipment shall be maintained in
good operating condition according to manufacturer's specifications.
A security fence, as specified in Subsection L(12), Fencing, screening and buffering, of
this subsection, shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property line and 20 feet from
a public right-of-way.
LAR-TND Larimer Avenue Traditional Neighborhood Development District. The following criteria
shall apply to all uses listed in § 173-11I(3) through (9):
[Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1006]
There shall be no minimum lot area; however, a minimum usable lot area of 7,200 square feet
shall be required. Usable lot area shall be interpreted as a contiguous lot area with a slope of
3% or less.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 448/483
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Building size: A building of 3,240 square feet each usable lot (i.e., 7,200 square feet) is
permitted. Usable lots in excess of 7,200 square feet shall be allowed to have a building equal
to 45% of the usable lot area. (Example: A developer with a usable lot of 9,000 square feet
could build a building of 4,050 square feet.)
Parking: All parking shall comply with § 173-23 of the Codified Book of Ordinances.
All off-street loading shall comply with § 173-23 of the Codified Book of Ordinances.
Driveways and access: Larimer Avenue is owned and maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. As such, the proper highway occupancy permits shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and proof of same will be required by the
Township.
Landscaping plan.
A landscaping plan for the proposed development shall be submitted. Also, any
development which abuts a residential use shall provide a ten-foot buffer strip along the
side boundary line. All plants shall be selected from species that are hardy in the area
and shall be sound nursery stock. Developers will have two options for the buffer strip.
Type I buffer: to consist of a double row of Norway spruces planted at oblique lines
to one another so that a continuous screen is provided. All trees shall be a minimum
of four feet in height at the time of planting. Trees which die shall be replaced within
six months.
Type II buffer: A Type II buffer shall consist of a single row of any species of
coniferous tree, shrub or plant that will block a line of sight from the level of existing
grade to at least four feet in height at time of planting and grow to at least six feet in
height
In addition to screening, the developer shall submit a general landscaping plan, including
foundation planting around structures. Any landscaping strip along Larimer Avenue shall
be composed of plantings that will not block clear views for vehicles entering or leaving
the premises.
Building design: Although expensive buildings will not be required, the Township expects
modern, clean structures (see Design Manual) or professional, workmanlike structural
rehabilitation; buildings of plain, painted or unpainted cement blocks will not be approved.
Lot design and slope protection: Any development which encroaches on the toe of a slope of
2:1 or greater shall provide a geotechnical investigation report and suitable structure(s) to
ensure slope stability. The design shall be provided by a professional engineer licensed in
Pennsylvania. Said design shall have the engineer's name and professional stamp upon the
same.
Height of structures: All structures, including signs, shall not exceed 35 feet.
Sidewalks: A sidewalk of at least four feet in width shall be provided along Larimer Avenue.
Construction shall follow Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications.
Setbacks: All structures shall be set back at least 10 feet from any lot line and at least five
feet from any required screening. Larger front yard setbacks from Larimer Avenue shall be
required in accordance with the following schedule; the depth of the lot will be calculated from
the front property line to the rear of the usable lot area.
Depth of Lot
(feet)
Required Setback
(feet)
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 449/483
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(15)
Depth of Lot
(feet)
Required Setback
(feet)
60 or less 10
60 to 70 15
Greater than 70 20
Stormwater management plan: The developer shall file and have approved a stormwater plan
with the Township that follows the Township's Stormwater Management Ordinance, Chapter
148, Article V, § 148-24.
Signage: Signage shall be consistent with the requirements of Article V of the Township's
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 173) as permitted in the Commercial District
Dumpsters: All dumpsters or rolloff boxes (except temporary ones used during construction or
demolition) shall be enclosed. The enclosure shall consist of masonry construction on three
sides with an opaque gate on the fourth side to allow for pickup and emptying. The exterior
shall harmonize with the primary building on site. Dumpsters shall be placed behind the front
wall of the primary building.
Processing: LAR-TND applications shall be processed in accordance with §§ 173-46 through
173-49 of the Zoning Ordinance. The approval or denial of plans shall be based upon their
conformance with the criteria set forth by this district and the Design Manual. The process for
review and approval of development proposals shall be as follows:
Step 1: sketch plan meeting. Though not required, developers are strongly encouraged to
develop a sketch plan prior to submitting a formal development proposal. This proposal
can be presented at any public meeting of the Township (Commissioners, Planning
Commission) for informal review and comment.
Step 2: formal development proposal. The developer shall present a formal development
proposal to the Township. The Township does not require elaborate plans and
specifications, but will require a submission sufficient for review. The submission shall
consist of:
A site plan showing proposed building layout, parking, road access, buffer strip and
general landscaping;
An elevation or similar representation of the proposed structure(s). This need not be
an architectural rendering;
Signage.
Special Note: The design of all proposals shall be fudged using the LAR-TND
Design Manual. This manual is available at the Administrative office of the
Township.
Step 3: Planning Commission review. A copy of the formal development proposal will be
forwarded to the Planning Commission and a copy will be sent to the Township Engineer.
The Planning Commission shall meet with the developer to discuss the proposal and
shall report their findings and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
Step 4: Township Commissioners public hearing. The Township Commissioners shall
schedule and hold a public hearing on the proposal pursuant to public notice. After the
public hearing, the proposal shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied. Any
conditional approval or denial shall clearly set forth the reasons for such action.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 450/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
N.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
O.
School building conversions.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1012]
Former school buildings located in R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts may be used for
any of the following purposes:
Educational purposes;
Recreational purposes;
Business offices or professional offices;
Financial institutions.
One sign for each separate occupancy not in excess of three square feet in size may be
displayed on the property, provided that all signs are affixed to one common structure not
exceeding 100 square feet in size nor in excess of 20 feet in height.
No sign shall be lighted directly or indirectly.
No use shall begin prior to 7:00 a.m. or end after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time.
No recreational use shall result in noise discernable beyond the property line of the subject
property.
No substantial change in exterior architecture or building size shall be permitted.
The use shall comply with parking and general regulations in Article III, District Regulations.
Mobile home park in the R-4 Residential District under the following conditions:
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 1047]
Compliance with all requirements of Chapter 148, Article VII.
Minimum park area.
A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at least five contiguous acres of land.
Each mobile home lot shall contain at least 5,000 square feet.
Site location. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum
requirements:
Free from adverse influence from swamps, marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas,
or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
Not subject to flooding or not extended into the one-hundred-year floodplain.
Not subject to any hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic
matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare.
Park areas for nonresidential uses.
No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are
required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management
and maintenance of the park.
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile
home located on a mobile home lot and connected to utilities.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 451/483
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(a)
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.
All mobile homes shall be located at least 40 feet from any park property line or street.
There shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet between an individual mobile home,
including accessory structures attached thereto, and adjoining pavement of a park street
or common parking area or other common areas and structures.
All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses shall be
required to provide screening such as fences or natural growth along the property
boundary line separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential use.
Erection and placement of mobile homes.
Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and
structures by at least 30 feet on all sides.
Mobile homes shall be installed upon and securely fastened to a frost-free foundation or
footer and in no event shall it be erected on jacks, loose blocks or other temporary
materials.
An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the entire base
of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay
and deterioration of the structure.
Mobile homes must meet all required safety standards based upon the Construction
Code, federal and state law, and all other applicable laws.
A mobile home patio with a minimum gross floor area of 180 square feet is required for
each mobile home.
Off-street parking.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per each mobile home is required.
Compliance with the requirements of Chapter 124, Article IV.
§ 173-50. Performance standards.
All conditional uses shall comply with the requirements of this section. In order to determine whether a
proposed use will conform to the requirements of this chapter, the governing body may obtain a
qualified consultant to testify, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
Fire protection. Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of Fire
Underwriters shall be readily available when any activity involving the handling or storage of
flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
Electrical disturbances. No activity shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting radio or
other equipment in the vicinity.
Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume, frequency or beat shall
be muffled or otherwise controlled, except fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes shall be exempt from this requirement.
Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring property in any district shall
be prohibited.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 452/483
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
Odors. No malodorous gas or mater shall be permitted which is discernible on any adjoining lot or
property.
Air pollution. No pollution of air by flyash, dust, smoke, vapors or other substance shall be
permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property.
Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining
properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will carry objectionable substances
onto neighboring properties.
Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards established by the Department of
Environmental Resources.
Article VII. Floodplain Regulations
[Added 7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 638]
§ 173-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of health and safety
hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary
expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief and the impairment of the tax base by:
Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in combination with other
existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood
heights, velocities and frequencies.
Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas
subject to flooding.
Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be
protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.
Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes
because of flood hazards.
§ 173-52. Applicability.
These floodplain provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Township of Wilkins and
shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map referred to in § 173-55A herein, as being located
within the boundaries of any floodplain district.
§ 173-53. Warning and disclaimers of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside
the floodplain districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 453/483
B.
A.
B.
A.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Wilkins or any officer or
employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 173-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD FRINGE
That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway as designated in § 173-55A(2).
FLOODPLAIN
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to
partial or complete inundation.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODWAY
That part of a floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude as
designated in § 173-55A. For the purposes of this article, the "floodway" shall be capable of
accommodating a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
MINOR REPAIRS
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including any addition, change or modification in construction,
exit facilities or permanent fixtures or the equivalent.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for a permanent occupancy, office or place of
assembly, contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The
term does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that on the average is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year), as determined by the
Wilkins Township Flood Insurance Study described in § 173-55A.
§ 173-55. Description of districts.
Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by
waters of the one-hundred-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the
Wilkins Township Flood Insurance Study and the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map prepared by Michael Baker, Jr., Inc., for the Federal Insurance Administration dated March
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 454/483
(1)
(2)
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
1978, which study and map shall be available for inspection in the office of the Township Manager
in the Municipal Building.
The Floodway District (FW) is delineated for purposes of this article using the criteria that a
certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one-hundredyear
flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at
any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 2 of the abovereferenced
Flood Insurance Study and shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map.
The Flood-Fringe District (FF) shall be that area of the one-hundred-year floodplain not
included in the Floodway District. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be
the one-hundred-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above-referenced
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and as shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map.
Overlay concept.
The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts
as shown on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map,[1] and as such, the provisions for the
floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Township Manager.
Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of any of the
floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or
those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply.
In the event that any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a
result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, the basic underlying
district provisions shall remain applicable.
§ 173-56. District boundary changes.
The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the Township where natural or manmade
changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers River Basin Commission or another qualified agency or individual
documents the notification for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
§ 173-57. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board and to
submit his own technical evidence if he/she so desires.
§ 173-58. Compliance required.
All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken
only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all other applicable codes and
ordinances such as the Township Building Code, Subdivision, the Grading Ordinance[1] and other
provisions of this chapter as previously adopted or subsequently amended.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 455/483
[1]
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction, Ch. 94, Grading, and Ch. 148, Subdivision and
Land Development.
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity
of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or
system.
Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, etc., within the
municipality, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources, Dams
and Encroachment Division. Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected
adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to both the Federal
Insurance Administration and the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 173-59. Floodway District (FW).
In the Floodway District, no development shall be permitted except where the effect of such
development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements which have been
approved by all appropriate local and/or state authorities as required above.
Permitted uses. In the Floodway District, the following uses and activities are permitted, provided
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by
any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials
and equipment:
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds,
golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges and hunting
and fishing areas.
Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and pervious parking
areas.
Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading
areas, airport landing strips, etc.
Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and activities may be permitted by
special exception, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance:
Structures except for mobile homes accessory to the uses and activities in Subsection A
above.
Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges,
transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage treatment plants and other similar or related
uses.
Water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.
Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals and similar activities.
Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or
explosive and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such material and
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 456/483
(7)
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
D.
equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement and/or can be readily removed
from the area within the time available after flood warning.
Other similar uses and activities, provided that they cause no increase in flood heights and/or
velocities. All uses, activities and structural developments shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the floodproofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
Mobile homes. No mobile homes shall be placed within the Floodway District except in existing
mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions.
Restricted uses.
[Added 7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 734]
The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable in addition to any other applicable
provisions of this article or any other ordinance, code or regulation.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act,[1] and the regulations
adopted by the Department of Community Affairs as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which:
Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances;
Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons or other comparable volume of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or
Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of radioactive substances;
Shall be subject to the provisions of this section in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to
human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etcetera)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 457/483
[1]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Prohibited uses.
[Added 7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 734]
Within the Floodway District (FW), any structure of the kind described in Subsection D above
shall be prohibited. Where permitted within the Flood-Fringe District (FF), any structure of the
kind described in Subsection D above shall be:
Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above the one-hundred-year flood; and
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication FloodProofing Regulations (United States Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972) or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 173-60. Flood-Fringe District (FF).
In the Flood-Fringe District, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with
the regulations of the underlying district, provided that all such uses, activities and/or development
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 173-61. Criteria for special exceptions and variances.
In passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this chapter and:
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments. No special exception or variance shall be granted for any proposed use,
development or activity that will cause any increase in flood levels during the one-hundred-year
flood.
The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent
disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owners.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management
program for the area.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 458/483
J.
K.
L.
[1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood of ordinary and emergency vehicles.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
expected at the site.
Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article.
§ 173-62. Technical assistance for special exceptions and
variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to
any request for a special exception or variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for
technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities and
the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters.
§ 173-63. Technical assistance fee.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
When technical assistance is deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant shall
deposit with the Township a fee as set by the fees resolution of the Board of Commissioners[1] to pay
for the cost of such assistance. If the cost exceeds said sum, an additional deposit shall be made. Any
excess sum shall be returned to the applicant.
Editor's Note: The most recent fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 173-64. Issuance of special exceptions and variances.
Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the Zoning Hearing Board has
determined that the granting of such will not result in unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with local laws or ordinances.
§ 173-65. Activities requiring a special exception.
[Added 7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 734]
The provisions of this section shall be applicable in addition to any other applicable provisions of this
article, or any other ordinance, Code or regulation.
Identification of activities requiring a special exception. In accordance with the Pennsylvania
Floodplain Management Act (Act 1978-166)[1] and regulations adopted by the Department of
Community Affairs as required by the Act, the following obstructions and activities are permitted
only as a special exception if located partially or entirely within any floodplain district:
The commencement of any of the following activities or the construction, enlargement or
expansion of any structure used or intended to be used for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of or any construction of a new mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 459/483
[1]
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
B.
subdivision.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Application requirements. Applicants for special exceptions shall provide five copies of the
following items:
A written request, including a completed building permit application form.
A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is located.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale and date.
The topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, showing
existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet.
All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in
acres or square feet.
The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways and parking areas, with
information concerning widths, pavement types and construction and elevations.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings, structures and
other public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and any other natural and manmade
features affecting or affected by the proposed activity or development.
The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot elevations concerning
the one-hundred-year flood elevations, and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities.
The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any other improvements.
Any other information which the municipality considers necessary for adequate review of
the application.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn
at suitable scale showing the following:
Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor plans, sections
and exterior building elevations, as appropriate.
For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and, as
required, the elevation of any other floor.
Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with the one-hundred-year flood.
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures.
Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways and parking
areas showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular accessways, including
existing and proposed grades.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 460/483
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems, water supply
systems and any other utilities and facilities.
The following data and documentation:
Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or development is
proposed is an existing separate and single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client
he/she represents.
Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect that
the proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect against damage from
the one-hundred-year flood.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect
or other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate description of the
nature and extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development during the
course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a statement concerning the effects such
pollution may have on human life.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect which contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of
any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation and the effects such materials and debris
may have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources' Planning
Module for Land Development.
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Resources to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Any other applicable permits such as but not limited to a permit for any activity regulated
by the Department of Environmental Resources under Section 302 of Act 978-166.
An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safely
evacuated before or during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a special exception by the
Township Zoning Officer, the following procedures shall apply in addition to all other applicable
permit procedures which are already established:
Within three working days following receipt of the application, a complete copy of the
application and all accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Township Planning Commission and Township
Engineer for review and comment.
If an application is received that is incomplete, the Township Zoning Officer shall notify the
applicant in writing, stating in what respects the application is deficient.
If the Township Zoning officer decides to disapprove an application, he/she shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 461/483
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
If the Township Zoning Officer approves an application, he/she shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the Department of Community
Affairs by registered mail within five working days after the date of approval. The application
shall be forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board for hearing.
Before a hearing on the special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall allow the
Department of Community Affairs 30 days after receipt of the notification by the Department
to review the application and the decision made by the Township.
If the Zoning Hearing Board does not receive any communication from the Department of
Community Affairs during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special exception to the
applicant.
If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the Zoning Hearing Board and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Zoning Hearing Board shall not issue the special exception.
Technical requirements for development requiring a special exception. In addition to any other
applicable requirements, the following provisions shall also apply to the activities requiring a
special exception. If there is any conflict between any of the following requirements and any
otherwise applicable provision, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
No application for a special exception shall be approved unless it can be determined that the
structure or activity will be located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any occupants of the
structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located and constructed so
that:
The structure will survive inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year flood without
any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
The lowest floor elevation (including basement) will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an indefinite period of time and
be safely evacuated at any time during the one-hundred-year flood.
Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or flows or debris
endangering life and property.
All hydrologic and hydraulic analysis shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations,
etcetera, shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Township and the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 173-66. Existing structures in floodplain districts.
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these
provisions but which is not in conformity with these provisions may be continued, subject to the
following conditions:
Existing structures and/or uses located in any floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged
unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 462/483
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
[1]
B.
C.
Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or
use located in any floodplain district to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value
shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible regardless of its location in
the floodplain district.
The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or
use regardless of its location in a floodplain district to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this article and any
other applicable ordinance.
Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be permitted to continue.
Minor repairs to existing buildings or structures are not subject to the provisions of this article,
provided that no structural changes or modifications are involved.
Article VIII. Administration and Enforcement
§ 173-67. Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the governing body, shall:
Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or chance of use which does not
conform to this chapter.
Issue zoning certificates and building permits.
Maintain a permanent file of all zoning certificates and applications as public records.
Identify and register all nonconforming uses.
§ 173-68. Zoning certificates.
A zoning certificate shall be obtained before any person may:
Occupy or use any vacant land.
Construct any building or structure or occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, moved, altered or enlarged.
Change the use of a structure or land to a different use.
Change a nonconforming use.
Applications for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing clearly and
completely the location, dimensions and nature of any structure involved and such other
information as the Zoning Officer may require for administration of this chapter, together with a
filing fee in accordance with a schedule fixed by resolution of the governing body.[1]
Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
Zoning certificates shall become null and void one year from the date of issue. Prior to
continuance of the activity or change for which the original certificate was issued, a new zoning
certificate must be obtained.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 463/483
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
§ 173-69. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 917]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10617.2.
§ 173-70. Enforcement remedies.
In case any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners, in
addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the municipality any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or land or to prevent, in or
about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
§ 173-71. Amendments.
The governing body may amend this chapter as proposed by a member of the governing body, by the
Planning Commission or by a petition of a person residing or owning property within the municipality in
accordance with the following provisions.
Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Planning Commission, and the petitioner, upon
such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee in accordance with a schedule fixed by
resolution.[1] The Planning Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report its
findings and recommendations, in writing, to the governing body and to the petitioner. The
proposed amendment shall be introduced before the governing body only if a majority of the
governing body elects to do so. If an amendment proposed by petition is not introduced, the
advertising deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner, otherwise such deposit shall be paid to the
municipality.
Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
Any proposed amendment introduced by a member of the governing body without written findings
and recommendations from the Planning Commission shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review at least 30 days prior to public hearing by the municipality.
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing
thereon pursuant to public notice. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the
proposed amendment is revised or further revised to include land previously not affected by it, the
governing body shall hold another public hearing pursuant to public notice before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
§ 173-72. Zoning Hearing Board.
In accordance with law, the governing body shall appoint and organize a Zoning Hearing Board, which
board shall adopt rules to govern its procedure. The Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes and,
pursuant to notice, shall conduct hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, take testimony under
oath and render decisions, in writing, all as required by law. A fee shall be charged in accordance with
a schedule fixed by resolution for any appeal or proceeding filed with the Zoning Hearing Board.[1] The
Zoning Hearing Board shall have the functions, powers and obligations specifically granted by law.
Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Manager.
Article IX. (Reserved)
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 464/483
[1]
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
Editor's Note: Former Art. IX, Planned Residential Development, added 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 543, was
repealed 4-29-2013 by Ord. No. 1032.
§ 173-73. through § 173-99. (Reserved)
Article X. Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 936; amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1063]
§ 173-100. Wireless communications facilities.
Purposes and findings of fact.
The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the siting, design, permitting,
maintenance, and use of wireless communications facilities in Wilkins Township (referred to
herein as the "Township"). While the Township recognizes the importance of wireless
communications facilities in providing high-quality communications service to its residents and
businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public safety and
to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in the
following provisions.
By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities while regulating their
location and number so as to ensure the provision for necessary services;
Provide for the managed development of wireless communications facilities in a manner
that enhances the benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the needs of
both Township residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and state laws
and regulations;
Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction, installation, maintenance and
removal of both tower-based and non-tower wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the public rights-of-way;
Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to, distributed antenna
systems, and other wireless communications facilities;
Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities through proper
design, siting, screening, material, color and finish and by requiring that competing
providers of wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing towers;
Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's residents.
General and specific requirements for non-tower wireless communications facilities.
The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs:
Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are permitted in all zoning
districts subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and subject to
applicable permitting by the Township.
Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be located on single-family
detached residences, single-family attached residences, or any residential accessory
structure.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 465/483
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
[2]
(i)
(j)
(k)
Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCFs shall be permitted to colocate
upon nonconforming tower-based WCFs. Co-location of non-tower WCFs upon
existing tower-based WCFs is encouraged even if the tower-based WCF is
nonconforming as to use and design within a zoning district.
Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed, constructed, operated,
maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Non-tower WCFs shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Township.
Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind
gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
Public safety communications. Non-tower WCFs shall not interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall not, by itself or in conjunction with
other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued, the owner shall
provide written notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when
the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned non-tower WCFs or portions of nontower
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
All abandoned or unused non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall be removed
within two months of the cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension
is approved by the Township.
If the non-tower WCF or related equipment is not removed within two months of the
cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the
Township, the non-tower WCF and/or associated facilities and related equipment
may be removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the non-tower WCF.
Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF shall provide the
Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the non-tower WCF.
Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF shall, at its sole
cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from,
caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 466/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
(l)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the non-tower WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a non-tower WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Township
in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a nontower
WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not
be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable
attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following maintenance requirements
shall apply:
The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and
shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to
promote the safety and security of the Township's residents.
All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
The following regulations shall apply to all co-located non-tower WCFs that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act[1] and/or that do not substantially change
the dimensions of the underlying wireless support structure:
Permit required. Non-tower WCF applicants proposing the modification of an existing
tower-based WCF shall obtain a building permit from the Township. In order to be
considered for such permit, the non-tower WCF applicant must submit a permit
application to the Township in accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA. Within 30 calendar days of
the date that an application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the Township
shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Township shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the WCF applicant, in writing, of such decision. The Township shall notify the
WCF applicant as to completeness of the WCF application within 30 days of receipt.
Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do not fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act and/or substantially change the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be located on single-family
detached residences, single-family attached residences, or any residential accessory
structure.
Special exception authorization required. Any WCF applicant proposing the construction
of a new non-tower WCF, or the modification of an existing non-tower WCF that does not
fall under the Pennsylvania WBCA or the FCC's 2009 Shot Clock Order, shall apply for
special exception authorization from the Township. New constructions, modifications, and
replacements that do fall under the WBCA shall not be subject to the special exception
process. The special exception application shall demonstrate that the proposed facility
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 467/483
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
[1]
(j)
complies with all provisions applicable to the proposed non-tower WCF in the Wilkins
Township Zoning Ordinance.
Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located upon any property or on a building
or structure that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic
Places or is listed on the official historic structures and/or historic districts list maintained
by the Township.
Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/or expert(s)
necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval
of the non-tower WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these non-tower WCF provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be located on existing structures or
wireless support structures, such as tower-based WCFs, subject to the following
conditions:
To the extent permissible by law, the total height of any wireless support structure
and mounted WCF shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the underlying
zoning district.
In accordance with industry standards, all WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF.
Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification on an
individual basis.
If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related equipment in a separate building,
the building shall comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning
district, and landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the equipment
building as possible in accordance with Township regulations.
Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing satellite dishes and
antennas for the purpose of maintaining television, phone, amateur (HAM) radio, and/or
internet connections at their respective residences shall be exempt from the regulations
enumerated in this section of the Zoning Ordinance.
Security fence. A security fence with a minimum height of eight feet, with only self-locking
gates, shall surround any separate communications equipment building. Vehicular
access to the communications equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
Stealth technology. Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and shall be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Removal, replacement and modification.
The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or accessory equipment for
the purpose of upgrading or repairing the non-tower WCF is permitted, so long as
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 468/483
[2]
(k)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d)
(4)
such repair or upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of the wireless
support structure or the number of antennas.
Any material modification to an existing non-tower WCF shall require notice to be
provided to the Township and possible supplemental permit approval to the original
permit or authorization.
Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any non-tower WCF to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found
within the Township Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall
have the authority to enter the property upon which a non-tower WCF is located at any
time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
Regulations applicable to all non-tower WCFs located in the public rights-of-way. In addition
to the non-tower WCF provisions listed in Subsection B of this section, the following
regulations shall apply to non-tower WCFs located in the public rights-of-way:
Location and co-location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on existing
poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not technologically
feasible, the WCF applicant shall, with the Township's approval, locate its non-tower
WCF on existing poles or freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless
support structures.
Design requirements:
Non-tower WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW,
including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist
of equipment components that are no more than six feet in height and that are
compatible in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted.
The combined height of the support structure and non-tower WCF shall be subject to
the forty-foot height maximum enumerated herein. All equipment shall be the
smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
Antennas and related equipment shall be treated to match the supporting structure
and may be required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible
with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW
based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall be located so as not
to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW, as determined by the Township. In addition:
In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or landscaping be
located within 18 inches of the face of the curb or on a privately owned lot.
Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be
screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with the surrounding
area to the satisfaction of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 469/483
[4]
[5]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(e)
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(1)
C.
Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCFs shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the
Township, or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a non-tower WCF in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any non-tower WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the right-of-way;
Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
An emergency as determined by the Township.
General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless communications facilities.
The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless communications facilities:
Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed, constructed, operated,
maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors.
Any tower-based WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order
and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall
not endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based WCF and the scheduling of
the public hearing upon the application, the WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners
of every property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The WCF applicant shall provide
proof of the notification to the Township.
Special exception authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are permitted in certain
zoning districts by special exception and at a height necessary to satisfy their function in
the WCF applicant's wireless communications system. No WCF applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in this
section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The WCF applicant shall
demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole for the tower-based WCF is the minimum height
necessary for the service area.
Prior to the Zoning Hearing Board's approval of a special exception authorizing the
construction and installation of a tower-based WCF, it shall be incumbent upon the
WCF applicant, during the special exception hearing, to prove to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the WCF applicant cannot adequately
extend or infill its communications system by the use of equipment such as redoes,
repeaters, antennas and other similar equipment installed on existing structures,
such as utility poles or their appurtenances and/or other available tall structures. The
WCF applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF must
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 470/483
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(d)
(e)
(f)
be located where it is proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's service area
and that no other viable alternative location exists.
The special exception application shall be accompanied by a propagation study
evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other communication facilities and
equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to
the WCF applicant, the power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and
any relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant in determining the need
for the proposed site and installation.
The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the proposed tower-based WCF complies with all state and
federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with another principal use, the
WCF applicant shall present documentation to the Board of Commissioners that the
owner of the property has granted an easement for the proposed tower-based WCF
and that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
The special exception application shall be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the proposed tower-based WCF complies with all applicable
provisions in this section.
Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a permit authorizing construction
and erection of a tower-based WCF, the applicant shall employ a structural engineer
registered in Pennsylvania to issue to the Township a written certification of the proposed
tower-based WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the
Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunications Industry Association. Such
engineer shall certify the proper construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure. This certification shall be provided during the special exception hearings, or at
a minimum be made as a condition attached to any approval given such that the
certification be provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
Visual appearance. Tower-based WCFs shall employ stealth technology, which may
include the tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based WCFs and related
equipment shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding
environment and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider whether its decision upon the subject application will
promote the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district involved;
encourage compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the area;
benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character
of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land development design and
construction principles, practices and techniques.
Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF shall demonstrate that
the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
structure or building or sited on land owned and maintained by Wilkins Township. The
Zoning Hearing Board may deny an application to construct a new tower-based WCF if
the WCF applicant has not made a good-faith effort to mount its antenna(s) on an
existing structure. The WCF applicant shall present evidence to the Township Zoning
Hearing Board that it contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers within
a one-fourth-mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on
those structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 471/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing building, structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause radio frequency
interference with other existing equipment for that existing building, structure, or
tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have adequate location, space,
access, or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform
its intended function.
Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under applicable state and
federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the modification of an existing tower-based
WCF which increases the overall height of such tower-based WCF shall first obtain a
permit from the Township. Nonroutine modifications, as well as modifications that
substantially change the tower-based WCF, shall be prohibited without a permit.
Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must demonstrate that a
significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists with respect to all wireless
operators in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being proposed is the leastintrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or
nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Zoning Hearing
Board's decision on an application for approval of a tower-based WCF.
Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based WCFs, the WCF
applicant shall provide the Zoning Hearing Board with a written commitment that it will
allow other service providers to co-locate antennas on the tower-based WCF where
technically feasible. To the extent permissible under state and federal law, the owner of a
tower-based WCF shall not install any additional antennas without obtaining the prior
written approval of the Township.
Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the
American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended.
Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum functional height and
shall not exceed 75 feet vertically from the base of the tower-based WCF to the top of the
original wireless support structure. An existing tower may be increased by no more than
an additional 75 feet as long as an independent, certified engineer retained under this
section expresses an opinion that the additional height is necessary for the proposed
communications tower to perform its function.
Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless communications equipment building
not exceeding 500 square feet in area, or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete
pad not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area, housing the receiving and transmitting
equipment may be located on the site for each unrelated company sharing antenna
space on a tower-based WCF that is over 75 feet in height.
Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 472/483
[1]
[2]
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
(v)
(w)
Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and
shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the tower-based
WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the Township's residents and
utilize the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by itself or in conjunction with
other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be located upon a property
and/or on a building or structure that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania
Register of Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the Township Historical Society.
Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible location identifying the
name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only
other signage permitted on the tower-based WCF shall be that required by the FCC or
any other federal or state agency.
Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except as required by law. If
lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and
federal regulations. The WCF applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction
of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the
Township Secretary.
Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce noise
in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the Township Code, except
in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to
assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of the towerbased
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the
tower-based WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these
activities.
Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a towerbased
WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the WCF applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of
a fully completed application for the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the
Township shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision. If additional
information was requested by the Township to complete an application, the time required
by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward the onehundred-
fifty-day review period.
Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which are hereafter damaged
or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored at their former
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 473/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
(x)
(y)
(z)
(aa)
(bb)
(cc)
location but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this section.
Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to be discontinued, the
owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Special exception authorization automatically
lapses after 12 continuous months of disuse or abandonment. Unused or abandoned
WCFs or portions of tower-based WCFs shall be removed as follows:
All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within six months of the cessation of operations at the site, unless a time
extension is approved by the Township.
If the tower-based WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six months of
the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the
Township, the tower-based WCF and accessory facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of the
tower-based WCF.
Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas, shall be removed
within six months of the time of cessation of operations. The Township must approve
all replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related
costs.
FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF over 40 feet in
height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the name, address, and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the facility.
Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet
in height shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the
tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or
less in height shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering each tower-based WCF.
Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall, at its sole
cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from,
caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Township in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage
was caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a
tower-based WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include,
but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based WCF shall contain a seal
and signature of a professional structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 474/483
(dd)
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
[3]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[4]
(a)
[1]
(b)
(2)
Pennsylvania.
Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the construction or placement of
a tower-based WCF, the WCF applicant shall provide to the Township financial security
sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial security shall
remain in place until the tower-based WCF is removed.
The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications facilities
located outside the public rights-of-way:
Development regulations.
Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in, or within 100 feet of, an area in which
utilities are primarily located underground.
Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside the public rights-of-way in the following
zoning districts by special exception, subject to the above prohibition:
C Commercial District (along the Route 22 corridor).
M Manufacturing District.
Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a sole use on a lot,
provided that the lot meets the minimum lot requirements in the underlying zoning
district. The minimum distance between the base of a tower-based WCF and any
adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the proposed
WCF structure height.
Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be permitted on a property
with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with another use, subject
to the following conditions:
The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the applicable
district and need not be affiliated with the tower-based WCF.
Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the requirements for the
applicable district and shall be the area needed to accommodate the towerbased
WCF and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and buffer
planting.
Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the base of a tower-based
WCF and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal to
110% the total height of the tower-based WCF or the minimum setback of the
underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Where the site on which a
tower-based WCF is proposed to be located is contiguous to an educational
use, child day-care facility, or agriculture or residential use, the minimum
distance between the base of a tower-based WCF and any such adjoining uses
shall equal 250 feet, regardless of the height of the tower-based WCF, unless it
is demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that in the event of
failure the tower-based WCF is designed to collapse upon itself within a setback
area less than the required minimum setback without endangering such
adjoining uses and their occupants.
Design regulations.
The tower-based WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology available in
an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize
aesthetic impact. Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 475/483
[2]
[3]
[4]
[1]
[2]
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an existing tower-based
WCF shall require prior approval of the Township.
Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and comparable
antennas for future users.
Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped with an anticlimbing
device, as approved by the manufacturer.
Surrounding environs.
The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs
located within proximity to the tower-based WCF shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township complying with the
standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to
document and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the tower-based
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
Fence/screen.
A security fence with a minimum height of eight feet, with only self-locking gates,
shall completely surround any tower-based WCF, as well as guy wires, or any
building housing WCF equipment.
Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly constructed towerbased
WCF as possible. The Zoning Hearing Board may permit any combination of
existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of
landscaping if, in the discretion of the Board, they achieve the same degree of
screening. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Accessory equipment.
Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or connected with, a tower-based
WCF shall be placed underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which they are situated and
shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be provided to ensure
adequate emergency and service access to a tower-based WCF. The access road shall
be a dust-free, all-weather surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall
closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil
erosion. Where applicable, the owner of the tower-based WCF shall present
documentation to the Zoning Hearing Board that the property owner has granted an
easement for the proposed facility.
Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height, there shall be two offstreet
parking spaces.
Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any tower-based WCF to ensure
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found within the
Township Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 476/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d)
(3)
authority to enter the property upon which a tower-based WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications facilities
located in the public rights-of-way:
Location and development standards.
Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed 40 feet in height and are
prohibited in areas in which all utilities are located underground.
Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall not be located in the front facade area of any
structure.
Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall be permitted along certain collector roads and
arterial roads throughout the Township, regardless of the underlying zoning district. A
map of such permitted roads is kept on file at the Township Zoning Office.
Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW
based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and related equipment shall be located so as
not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW, as determined by the Township. In addition:
In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or landscaping be
located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be
screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the
surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be removed at the sole
expense of the owner.
Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Design regulations.
The tower-based WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology available in
an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any height extensions to an
existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of the Township and shall not
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 40 feet.
Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and comparable
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 477/483
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(e)
(f)
antennas for future users.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within three months following written notice from the
Township, or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a tower-based WCF in the
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any tower-based WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the right-of-way;
Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
An emergency as determined by the Township.
Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described in this section,
every tower-based WCF in the ROW is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a
fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the Township's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay
an annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township for the Township's costs
incurred in connection with the activities described above.
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of Wilkins adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code nor on the list is available
from the office of the Township Manager. The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the
Code was Ord. No. 876, adopted 4-10-1995. A complete listing, including disposition, of all legislation
reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code is on file in the office of the Township
Manager.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 23-
94
8-29-1994 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Res. 3-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Res. No. 9-95 7-11-1995 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 117
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 478/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 20-
95
10-30-1995 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Ord. No. 877 11-27-1995 Solid waste and recycling fees Ch. 135, Art. III; repealer
only
Ord. No. 878 12-11-1995 Building permits; construction
within flood hazard areas
Ch. 72, Art. II
Ord. No. 879 2-12-1996 Compensation of Manager NCM
Ord. No. 880 2-12-1996 1996 real estate tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 881 2-12-1996 1996 appropriations NCM
Ord. No.882 3-11-1996 Recreation Board Ch. 42; repealer only
Ord. No. 883 Not adopted
Ord. No. 884 4-9-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 885 8-29-1996 Attorney fees for collection of
delinquent claims
Superseded by Ord. 968
Ord. No. 886 9-30-1996 Condemnation of dangerous
structures
NCM
Ord. No. 887 9-30-1996 Narcotics Task Force Ch. 26
Ord. No. 888 10-28-1996 Use and transportation of
explosives
Ch. 82, Art. I
Ord. No. 889 10-28-1996 Explosives permit Ch. 82, Art. II
Ord. No. 890 10-28-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 891 10-28-1996 Transfer of fire insurance
proceeds to pay delinquent taxes
Ch. 99, Art. I
Ord. No. 892 10-28-1996 Transfer of fire insurance
proceeds to secure removal or
repair of structure
Ch. 99, Art. II
Ord. No. 893 12-30-1996 1997 appropriations NCM
Ord. No. 894 12-30-1996 1997 real estate tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 895 1-27-1997 Truth in advertising Ch. 159
Ord. No. 896 1-27-1997 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 897 2-10-1997 Compensation of Manager NCM
Ord. No. 898 2-10-1997 Sewers amendment Ch. 131, Art. II
Ord. No. 899 3-31-1997 Personnel amendment Ch. 33
Ord. No. 900 3-31-1997 Sewers amendment Ch. 131, Art. II
Ord. No. 901 5-12-1997 Condemnation of dangerous
structures
NCM
Ord. No. 902 5-27-1997 Police Pension Plan amendment Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 903 9-8-1997 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No. 904 9-8-1997 Authorizing construction of
sanitary sewer
NCM
Ord. No. 905 9-29-1997 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No. 906 10-27-1997 Dye test prior to sale Ch. 131, Art. VII
Ord. No. 907 12-29-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 908 12-29-1997 Compensation of Manager NCM
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 479/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 909 12-29-1997 1998 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 910 2-9-1998 Budget NCM
Ord. No. 911 4-27-1998 Intergovernmental agreement NCM
Ord. No. 912 9-14-1998 Police Pension Plan amendment Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 913 9-14-1998 Intergovernmental agreement
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 914 11-23-1998 Capital expenditure NCM
Ord. No. 915 12-28-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 916 12-28-1998 1999 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 917 12-28-1998 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 918 3-29-1999 Compensation of Manager NCM
Ord. No. 919 3-29-1999 Explosives: permits amendment Ch. 82, Art. II
Ord. No. 920 5-10-1999 Explosives: permits amendment Ch. 82, Art. II
Ord. No. 921 6-7-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 922 8-9-1999 Animals: keeping and possession
regulations
Ch. 65, Art. II
Ord. No. 923 9-13-1999 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No. 924 11-8-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No. 925 11-8-1999 At-will employees Ch. 3
Ord. No. 926 12-27-1999 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 927 12-27-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 928 1-26-2000 Property maintenance Ch. 124
Ord. No. 929 4-10-2000 Assistant Manager; Manager
amendment
Ch. 20, Arts. I and II
Ord. No. 930 5-30-2000 Animals: keeping and possession
regulations
Ch. 65, Art. II amendment
Ord. No. 931 9-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 932 1-30-2001 2001 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 933 2-12-2001 Police Department amendment Ch. 37
Ord. No. 934 4-9-2001 Construction authorization NCM
Ord. No. 935 6-11-2001 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No. 936 8-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 937 1-28-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 938 1-28-2002 2002 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 939 1-28-2002 Police pension plan Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 940 2-11-2002 2002 tax rate amendment NCM
Ord. No. 941 2-25-2002 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 942 6-10-2002 Compensation of Manager NCM
Ord. No. 943 6-10-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 944 7-29-2002 Retirement: nonuniformed
employees pension plan
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. II
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 480/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 945 7-29-2002 Board of Code Enforcement
Appeals
Repealed by Ord. No.
1062
Ord. No. 946 10-14-2002 Construction of water line
authorized
NCM
Ord. No. 947 12-30-2002 Budget and real estate tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 948 12-9-2002 Alarm systems Ch. 61
Ord. No. 949 12-9-2002 Animals: rabies vaccination of
dogs amendment; keeping and
possession regulations
Ch. 65: Arts. I and II
Ord. No. 950 12-9-2002 Police pension plan amendment Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 951 12-9-2002 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 117
Ord. No. 952 1-27-2003 Budget expenses NCM
Ord. No. 953 2-10-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 954 3-31-2003 2003 road paving program NCM
Ord. No. 955 7-14-2003 Commissioners salaries repealer Ch. 50
Ord. No. 956 9-8-2003 2003 bond series NCM
Ord. No. 957 10-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 958 12-8-2003 2004 budget NCM
Ord. No. 959 2-9-2004 Township Manager compensation NCM
Ord. No. 960 2-23-2004 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. II
Ord. No. 961 3-29-2004 Board of Code Enforcement
Appeals amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
1062
Ord. No. 962 6-28-2004 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 963 6-28-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 78
Ord. No 964 6-28-2004 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 965 9-13-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 966 9-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Ord. No. 967 12-13-2004 Budget and real estate tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 968 1-10-2005 Attorney fees for collection of
delinquent claims
Ch. 156, Art. IX
Ord. No. 969 1-31-2005 Compensation of Tax Collector NCM
Ord. No. 970 4-11-2005 Retirement: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 971 7-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 972 7-11-2005 Street acceptances NCM
Ord. No. 973 10-10-2005 Temporary real estate tax
abatement for new home
construction on specific property
Repealed by Ord. No. 979
Ord. No. 974 12-12-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Superseded by Ord. No.
983
Ord. No. 975 12-12-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 481/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 976 5-22-2006 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 977 12-11-2006 Deed transfer tax amendment Ch. 156, Art. II
Ord. No. 978 12-11-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 979 4-30-2007 Abatement for improvements to
deteriorated residential property
and new construction
Ch. 156, Art. X
Ord. No. 980 4-30-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Ord. No. 981 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Ord. No. 982 9-10-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No. 983 12-17-2007 Local services tax Ch. 156, Art. III
Ord. No. 984 12-17-2007 2008 budget NCM
Ord. No. 985 12-17-2007 Cable franchise agreement with
Verizon
NCM
Ord. No. 986 4-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 987 4-28-2008 Property maintenance
amendment; abandoned and
nuisance vehicles
Chs. 124; 167
Ord. No. 988 8-11-2008 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 989 9-8-2008 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 990 9-29-2008 Animals: keeping and possession
regulations amendment
Ch. 65, Art. II
Ord. No. 991 12-8-2009 2009 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 992 1-12-2009 Open Records Policy Ch. 41, Art. I
Ord. No. 993 1-12-2009 Municipal claims: attorney's fees
for cost of collections
Ch. 25, Art. I
Ord. No. 994 1-12-2009 Business tax Ch. 156, Art. IV; Art. V
(footnote only)
Ord. No. 995 1-12-2009 Local services tax amendment Ch. 156, Art. III
Ord. No. 996 1-12-2009 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 997 7-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 998 8-10-2009 Retirement: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 999 8-10-2009 Property maintenance Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1000 10-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1001 12-14-2009 2010 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1002 2-8-2010 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1003 3-8-2010 Retirement: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. I
Ord. No. 1004 3-29-2010 Cable franchise agreement
(Comcast)
NCM
Ord. No. 1005 5-10-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 482/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1006 5-10-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1007 9-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1008 9-13-2010 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1009 11-22-2010 Tax notices, discounts, penalties
and interest amendment
Ch. 156, Art. VIII
Ord. No. 1010 11-22-2010 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1011 11-22-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1012 2-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1013 2-14-2011 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1014 3-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1015 4-25-2011 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 117
Ord. No. 1016 5-9-2011 Tax notices, discounts, penalties
and interest amendment
Ch. 156, Art. VIII
Ord. No. 1017 5-9-2011 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1018 9-12-2011 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 88
Ord. No. 1019 10-24-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 156, Art. I
Ord. No. 1020 10-24-2011 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1021 12-12-2011 2012 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1022 12-12-2011 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. II
Ord. No. 1023 1-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1024 2-13-2012 2012 budget and tax levy
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1025 4-9-2012 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1026 4-30-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No. 1027 4-30-2012 Designation of earned income tax
collector
NCM
Ord. No. 1028 9-10-2012 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1029 11-12-2012 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 1030 12-10-2012 2013 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1031 2-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1032 4-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1033 4-29-2013 Animals: keeping and possession
regulations amendment
Ch. 65, Art. II
Ord. No. 1034 11-11-2013 Streets and sidewalks: regulation
of dumpsters in public right-of-way
Ch. 144, Art. VI
Ord. No. 1035 11-11-2013 Personnel: leaves of absence;
disability amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Ord. No. 1036 11-11-2013 Neighborhood blight reclamation
and revitalization
Ch. 27
8/17/2020 Township of Wilkins, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WI1433?guid=WI1433&children=true 483/483
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1037 12-16-2013 2014 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1038 12-16-2013 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. II
Ord. No. 1039 1-13-2014 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 33, Art. I
Ord. No. 1040 4-28-2014 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1041 7-7-2014 Floodplain management Ch. 90
Ord. No. 1042 8-11-2014 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No. 1043 8-25-2014 Guaranteed revenue note NCM
Ord. No. 1044 9-29-2014 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 121
Ord. No. 1045 11-10-2014 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1046 11-10-2014 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 1047 11-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1048 11-24-2014 Animals: keeping and possession
regulations amendment; municipal
building and property amendment;
parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 65, Art. II; Ch. 104; Ch.
117
Ord. No. 1049 12-8-2014 2015 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1050 1-12-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1051 1-12-2015 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 124
Ord. No. 1052 2-9-2015 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 1053 2-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1054 5-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 168
Ord. No. 1055 9-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1056 11-9-2015 Taxation: Local Economic
Revitalization Tax Assistance
(LERTA) Program
Ch. 156, Art. XI
Ord. No. 1057 12-14-2015 2016 budget and tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1058 1-25-2016 Streets and sidewalks: sidewalk
construction and maintenance
Ch. 144, Art. I
Ord. No. 1059 1-25-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No. 1060 1-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1061 1-25-2016 Explosives: geophysical seismic
testing
Ch. 82, Art. III
Ord. No. 1062 2-29-2016 Board of Code Enforcement
Appeals repealer
Ch. 8 (repealer only)
Ord. No. 1063 4-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 173
Ord. No. 1064 6-20-2016 Property maintenance Ch. 124